ELIZABETH CITY CODE   2004 
____________ 
A Codification of the General 
Ordinances of the City 
of Elizabeth, New Jersey 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 10, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    The Elizabeth, New Jersey Municipal Code, originally published by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. under the direction of Ray Bolanowski, assistant city attorney. 
    The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, section 2.12.040 is section .040, located in chapter 2.12 of title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by "tens" (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 10, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific Code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 5123 passed January 22, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, section 2.04.010 is section .010, in chapter 2.04 of title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, Code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are "Reserved" for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, chapter 2.06, city manager, can be added between 2.04, city council, and chapter 2.08, city attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each Code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a Code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" Code references in the new Code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior Code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new Code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 10, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new Code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. This guide will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, this Code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with decimals. (Example: 31, 32, 32.1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "Reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to deliver the supplement more quickly, but to also reduce the number of errors. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
THE CHARTER[1] 
CHAPTER 210, LAWS OF 1950 
As Amended and Supplemented to August 3, 1959 
    An Act concerning municipalities, providing a plan of optional charters and for the manner of adoption and effect thereof. 
    Be it enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of the State of New Jersey: 
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: The Charter is composed of those sections of the Optional Municipal Charter Law (also known as the "Faulkner Act") applicable to the Mayor-Council Plan F, as they were compiled by the Elizabeth Charter Commission, which was established November 1958 and reported August 1959. This form of government was adopted by referendum November 3, 1959, and became effective January 1, 1961. Section 1-13(a) and (b) is an editorial addition, the inclusion being judged advisable by the references to this section in Article 8, Sections 8-3 and 8-5. Except for the statutory citations, which are also editorial additions, the remaining material is reproduced as it appears in the Charter Commission Report. Statutory citations may be considered to carry through dependent subsections. 

ARTICLE 1 - Procedure for Adoption of Optional Charter Plans 
A. Charter Commission 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-13.  1-13. (a) If the charter commission shall recommend the adoption of any of the optional forms of government set forth in articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 or 12A of this act, it may also specify that the municipal council shall consist of seven or nine members instead of five members as provided in said articles; or if the charter commission shall recommend the adoption of any of the optional forms of government set forth in articles 13, 14, 15 or 16 of this act, it may also specify that the council shall consist of five or seven members instead of three members as provided in said articles.  (b) If the charter commission shall recommend the adoption of any of the optional forms of government set forth in articles 5, 6, 8, 11 or 12 of this act it may further specify that the municipality shall be divided into three, four, five or six wards instead of two wards as provided in said articles within the limitations hereinafter provided:  (1) where the council is to consist of five members, the municipality may be divided into three wards:  (2) where the charter commission specifies that the council shall consist of seven members, the municipality shall be divided into four wards; and  (3) where the charter commission specifies that the council shall consist of nine members, the municipality shall be divided into five or six wards. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-24.  1-24. For the purposes of this act each of the optional forms of government provided in article 3 through 16, inclusive, of this act, and each of said optional forms as modified by any available provisions concerning size of council and number of wards is hereby declared to be a complete and separate form of government provided by the Legislature for submission to the voters of the municipality. Any reference in this act to articles 3 through 16, inclusive, shall be deemed to include article 12A.  
ARTICLE 2 - Incorporation and Powers 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-26.  2-1. Upon the adoption by the qualified voters of any municipality of any of the optional forms of government set forth in this act, the municipality shall thereafter be governed by the plan adopted, by the provisions of this act common to optional plans and by all applicable provisions of general law, subject to the transitional provisions of article 17 of this act, unless and until the municipality should adopt another form of government as provided by law. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-27.  2-2. Upon such adoption of a plan under this act, the inhabitants of any municipality or municipalities within the corporate limits as now or hereafter established shall be and remain a body corporate and politic with perpetual succession, and with such corporate name as it has heretofore adopted or may hereafter adopt. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-28.  2-3. For the purposes of this act, a "general law" shall be deemed to be any law or provision of law, not inconsistent with this act, heretofore or hereafter enacted which is by its terms applicable or available to all municipalities, and the following additional laws whether or not such additional laws are so applicable or available to all municipalities: legislation relating to taxation, local courts, educational, health, public authorities serving more than one municipality, and municipalities in unsound financial condition. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-29.  2-4. Each municipality governed by an optional form of government pursuant to this act shall, subject to the provisions of this act or other general laws, have full power to:  (a) organize and regulate its internal affairs, and to establish, alter, and abolish offices, positions and employments and to define the functions, powers and duties thereof and fix their term, tenure and compensation;  (b) adopt and enforce local police ordinances of all kinds and impose penalties of fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for any term not exceeding ninety days or both for the violation thereof; to construct, acquire, operate or maintain any and all public improvements, projects or enterprises for any public purpose, subject to referendum requirements otherwise imposed by law, and to exercise all powers of local government in such manner as its governing body may determine;  (c) sue and be sued, to have a corporate seal, to contract, and be contracted with, to buy, sell, lease, hold and dispose of real and personal property, to appropriate and expend moneys, and to adopt, amend and repeal such ordinances and resolutions as may be required for the good government thereof;  (d) exercise powers of condemnation, borrowing and taxation in the manner provided by general law. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-30.  2-5. The general grant of municipal power contained in this article is intended to confer the greatest power of local self-government consistent with the Constitution of this State. Any specific enumeration of municipal powers contained in this act or in any other general law shall not be construed in any way to limit the general description of power contained in this article, and any such specifically enumerated municipal powers shall be construed as in addition and supplementary to the powers conferred in general terms by this article. All grants of municipal power to municipalities governed by an optional plan under this act, whether in the form of specific enumeration or general terms, shall be liberally construed, as required by the Constitution of this State, in favor of the municipality.  
ARTICLE 8 - Mayor-Council Plan F 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-74.  8-1. The form of government provided in this article shall be known as the "mayor-council plan F" and shall, together with articles 2 and 17 and sections 3-6 through 3-18, inclusive, of article 3, govern any municipality the voters of which have adopted it pursuant to this act. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-75.  8-2. Each municipality hereunder shall be governed by an elected council, and an elected mayor and by such other officers and employees as may be duly appointed pursuant to this article, general law or ordinance. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-76.  8-3. The municipality shall be divided into two wards unless pursuant to the authority granted under sections 1-13 or 1-19 of article 1, of this act, the municipality is to consist of from three to six wards. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-77.  8-4. The mayor shall be elected by the voters of the municipality at the general election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November or at such other times as may be provided by law for holding general elections, and shall serve for a term of four years beginning on the first day of January next following his election. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-78.  8-5. The council shall consist of five members, unless pursuant to the authority granted under sections 1-13 or 1-19 of article 1 of this act, the municipality shall be governed by a council of seven or nine members. Members of the council shall serve for a term of four years, except as hereinafter provided for those first elected, beginning on the first day of January next following their election. They shall be elected at large and by ward at the general election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November or at such other time as may be provided by law for holding general elections in the following manner:  (a) in a municipality having two wards and five councilmen, one councilman shall be elected from each ward and three at large;  (b) in a municipality having three wards and five councilmen, one councilman shall be elected from each ward and two at large;  (c) in a municipality having four wards and seven councilmen, one councilman shall be elected from each ward and three at large;  (d) in a municipality having five wards and nine councilmen, one councilman shall be elected from each ward and four at large;  (e) in a municipality having six wards and nine councilmen, one councilman shall be elected from each ward and three at large.  The Elizabeth Charter Commission specifies that clause (e) shall be applicable. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-79.  8-6. At the first election as provided in article 17 of this act, following the adoption by a municipality of this plan, five, seven or nine councilmen, as provided in section 8-5 of this article, shall be elected. The councilmen elected at large shall serve for a term of four years and the councilmen elected from wards, for a term of two years. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-80.  8-7. Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at the next general election to be held not less than sixty days after the occurrence of the vacancy. The council shall fill the vacancy temporarily by appointment to serve until the qualification of the person so elected. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be a member of the same political party as the prior incumbent.  
C. Council 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-36.  3-6. The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the municipal council, except as may be otherwise provided by general law. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-37.  3-7. The council, in addition to such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon it by this charter or otherwise by general law, may: 
 (a) require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit sworn statements regarding his official duties in the performance thereof, and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any department, office or agency of the municipal government; 
 (b) remove any municipal officer, other than the mayor or a member of council, for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-38.  3-8. The council shall appoint a municipal clerk, who shall serve as clerk of the council, keep its minutes and records of its proceedings, maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions as this act requires, and perform such functions as may be required by law. The municipal clerk shall, prior to his appointment, have been qualified by training or experience to perform the duties of the office.  
D. Mayor and Administration 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-39.  3-9. The executive power of the municipality shall be exercised by the mayor. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-40.  3-10. The mayor shall enforce the charter and ordinances of the municipality and all general laws applicable thereto. He shall annually report to the council and the public on the work of the previous year and on the condition and requirements of the municipal government and shall from time to time make such recommendations for action by the council as he may deem in the public interest. He shall supervise all of the departments of the municipal government and shall require each department to make an annual and such other reports of its work as he may deem desirable. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-41.  3-11. (a) Ordinances adopted by the council shall be submitted to the mayor, and he shall within ten days after receiving any ordinance, either approve the ordinance by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the council by delivering it to the municipal clerk together with a statement setting forth his objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the mayor's approval, unless the mayor fails to return an ordinance to the council within ten days after it has been presented to him, or unless council upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day following its return by the mayor shall by a vote of two-thirds of the members resolve to override the mayor's veto.  (b) The mayor may attend meetings of council and may take part in discussions of council but shall have no vote except in the case of a tie on the question of filling a vacancy, in the council, in which case he may cast the deciding vote. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-42.  3-12. The mayor shall designate the business administrator, any other department head, or the municipal clerk to act as mayor whenever the mayor shall be prevented by absence from the municipality, disability or other cause from attending to the duties of his office. During such time the person so designated by the mayor shall possess all the rights, powers, and duties of mayor. Whenever the mayor shall have been unable to attend to the duties of his office for a period of sixty consecutive days for any of the above stated reasons, an acting mayor shall be appointed by the council, who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the mayor or the then acting mayor. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-43.  3-13. (a) The municipality shall have a department of administration and such other departments, not exceeding 9 in number, as council may establish by ordinance. All of the administrative functions, powers and duties of the municipality, other than those vested in the office of the municipal clerk, shall be allocated and assigned among and within such departments.  (b) Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. Each department head shall serve during the term of office of the mayor appointing him, and until the appointment and qualification of his successor.  (c) The mayor may in his discretion remove any department head after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a department head the mayor shall first file written notice of his intention with the council, and such removal shall become effective on the twentieth day after the filing of such notice unless the council shall prior thereto have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the council, disapproving the removal.  (d) Department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within their respective departments and may, with approval of the mayor, remove such officers and employees subject to the provisions of the Revised Statutes, Title 11, Civil Service, where that Title is effective in the municipality, or other general law; provided, however, that council may provide by ordinance for the appointment and removal of specific boards or commissions by the mayor.  (e) In any city of the first class having a population of more than 250,000, notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, there shall be a board of alcoholic beverage control which shall exercise the powers conferred upon municipal boards of alcoholic beverage control under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes. Such board shall be comprised of 3 members, no more than 2 of whom shall be of the same political party, who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, each to serve for a term of 3 years, provided that of those first appointed 1 shall be appointed to serve for a term of 1 year, 1 for 2 years, and 1 for 3 years. Any vacancy in such office shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. The members of such board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duty. They shall be removable by the mayor for cause. Any person appointed hereunder shall not be subject to the provisions of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes, Civil Service, and no such person shall be a member of the city council.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the general power of the municipal council under this act to establish, alter and abolish offices, boards and commissions in any municipality other than a city of the first class having a population of more than 250,000.  (f) Whenever in any city of the first class having a population of more than 250,000 the governing body is authorized by any provision of general law to appoint the members of any board, authority or commission, such power of appointment shall be deemed to vest in the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-44.  3-14. The department of administration shall be headed by a director who shall be known and designated as business administrator. He shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the municipality or State, but during his tenure of office he may reside outside the municipality only with the approval of council. He shall have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the department. The department, under the direction and supervision of the mayor shall:  (a) assist in the preparation of the budget;  (b) administer a centralized purchasing system;  (c) be responsible for the development and administration of a sound personnel system; and  (d) perform such other duties as council may prescribe.  (e) In cities of the first class having a population of more than 250,000, the business administrator also shall, subject to the direction of the mayor, supervise the administration of each of the departments established by ordinance. For this purpose, he shall have power to investigate the organization and operation of any and all departments, to prescribe standards and rules of administrative practice and procedure, and to consult with the heads of the departments under his jurisdiction; provided that with respect to any department of law or department of audit, accounts or control, the authority of the business administrator under this subsection shall extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing.  
E. Budget and Control 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-45.  3-15. The municipal budget shall be prepared by the mayor with the assistance of the business administrator. During the month of November, the mayor shall require all department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year, and to appear before the mayor or the business administrator at public hearings, which shall be held during that month, on the various requests. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-46.  3-16. On or before the fifteenth day of January the mayor shall submit to council his recommended budget together with such explanatory comment or statement as he may deem desirable. The budget shall be in such form as is required by law for municipal budgets, and shall in addition have appended thereto a detailed analysis of the various items of expenditure and revenue. Council may reduce any item or items in the mayor's budget by a vote of a majority of the council, but an increase in any item or items therein shall become effective only upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of council. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-47.  3-17. The council shall where practicable provide for the maintenance of a system of work programs and quarterly allotments, for operation of the budget. It shall be the duty of the officer or department administering any such program to develop and report appropriate unit costs of budgeted expenditures. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-48.  3-18. The council shall provide by ordinance for the exercise of a control function, in the management of the finances of the municipality, by some officer other than the business administrator. The control function shall include provision for an encumbrance system of budget operation, for expenditures only upon written requisition, for the preaudit of all claims and demands against the municipality prior to payment, and for the control of all payments out of any public funds by individual warrants for each payment to the official having custody thereof.  
ARTICLE 17 - Additional Provisions Common to Optional Plans 
A. Elections in General 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-150.  17-2. The municipal election shall be held at the same place or places and conducted in the same manner, so far as possible, as the general election, and the polls shall be open from seven o'clock in the forenoon until eight o'clock at night at the prevailing time. The election officers conducting such elections shall be those provided for conducting the general election. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-151.  17-3. Every municipal officer elected under any of the plans provided in this act shall serve for the term of office specified in the plan and until his successor is elected and qualified.  
C. Officers and Employees 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-163.  17-14. No officer or employee elected or appointed in any municipality shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract or job for work or materials, or the profits thereof, to be furnished or performed for the municipality, and no such officer or employee shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract or job for work or materials or the profits thereof, to be furnished or performed, for any person operating any interurban railway, street railway, gas works, waterworks, electric light or power plant, heating plant, telegraph line, telephone exchange, or other public utility within the territorial limits of such municipality. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-164.  17-15. No officer or employee shall accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person operating within the territorial limits of a municipality, any interurban railway, street railway, gas works, waterworks, electric light or power plant, heating plant, telegraph line, telephone exchange or other business using or operating under a public franchise, any frank, free pass, free ticket or free service, or accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person, any other service upon terms more favorable than is granted to the public generally, except that such prohibition of free transportation shall not apply to policemen or firemen in uniform. Nor shall any free service to the municipal officials heretofore provided by any franchise or ordinance be affected by this section. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-165.  17-16. No candidate for office, appointment or employment, and no officer, appointee, or employee in any municipality shall directly or indirectly give or promise any person any office, position, employment, benefit or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or obtaining the political support, aid or vote of any person, under the penalty of being disqualified to hold the office or employment to which he may be or may have been elected or appointed. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-166.  17-17. Any person convicted of a crime or offense involving moral turpitude shall be ineligible to assume any municipal office, position or employment in a municipality governed pursuant to this act, and upon conviction thereof while in office shall forfeit his office. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of sections 17-14, 17-15 or 17-16 of this article shall upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction forfeit his office. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-167.  17-18. If any person hereafter elected or appointed to any office or position in a municipality governed under this act shall, after lawful notice or process, willfully refuse or fail to appear before any court, any legislative committee, or the Governor, or having appeared shall refuse to testify or to answer any question regarding the property, government or affairs of the municipality, or regarding his nomination, election, appointment or official conduct on the ground that his answer would tend to incriminate him, or shall refuse to waive immunity from prosecution on account of any such matter in relation to which he may be asked to testify, may be removed from office by the governing body of the municipality in its discretion. Any person removed from office pursuant to this section shall not thereafter be eligible for election or appointment to any office or employment in such municipality.  
;adv=;6q;D. Recall 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-168.  17-19. Any elective officer shall be subject to removal from office for cause connected with his office, after he has served at least one year, upon the filing of a recall petition and the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting on the question of removal at any general, regular municipal or special election. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-169.  17-20. A recall petition shall demand the removal of a designated incumbent, shall be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least twenty-five per centum (25%) of the registered voters of the municipality, and shall be filed with the municipal clerk. It shall set forth a statement of the cause upon which the removal is sought. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-170.  17-21. The signatures to a recall petition need not all be appended to one paper but each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence giving the street and number or other sufficient designation if there shall be no street and number. One of the signers to each such paper shall take an oath before an officer competent to administer oaths that the statement therein made is true as he believes and that each signature to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Within ten days from the date of filing the petition the municipal clerk shall complete its examination and ascertain whether or not such petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters, and shall, attach to the petition his certificate showing the result of his examination. If by that certificate the petition is shown to be insufficient it may be amended within ten days from the date of said certificate. The municipal clerk shall, within five days after such amendment, make a similar examination and determination of the amended petition, and if the certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing it without prejudice to the filing of a new petition to the same effect. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-171.  17-22. If the petition shall be sufficient the municipal clerk shall within two days notify the mayor, councilman or councilmen whose recall is sought thereby. If such notice cannot be served personally upon the mayor, councilman or councilmen affected, service may be made by registered mail addressed to the officer's last known address. If within five days after the service of the notice by the municipal clerk the mayor, councilman or councilmen sought to be recalled by such petition do not resign, or having tendered their resignation it shall not have been accepted by the municipal council, the municipal clerk shall order and fix a date for holding a recall election not less than sixty nor more than ninety days from the filing of the petition. Notice of the filing of the petition and of the date of the election shall be posted for public view in the office of the municipal clerk and he shall also insert the notice forthwith in a newspaper published in the municipality, or if there be no such newspaper, then in a newspaper having general circulation in such municipality. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-172.  17-23. The ballots at the recall election shall conform to the requirements respecting the election of municipal officers in the municipality, as provided in this article or in Title 19 of the Revised Statutes (Elections), whichever shall apply in the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this act, except that the words "recall election" shall appear on the ballot. The recall features of the ballot shall appear at the top thereof and shall be separated from the portion of the ballot for the election of officers by a heavy black line. The proposal for recall shall be placed on the ballot in the following manner:  "Shall...(here insert name of incumbent) be removed from office by recall?" This matter shall occupy two lines in boldface type. Immediately below the above wording shall appear the phrase "for recall," and immediately underneath such phrase the words "against recall." Immediately at the left of each of these two phrases shall be printed a square, in which the voter may make a cross (X) or plus (+) or a check (v) mark. Immediately below the foregoing shall appear the following:  "Indicate your vote by placing a cross (X) or plus (+) or a check (v) mark in one of the squares above." N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-173.  17-24. If the removal of more than one officer is sought the same provisions for submitting to the electors the question and direction hereinbefore described shall be repeated in the case of each officer concerned and their position on the ballot for their recall shall be in the order of the filing of the petition with the municipal clerk. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-174.  17-25. The same ballot used for submitting the question or questions of recall shall be used for election of a successor to the incumbent sought to be removed and immediately under the black line following the recall question shall appear the phrase "Nominees for successors of...(here insert name of incumbent) in the event he is recalled." The names of all persons nominated as the successors shall be placed upon the ballot in the same manner provided for other elections of municipal officers in the municipality. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-175.  17-26. The provisions of this article or of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes (Elections), whichever shall apply in the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this act, concerning the nomination of municipal officers, preparation of the ballot, election of municipal officers, counting and canvassing of the results of the election of such officers, shall apply to the election for the recall of officers and the election of their successors. Where the plan of government in effect in the municipality provides for partisan elections, the county committee of each political party shall be authorized to select a candidate for successor of a recalled incumbent in the same manner as provided by Title 19 of the Revised Statutes for nominations to fill a vacancy after the last day for filing petitions for nominations in the primary elections. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-176.  17-27. The municipal clerk shall cause to be made due publication of notices of arrangements for holding all recall elections and they shall be conducted as are other elections for municipal officers in the municipality. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-177.  17-28. (a) If a majority of votes in connection with the recall of any officer be in favor of the recall, the term of office of such officer shall terminate upon the certification of the results of election by the municipal clerk.  (b) If the results of such recall election shall, by the certificate of the municipal clerk, be shown to be against the recall of the officer he shall continue in office as if no recall election had been held, and the vote for election for the successor of such officer taken at the time of such attempted recall shall be void. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-178.  17-29. If the office of the incumbent shall become vacant either by his resignation or by the result of the recall election, his successor shall be the nominee receiving the greatest number of votes at the recall election. The person so elected shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.  
E. Local Legislation 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-179.  17-30. The council shall by ordinance or resolution designate the time of holding regular meetings, which shall be at least monthly. The mayor may, and upon written request of a majority of the members of the council, shall, call a special meeting of the council. In the call he shall designate the purpose of the special meeting and no other business shall be considered. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. The municipal clerk shall keep a journal of its proceedings and record the minutes of every meeting. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-180.  17-31. (a) Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent with ordinance or statute. A majority of the whole number of members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance shall be adopted by the council without the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the council.  (b) Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or typewritten form and shall be read and considered as provided by general law. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the officer presiding at such meeting and by the municipal clerk.  (c) The council at its organization meeting shall elect a president of the council from among the members thereof and he shall preside at its meetings and perform such other duties as the council may prescribe. In the absence of the president, the council shall elect a temporary presiding officer. The compensation of the mayor, councilmen and department heads shall be fixed by the council immediately after its organization. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-181.  17-32. (a) Except as may otherwise be provided in this act, all ordinances shall be adopted and published in the manner required by general law: provided, however, that any ordinance may incorporate by reference any standard technical regulations or code, official or unofficial, which need not be so published whenever ten copies of said regulations or code have been placed on file in the office of the municipal clerk and in the office of the body or department charged with the enforcement of said ordinance for the examination of the public so long as said ordinance is in effect.  (b) No ordinance other than the local budget ordinance shall take effect less than twenty days after its final passage by council and approval by the mayor where such approval is required, unless the council shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least two-thirds of all the members of the council vote in favor of such resolution. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-182.  17-33. The municipal clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions adopted by council and at the close of each year, with the advice and assistance of the municipal attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions, or true copies thereof, of the municipality which then remain in force and effect. He shall also properly index the record books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-183.  17-34. No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority of the municipality, except such as relates to the organizations or internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof, shall take effect until it is filed either with the municipal clerk or in such other manner as may be provided by ordinance. The council shall provide for the prompt publication of such rules and regulations.  
;adv=;6q;F. Initiative and Referendum 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-184.  17-35. The voters of any municipality may propose any ordinance and may adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the municipal council by a petition signed (a) in the case of municipalities of 70,000 or less inhabitants, by twenty-five per centum (25%) of the registered voters of the municipality, and (b) in the case of municipalities of more than 70,000 inhabitants, by fifteen per centum (15%) of the registered voters of the municipality; except that in the case of municipalities in counties of the first class having a population in excess of 800,000, any such initiated ordinance may be submitted to the municipal council by a petition signed by voters of the municipality, equal to, or in excess of, in numbers, fifteen per centum (15%) of the valid votes cast in the municipality at the last preceding election for members of the General Assembly. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-185.  17-36. The voters shall also have the power of referendum which is the power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance submitted by the council to the voters or any ordinance passed by the council against which a referendum petition has been filed as herein provided. No ordinance passed by the municipal council, except when otherwise required by general law or permitted by the provisions of section 17-32 (b) of this act, shall take effect before twenty days from the time of its final passage and its approval by the mayor where such approval is required. If within twenty days after such final passage and approval of such ordinance a petition protesting against the passage of such ordinance shall be filed with the municipal clerk and if the petition shall be signed in the case of municipalities of 70,000 or less inhabitants by twenty-five per centum (25%) of the registered voters of the municipality and in the case of municipalities of more than 70,000 inhabitants, by fifteen per centum (15%) of the registered voters of the municipality, or in the case of municipalities in counties of the first class having a population in excess of 800,000, by voters of the municipality, equal to, or in excess of, in numbers fifteen per centum (15%) of the valid votes cast in the municipality at the last preceding election for members of the General Assembly, the ordinance shall be suspended from taking effect until proceedings are had as herein provided. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-186.  17-37. All petition papers circulated for the purposes of an initiative or referendum shall be uniform in size and style. Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any such petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition paper the names and addresses of five voters, designated as the Committee of the Petitioners, who shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition and for its possible withdrawal as hereinafter provided. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that all the signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-187.  17-38. All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the municipal clerk as one instrument. Within twenty days after a petition is filed, the municipal clerk shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters. After completing his examination of the petition, the municipal clerk shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient he shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify at least two members of the Committee of the Petitioners of his findings. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-188.  17-39. An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notification of insufficiency has been served by the municipal clerk, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The municipal clerk shall, within five days after such an amendment is filed, examine the amended petition and, if the petition be still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the Committee of the Petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-189.  17-40. Upon the filing of a referendum petition with the municipal clerk, the ordinance shall be suspended until ten days following a finding by the municipal clerk that the petition is insufficient or, if an amended petition be filed, until five days thereafter; or, if the petition or amended petition be found to be sufficient, until it be withdrawn by the Committee of the Petitioners or until repeal of the ordinance by vote of the council or approval or disapproval of the ordinance by the voters. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-190.  17-41. Upon a finding, by the municipal clerk that any petition or amended petition filed with him in accordance with this act is sufficient, the clerk shall submit the same to the municipal council without delay. An initiative ordinance so submitted shall be deemed to have had first reading and provision shall be made for a public hearing. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-191.  17-42. If within sixty days of the submission of a certified petition by the municipal clerk the council shall fail to pass an ordinance requested by an initiative petition in substantially the form requested or to repeal an ordinance as requested by a referendum petition, the municipal clerk shall submit the ordinance to the voters unless, within ten days after final adverse action by the council or after the expiration of the time allowed for such action, as the case may be, a paper signed by at least four of the five members of the Committee of the Petitioners shall be filed with the municipal clerk requesting that the petition be withdrawn. Upon the filing of such a request, the original petition shall cease to have any force or effect. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-192.  17-43. Any ordinance to be voted on by the voters in accordance with section 17-36 or section 17-42 of this article shall be submitted at the next general or regular municipal election occurring not less than sixty days after the date of final action by council or the expiration of the time allowed for action by council in section 17-42 of this article, as the case may be, provided that if no such election is to be held within ninety days the council may in its discretion provide for a special election. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-193.  17-44. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this article, but there shall not be more than one special election in any period of six months for such purpose. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-194.  17-45. Whenever an ordinance is to be submitted to the voters of the municipality at any election in accordance with this article, the clerk shall cause the ordinance to be published in at least two of the newspapers published or circulated in the municipality. The publication shall be not more than twenty nor less than five days before the submission of the ordinance or proposition to be voted on. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-195.  17-46. The ballots to be used at such election shall be in substantially the following form: 
 "To vote upon the public question printed below, if in favor thereof mark a cross (X) or plus (+) or check (?) in the square at the left of the word Yes, and if opposed thereto mark a cross (X) or plus (+) or a check (v) in the square to the left of the word No." 
 ?YES 
?NO       "Shall the ordinance (indicate whether submitted by council or initiative or referendum petition) providing for (here state nature of proposed ordinance or proposition) be adopted?" N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-196.  17-47. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the municipality and be published as in the case of other ordinances. If the provisions of two or more measures approved or adopted at the same election conflict, then the measure receiving the greatest affirmative vote shall control.  
G. Wards 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-197.  17-48. Whenever any municipality adopts articles 5, 6, 8, 11 or 12 of this act, said municipality shall be divided into wards by the ward commissioners as hereinafter provided. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-198.  17-49. The members of the county board of elections of the county in which such municipality is situated, together with the municipal clerk of the municipality, shall constitute the word commissioners. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-199.  17-50. Within five days following the election at which the voters of the municipality shall have adopted one of said optional plans, the word commissioners shall meet and, having first taken and subscribed before some officer authorized to administer oaths, an oath faithfully and impartially to perform the duties imposed upon them, shall forthwith proceed to divide the municipality into such number of wards as is specified in the adopted plan. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-200.  17-51. The word commissioners shall fix and determine the ward boundaries so that each ward is formed of compact and contiguous territory. The wards so created shall not differ in population, according to the most recent Federal census, by more than ten per centum (10%) of the population of the least populous ward created. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-201.  17-52. Within thirty days after the adoption of one of said optional plans, the ward commissioners shall make and file their report and certificate over at least three of their signatures setting forth and properly describing the ward boundaries fixed and determined, to which there shall be annexed a map of the municipality with the ward boundaries clearly marked thereon.  The report so certified shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county, and a copy thereof shall also be filed with the Secretary of State and in the office of the clerk of the municipality. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-202.  17-53. A notice of the ward boundaries as fixed and determined by the word commissioners shall be published by the clerk of the municipality at least once m at least one newspaper circulating in the municipality within two weeks immediately next succeeding the filing of the report and certificate required by section 17-52 of this article. 
 Upon completion of the publication, the former wards, if any, shall be superseded, and thereafter all officers elected or appointed in the municipality for or representing the wards thereof shall be elected from or appointed for the wards fixed by the ward commissioners hereunder. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-203.  17-54. Within three months following each decennial Federal census, the ward commissioners shall meet, in the manner heretofore provided in this article for the purpose of making such adjustments in ward boundaries as shall be necessary pursuant to section 17-51 of this article. Within thirty days following such meeting, they shall discharge their duties and report to the municipality in the same manner as provided in sections 17-52 and 17-53 of this article. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-204.  17-55. All officers elected for existing wards in any municipality wherein ward lines are changed pursuant to section 17-54 of this article, shall continue in office until their respective terms of office shall expire and until their successors are elected and qualified.  
H. Succession in Government 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-205.  17-56. The schedule of installation of an optional plan adopted pursuant to this act shall, as provided herein, take the following course:  (a) An election to submit the question of adoption of an optional plan may be held at any time in accordance with the provisions of article 1 of this act:  (b) In the event of a favorable vote of the voters at the above election, the first election of officers under the adopted plan shall take place on (1) the second Tuesday in May occurring not less than seventy-five days next following the adoption of one of the optional plans in municipalities adopting articles 3, 4, 9, 10, 13 or 14 of this act; (2) the second Tuesday in May occurring not less than one hundred twenty days following the adoption of one of the optional plans in municipalities adopting articles 5, 6, 11, or 12 of this act; (3) at the next general election occurring no less than seventy-five days next following the adoption of one of the optional plans, in municipalities adopting articles 7, 12A, 15, and 16 of this act; or (4) at the next general election occurring not less than one hundred twenty days next following the adoption of one of the optional plans in municipalities adopting article 8 of this act.  Whenever a municipality has adopted any of the articles referred to in subsection (3) above, within ten days, or subsection (4) within forty days, prior to the last day fixed for the filing of nominating petitions for the primary election, the candidates to be first elected shall be nominated in the manner provided by chapter 27 of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes with respect to the filling of certain vacancies in nominations for county or municipal offices to be filled at the general election.  (c) An optional plan shall take effect, in accordance with the further provisions of this article at (1) twelve o'clock noon on the first day of July next following the first election of officers in municipalities adopting articles 3 through 6, inclusive, or 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 or 14, of this act, or (2) twelve o'clock noon on the first day of January next following the first election of officers in municipalities adopting articles 7, 8, 12A, 15 or 16 of this act. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-206.  17-57. Upon the effective date of an optional charter adopted pursuant to this act, any other charter and its amendments and supplements theretofore applicable to the municipality shall be superseded with respect to such municipality. All ordinances and resolutions of the municipality to the extent that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall remain in full force and effect until modified or repealed as provided by law. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-207.  17-58. At 12 o'clock noon on the effective date of an optional plan adopted pursuant to this act, all offices then existing in such municipality shall be abolished and the terms of all elected and appointed officers shall immediately cease and determine; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to abolish the office or terminate the term of office of any member of the board of education, trustees of the free public library, commissioners of a local housing authority, municipal judges or of any official or employee now protected by any tenure of office law, or of any policeman, fireman, teacher, principal or school superintendent whether or not protected by a tenure of office law. If the municipality is operating under the provisions of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes (Civil Service) at the time of the adoption of an optional plan under this act, nothing herein contained shall affect the tenure of office of any person holding any position or office coming within the provisions of said Title 11 as it applies to said officers and employees. If the municipal clerk has, prior to the effective date of the optional plan, acquired a protected tenure of office pursuant to law, he shall become the first municipal clerk under the optional plan.  Provision for officers and for the organization and administration of the municipal government under the optional plan may be made by resolution pending the adoption of ordinances, but any such resolution shall expire not later than 30 days after the effective date of the optional plan. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-208.  17-59. (a) No subordinate board, department, body, office, position or employment shall be created and no appointments shall be made to any subordinate board, department or body, or to any office, employment or position, including without limitation patrolmen and firemen, between the date of election of officers and the date the newly elected officers take office under any optional plan.  (b) All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive or judicial character which are pending upon the effective date of an optional plan adopted pursuant to this act may continue, and the appropriate officer or employee under such optional plan shall be substituted for the officer or employee theretofore exercising or discharging the functions, power or duty involved in such action or proceeding.  
I. General Provisions 
N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-209.  17-60. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this act shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have rendered. N.J.S.A. 
40:69A-210.  17-61. This act shall be known as the Optional Municipal Charter Law. 
 17-62. This act shall take effect immediately.  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Citation of codification. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known as the "code of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey," and in all legal proceedings shall be cited by that name. 
(Prior code § 2-1) 
1.04.020 - Definitions and terminology. 
A.  Definitions. For the purposes of this codification of ordinances, in the interpretation and application of all ordinances contained herein, and in the interpretation of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require: 
    "Charter" or "city charter" means Mayor-Council Plan F of Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws of 1950 (N.J.S.A. 40: 69A-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, and any and all statutory provisions of the state of New Jersey as may be lawfully applicable to the city. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth, in the county of Union, state of New Jersey. 
    "Clerk" or "city clerk" means the municipal clerk duly appointed pursuant to the charter or ordinance. 
    "Council" means the local legislative body of the city, constituted and elected pursuant to the charter. 
    "Fiscal year" means that calendar year beginning on the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December. 
    "Governing body" means the city council as constituted under the charter. 
    "Ordinance" means any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted, pursuant to law, so long as it remains in force and effect. 
    "Person" means any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other entity, as well as an individual. 
    "Month" means a calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided. 
    "State" means the state of New Jersey. 
    "Street" means and includes a highway, road, avenue, court, public lane or alley; and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
    "Year" means a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. 
B.  Construction of Terminology. For the purposes of this codification of ordinances, in the interpretation and application of all ordinances contained herein, and in the interpretation of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require: 
1.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present. 
2.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
3.  The singular number includes the plural; and the plural, the singular. 
4.  "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
5.  The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
6.  "Writing" and "written" include printing, typewritten and any other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as well as legible handwriting. 
(Prior code § 2-2) 
1.04.030 - Construal of section titles. 
    The titles of the several sections of the code of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the titles, are amended or reenacted. 
(Prior code § 2-4) 
1.04.040 - Severability. 
    If any chapter, article, section or part of this codification of ordinances shall be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative in whole or in part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, article, section or part shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, articles, sections or parts of this codification of ordinances. 
(Prior code § 2-5) 
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Common seal adopted and described. 
    The seal heretofore adopted by the city council is established and declared to be the common seal of the city being described as follows: On a circular shield, a wooden landscape with four houses in the foreground, a bay in which a three-masted vessel is at anchor and near the shore a rowboat. In the middle base point, the year and number 1665. From the middle chief point, a Spanish shield pendant, charged with the arms of Carteret, the founder of Elizabeth, a ribbon surmounting the shield with the motto of Carteret, the whole within the border inscribed with the legend, Seal of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Prior code § 2-9) 
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Violations and penalties-Collection. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, the violation of any provision of the Code of the city shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by the city for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); or by a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service. Each day or part thereof any violation of the Code shall constitute a separate offense. For a violation of the housing and coning codes a fine in excess of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) may not be imposed unless the owner of the property has been given a thirty (30) day period in which to cure or abate the condition and has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the municipal court for an independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, a fine greater than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) but not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon re-inspection of the property it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed. 
B.  Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance. 
C.  Any person convicted of the violation of any ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he or she was convicted, and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the county jail or place of detention provided by the municipality, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be required to perform community service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days. 
D.  Whenever any such fine is imposed, such fine and costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt or in such other manner as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4662 , § 1, 1-26-2016; Ord. 3492 § 1, 2003: prior code § 2-7) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - ADMINISTRATION CODE GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Short title. 
    This title shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code (1961)" and is herein referred to as "the code." 
(Prior code § 4-1) 
2.04.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this title, and in the interpretation and application of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Administrator" means the business administrator duly appointed pursuant to the charter and administrative code or any deputy or acting administrator temporarily serving in place of the business administrator pursuant to the charter or ordinance. 
    "Department" means an organization unit of the city government established or designated by or pursuant to the administrative code as a department and any agency or instrumentality of the city government not allocated or assigned within such an organization unit. 
    "Director" means the administrative head of a department. 
(Prior code § 4-2) 
2.04.030 - Allocation of administrative functions. 
    All of the administrative functions, powers and duties of the city shall be allocated and assigned among and within departments established or constituted by the code or any amendments and supplements thereto. 
(Prior code § 4-23) 
2.04.040 - Department heads and subordinates-Appointment and removal. 
    The head of each department shall be a director, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. Each department head shall serve during the term of office of the mayor appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Subject to the provisions of the Revised Statutes, Title 11, Civil Service, department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within their respective departments and may, with the approval of the mayor, remove any such officer or employee. 
(Prior code § 4-24) 
2.04.050 - Interim appointments. 
    Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the charter or administrative code to be filled by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and there is no holdover incumbent, the mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy in the absence of any contrary provision in the charter or ordinance by appointing an acting officer from among the existing officers and employees of the department affected. Such appointee shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of the office until it shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment shall terminate not later than ninety (90) days after the date of the appointment, unless the council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions of such period. 
(Prior code § 4-25) 
2.04.060 - School organization. 
    The board of education and the board of school estimate as provided pursuant to Title 18 of the Revised Statutes are not subject to the administrative code. The mayor shall, however, from time to time, make recommendations to the board of education and to the council, as he or she deems meet, for the development, use and operation of joint and cooperative administrative services between the city and the city school district. 
(Prior code § 4-26) 
2.04.070 - Division of human rights. 
    Within the office of the mayor, there is established a division of human rights which shall consist of the human rights commission. 
(Prior code § 4-28) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Local Legislation 

2.08.010 - Legislative power. 
    All legislative power of the city will be exercised by the city council pursuant to the charter. The council, in addition to such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon it by the charter or otherwise by general law, may require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit sworn statements regarding his or her official duties in the performance thereof, and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any department, office or agency of the municipal government. 
(Prior code § 4-8) 
2.08.020 - Organization-President and president pro tem of the council. 
    The council will organize annually on the first day of January unless that day is Sunday, in which case it shall organize on the next succeeding day, at which time it will elect a president and a president pro tem from among its members. The president shall preside at its meetings and perform such other duties as the council may prescribe. In the absence of the president, the president pro tem will act as the temporary presiding officer and perform such other duties as the council may prescribe in the absence of the president. 
(Prior code § 4-9) 
2.08.030 - Clerk of the council. 
    The council shall appoint a city clerk for the term prescribed by law. Prior to his or her appointment he or she shall have been qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his or her office. He or she shall serve as clerk of the council and have such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by Chapter 2.16 of this title. 
(Prior code § 4-10) 
2.08.040 - Meetings of council. 
A.  Regular Meetings. The council shall meet annually on the first day of January, unless that day is Sunday, in which case it shall meet on the next succeeding day. The council shall meet regularly thereafter on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 7:30 p.m., except that in the month of June the first regular meeting shall be held on the second Wednesday of the month, and except that the council may, by resolution, dispense with one or more of the meetings otherwise scheduled for the months of July and August. When the time for any regular meeting of the council falls on a legal holiday, as prescribed by law, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday. 
B.  Special Meetings. The mayor or the president of the council may at any time, and upon written request of a majority of the councilmembers shall, call a special meeting of the council. The request and call for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than that specified. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the clerk and served upon each councilmember as hereinafter provided, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called, provided that the mayor may determine that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the people which requires consideration by the council within a shorter time, and upon such determination, which the mayor shall set forth in the call, the call may be filed with the clerk at any time not less than three hours prior to the time set for the meeting. Upon the filing of any call for a special meeting, the clerk shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone or telegraph to each councilmember, at such place as he or she shall have previously designated for that purpose, and shall also serve or cause to be served a written copy of the call upon each councilmember, by delivery of a copy to him or her personally or by the leaving of a copy at his or her usual place of abode. The police department shall cooperate with the clerk in effectuating such service of notice. Upon written waiver of notice executed by all members of the council, a special meeting may be held without prior notice notwithstanding the above provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 4-11) 
2.08.050 - Meetings-Rules of council. 
    All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed and rules for the consideration of nominations submitted by the mayor and for the conduct of other business of the council shall be provided by ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4-12) 
2.08.060 - Council conferences. 
    The council may meet at any time in informal conference for the consideration of any city business or to meet with any officer or employee of the city or any other person on city business. No person other than those specifically invited by the council to attend shall be authorized to be present at any such conference. 
(Prior code § 4-13) 
2.08.070 - Quorum. 
    A majority of the whole number of members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance shall be adopted by the council without the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the council. If a quorum is not present one-half hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the president or the clerk may declare the meeting adjourned. 
(Prior code § 4-14) 
2.08.080 - Roll call votes-Minutes. 
    The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the officer presiding at such meeting and by the clerk. 
(Prior code § 4-15) 
2.08.090 - Ordinances-Passage and approval-When effective, necessary. 
A.  All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the manner provided by general law. Each ordinance passed by the council shall be forthwith delivered by the clerk to the mayor. Each ordinance shall be returned by the mayor to the city clerk after the mayor has affixed his or her signature thereto or after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of its delivery to the mayor in any event. 
B.  No ordinance other than the local budget ordinance shall take effect less than twenty (20) days after its final passage by council and approval by the mayor where such approval is required, unless the council shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least two-thirds of all the members of the council vote in favor of such resolution. 
C.  Any and all expenditures of money not included in the current budget and not considered an emergency within the contemplation of the definition as propounded by the Legislature shall be done by ordinance and not by resolution, and unless prior thereto there shall have been regularly adopted by the governing body an ordinance authorizing an appropriation sufficient to meet the cost of carrying out the provisions of contract, ordinance or expenditure. 
D.  A legally advertised public hearing cannot be canceled without consent of the majority of council members present. 
(Prior code § 4-16) 
2.08.100 - Passage over veto. 
    The council will reconsider any ordinance returned by the mayor within the time permitted by the charter, together with a statement setting forth his or her objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. Such reconsideration of the ordinance or any item or part thereof from which the mayor is constrained to withhold his or her approval shall be at the next meeting of council which occurs not less than three days following the return of the ordinance by the mayor. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the council following a veto by the mayor, the clerk shall append to such ordinance a certification of the action of the council upon such reconsideration in substantially the following form: 
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council of the City of Elizabeth on the _______ day of _______, 20___, was delivered to me on the _______ day of _______, together with the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained to withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On reconsideration thereof, on the _______ day of _______ (the Council duly resolved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its members to enact such ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or (the Mayor's veto was sustained.) 
Dated: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
(Prior code § 4-17) 
2.08.110 - Ordinances not returned by mayor. 
    Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the mayor's signature by reason of his or her failure to return it to the council by filing it with the clerk within ten (10) days after it has been presented to him or her, the clerk shall append to such ordinance as engrossed a certificate in substantially the following form: 
I hereby certify that the above ordinance was adopted by the City Council on the _______ day of _______, 20___, and was presented to the Mayor duly certified on the _______ day of _______, 20___, and upon his failure to sign it or to return and file it with the clerk within ten (10) days thereafter, the said ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor has signed it. 
Dated: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
(Prior code § 4-18) 
Article II - Rules of Procedure 

2.08.120 - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "Rules of Council," and is hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "rules." 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 1) 
2.08.130 - Meetings. 
    Regular and special meetings of the council shall be held at such times as are provided by the code. An adjourned meeting shall be considered a continuation of the preceding meeting, and the business of the council shall be resumed where it was left at the last adjournment. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 2) 
2.08.140 - Presiding officer-Powers, duties. 
    The president of the council, chosen in the manner and for the term prescribed by the code, shall: 
A.  Appoint such special committees of the council as may be authorized by motion or resolution. 
B.  Preside at all meetings of the council, and of the committee of the whole. 
C.  State the question and announce the result on all matters upon which the council may vote. 
D.  Rule on all questions of order, subject to appeal to the council. 
E.  Sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted in his or her presence; and in his or her absence the president pro tempore shall sign ordinances and resolutions adopted in his or her presence. 
F.  Have such other functions, powers and duties as the council may from time to time prescribe. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 3) 
2.08.150 - Clerk-Duties. 
    The city clerk shall serve as clerk of the council in accordance with the code. In the absence of the clerk, the president shall appoint a clerk pro tempore. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 4) 
2.08.160 - Agenda. 
    An agenda for each regular meeting of the council shall be prepared by the clerk under the supervision of the president of the council. The agenda shall be completed not later than 4:00 p.m. on the day of each regular meeting of the council. The agenda for each regular meeting shall include only such matters of council business as have been considered at a premeeting conference of city council. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 5) 
2.08.170 - Call to order. 
    The president of the council shall call each meeting to order. In his or her absence the clerk shall call the meeting to order and those present shall select a temporary chairperson who shall preside during the absence of the president. The president shall assume the chair as soon as he or she is in attendance at any meeting which may have been called to order in his or her absence, and the temporary chairperson shall thereupon relinquish the chair. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 6) 
2.08.180 - Quorum call. 
    At the opening of each meeting of the council, the clerk shall call the roll and the names of those present shall be recorded in the minutes. As provided by the code, five members of the council shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present one-half hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the presiding officer or the clerk may declare the meeting adjourned. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 7) 
2.08.190 - Order of business. 
    The order of business at each meeting of the council shall be as follows: 
A.  Roll call. 
B.  Public speaking portion. Taxpayers or residents of the city have a right to address the city council during this order of business which shall last from 7:30 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. Each speaker addressing the city council, pursuant to this section, shall be required to limit his or her remarks to five minutes and shall at no time engage in any personally offensive or abusive remarks. The chair shall call any speaker to order who violates any provision of this rule. 
    Presiding officers should be instructed first to rule a disrupter out of order and if the conduct continues, he or she or she should be told that his or her or her public remarks are terminated. If the prohibited conduct continues, he or she or she may be forcibly removed from the chambers and charged with violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-8, which will thereafter be tried in a municipal court outside the local jurisdiction. 
C.  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
D.  Public hearings. 
E.  Petitions, communications, etc. 
F.  Reports of city officers. 
G.  Old business. 
H.  Ordinances upon first reading. 
I.  Ordinances upon second reading. 
J.  New business. 
K.  Adjournment. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 8) 
2.08.200 - Distribution and reading of minutes. 
    The clerk shall, so far as practicable, prepare and distribute to the council the minutes of each meeting promptly after the meeting. The minutes of any meeting may be approved without reading whenever they have been distributed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of approval. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 9) 
2.08.210 - Committees. 
    There shall be no standing committees of the council other than the committee of the whole. The rules of the council shall govern the meetings of the committee of the whole so far as applicable. Special committees for legislative purposes may be appointed by the president pursuant to motion or resolution. No special committee shall proceed to the consideration of any matter referred to it unless a majority of the members of the committee shall be present. All committee meetings shall be held at city hall. No special committee shall report on a matter referred to it at the same meeting at which the reference is made, except by unanimous consent of the members of the committee. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 10) 
2.08.220 - Roll-call votes and minutes. 
    As provided by the code, the vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the presiding officer and by the clerk. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 11) 
2.08.230 - Nominations and appointments. 
A.  Nominations submitted by the mayor will be considered in committee of the whole and may be reported to the council at its next regular meeting. Any member of the council may move a nomination. 
B.  With respect to appointments to be made by the council, any member of the council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to be filled. The council will consider such nominations in committee of the whole, which will report to a regular meeting of the council. Where there is a single office to be filled, the sense of the council on the appointment shall be taken as to each nominee, and the nominee receiving a majority shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more than one office to be filled, such as on a board, commission or authority, the same procedure shall be followed with respect to each office separately until the total number of appointments to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the chair, a group of nominations may be considered at once where there is no apparent division in the council as to the nominees included in the group. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 12) 
2.08.240 - Rules of debate. 
A.  The president of the council shall not be deprived of any right to vote or of any other rights, powers or duties of a councilmember by virtue of occupying the office of president of the council. 
B.  A member of the council shall be entitled to the floor only upon recognition by the chair. Once a member has been recognized and taken the floor, he or she shall not be interrupted for any reason other than a call to order; and in such case the chair shall rule promptly on the point of order and the speaker be allowed to proceed if he or she is in order. 
C.  The councilmember who has made a motion shall be entitled to the privilege of closing debate. 
D.  A motion to reconsider may be made by a councilmember on the prevailing side, and such motion may be made only at the same meeting, or at an adjournment thereof, at which the action was taken. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 13) 
2.08.250 - Voting. 
    When the roll is called upon any question, the silence of a councilmember shall constitute an affirmative vote unless he or she states that he or she abstains. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 14) 
2.08.260 - Addressing the council. 
A.  Persons other than councilmembers may be permitted to address the council in the proper order of business. A person present may, upon recognition by the chair and with the consent of two-thirds of council, be heard in the order of communications and petitions and at such other times as council may specifically permit. No person shall address any remark or question to any specific council member, nor shall any person be permitted to address the chair, while a motion is pending. A councilmember may, through the chair, respond to any communication or address received pursuant to this section. 
B.  Except upon consent of the council, each person addressing the council pursuant to this section shall be required to limit his or her remarks to five minutes, and shall at no time engage in any personally offensive or abusive remarks. The chair shall call any speaker to order who violates any provision of this rule. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 15) 
2.08.270 - Decorum. 
A.  Each member of the council shall cooperate with the chair in preserving order and decorum, and no member shall by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings of the council nor disturb any member while speaking, or fail to abide by the orders of the council or its president, except as specifically permitted by these rules. 
B.  Any person who shall disturb the peace of the council, make impertinent or slanderous remarks or conduct himself or herself in a boisterous manner while addressing the council shall be forthwith barred by the presiding officer from further audience before the council, except that if the speaker shall submit to proper order under these rules, permission for him or her to continue may be granted by a majority vote of the council. 
C.  The police department shall, upon request, designate a member of the department to serve as sergeant at arms at council meetings. He or she shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at such meetings. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 16) 
2.08.280 - Ordinances and resolutions. 
A.  Ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared for the consideration of council by the city attorney upon: 
1.  Request of any member of council; 
2.  Request of the mayor; and 
3.  Upon recommendation of the city attorney, prior to introduction, each proposed ordinance requiring or permitting administrative action may be submitted to the business administrator and the department head concerned, each of whom shall submit to the council an opinion as to the administrative implications of the proposed ordinance or resolution. 
B.  An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the council. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single object, which shall be expressed in its title. After the first reading of an ordinance, it shall be referred to the committee of the whole. Each resolution shall also be referred to the committee of the whole upon its introduction, unless the council shall provide for its immediate passage. The committee of the whole shall file with the clerk all petitions, resolutions or other papers considered by it on each matter referred to the committee. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 17) 
2.08.290 - Filing of reports and resolutions. 
    All reports to the council and all resolutions shall be filed with the city clerk and entered in the minutes of the council. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 18) 
2.08.300 - Suspension of rules. 
    Any rule of council may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of city council. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 19) 
2.08.310 - Proceedings governed by "Robert's Rules of Order." 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in these rules, the proceedings of the council shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order." 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 20) 
2.08.320 - Adjournment. 
    A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Prior code Appx. Part I § 21) 
Chapter 2.12 - MAYOR 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Mayor-General powers and duties. 
    The executive power of the city shall be exercised by the mayor. He or she shall annually report to the council and the public on the work of the previous year and on the condition and requirements of the municipal government and shall from time to time make such recommendations for action by the council as he or she may deem in the public interest. He or she shall enforce the charter and ordinances of the city and shall supervise all of the departments of the city government and require each department to make an annual and such other reports of its work as he or she may deem desirable. He or she shall appoint all officers and employees for whose election or appointment no other provision is made by the charter or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4-22) 
2.12.020 - Acting mayor-Designation, powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall designate the business administrator, any other department head or the municipal clerk to act as mayor whenever the mayor shall be prevented by absence from the municipality, disability or other cause from attending to the duties of his or her office. During such time the person so designated by the mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and duties of mayor. Whenever the mayor shall have been unable to attend to the duties of his or her office for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days for any of the above-stated reasons, an acting mayor shall be appointed by the council, who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the mayor or the then acting mayor. 
(Prior code § 4-27) 
Chapter 2.16 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - City clerk-General powers and duties. 
    The city clerk, appointed by the council, shall: 
A.  Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other state law or city ordinance, and receive the fees prescribed therefor for use by the city. 
B.  Until such time as a separate alcoholic beverage control board may be established pursuant to law, issue such licenses as may be authorized by the council pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law (N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 et seq.) and the ordinances of the city. 
C.  Perform such functions as are vested in the municipal clerk by state law and ordinances relating to bingo and raffles licensing. 
D.  Provide secretarial and clerical services for the councilmembers in the discharge of their official duties, and one or more offices for conferences and consultation. 
E.  Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 4-46) 
2.16.020 - Duties regarding minutes, ordinances and resolutions. 
    The clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the council and, upon request of the chairperson, of any council committee, and he or she shall preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions. At the close of each year, with the advice and assistance of the city attorney, the clerk shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions, or true copies thereof, of the city which then remain in force and effect. He or she shall also properly index the record books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions. 
(Prior code § 4-47) 
2.16.030 - Duties regarding custody of seal and documents. 
A.  The city clerk shall have custody of the city seal and shall safely keep all records, books and documents of the city, except such of them as are committed by charter or ordinance to another office. He or she shall be the depositary and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by or on account of any city officer or employee, except his or her own bond. The latter shall be placed in the custody of the director of finance. He or she shall also be the depositary and custodian of all insurance policies, deeds, leases and contract documents to which the city may be a party. He or she shall report to the business administrator at least annually on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and contract of insurance in his or her custody. 
B.  The clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the city to be affixed to instruments in writing pursuant to law, to exemplify any documents on record in his or her office, or to certify any act or paper which from the records of his or her office shall appear to have been a public act of the city or a public document. He or she shall charge and collect such fees for the affixing of the seal, exemplification or certification as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4-48) 
2.16.040 - Deputy municipal clerk. 
A.  There is established the office of deputy municipal clerk within the office of the municipal clerk (city clerk) of the city. The deputy municipal clerk shall be appointed by the city council and shall receive such compensation as provided by the ordinance codified in this section and thereafter as provided by a separate salary ordinance as enacted by the city council of the city. The deputy municipal clerk shall serve for a term of five years. 
B.  During the absence or disability of the municipal clerk (city clerk), the deputy municipal clerk shall have all the powers of the municipal clerk (city clerk) and shall perform the functions and duties of such office. 
C.  Powers, Duties and Functions. 
1.  The deputy municipal clerk shall be under the supervision of the municipal clerk (city clerk) and shall perform all duties as directed by the municipal clerk (city clerk). 
2.  The deputy municipal clerk shall, under the direction of the municipal clerk (city clerk), assist the municipal clerk in the performance of all duties and functions required of the municipal clerk by state law or city ordinance. 
3.  The deputy municipal clerk shall, under the direction of the municipal clerk (city clerk), attend all meetings and conferences of the city council and assist in the preparation of meeting agendas and the compilation of minutes of the proceedings of city council. 
4.  The deputy municipal clerk shall, under the direction of the municipal clerk (city clerk), maintain an adequate filing and indexing system of all official documents of the city and correspondence directed to the governing body of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-49) 
Chapter 2.20 - PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Established. 
    There is established the position of parking enforcement officer in the city pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 260 of the Laws of 1987 of the State of New Jersey, as same may be supplemented and amended, for the purposes of enforcing state, county or municipal statutes, resolutions, ordinances or regulations related to the parking of vehicles within the municipality. 
(Prior code § 4-191) 
2.20.020 - Authority. 
    A parking enforcement officer shall have the authority to: 
A.  Issue a parking ticket for a parking offense, as those two terms are defined in the "Parking Offices Adjudication Act," P.L. 1985, c. 14 (C.39:4-139.2 et seq.); 
B.  Serve and execute all process for any parking offense issuing out of the court in the municipality having jurisdiction over the complaint; and 
C.  Cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in the municipality in violation of a statute, resolution, ordinance or regulation to be towed away from the scene of the violation and to collect from the vehicle owner or the owner's agent, on behalf of the municipality, the costs of the towing and subsequent storage of the vehicle before surrendering the vehicle to the owner or agent. 
(Prior code § 4-192) 
2.20.030 - Appointment. 
    The city council shall appoint parking enforcement officers by resolution and in accordance with all regulations of the state of New Jersey and department of personnel as follows: 
Police department 14 Fire department (as a related duty to primary title) 7 Department of public works (as a related duty to primary title) 17 Parking authority 10 Library employees 2 Members of city council 9  
(Ord. No. 4221, § 1, 6-28-2011; prior code § 4-193) 
2.20.040 - Requirements. 
    A person appointed as a parking enforcement officer shall be required to: 
A.  Be a resident of the state during the term of appointment; 
B.  Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and intelligently; 
C.  Be of sound mind and in good health; 
D.  Be of good moral character; and 
E.  Not have been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which would make the person unfit to perform the duties of his or her office. 
(Prior code § 4-194) 
2.20.050 - Fingerprinting-Eligibility and qualifications. 
A.  An applicant for the position of parking enforcement officer appointed pursuant to this chapter shall have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
B.  Before any parking enforcement officer is appointed pursuant to this chapter, the director of the police department shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of the applicant and report these determinations in writing to the appointing authority. 
(Prior code § 4-195) 
2.20.060 - Training course required. 
    No person appointed after the effective date of this chapter may commence duties as a parking enforcement officer unless that person has successfully completed a training course conducted or approved by the municipality. The appointing authority may waive this training requirement for any person otherwise eligible to be appointed as a parking enforcement officer under this chapter if the person possesses substantially equivalent training and background, as determined by the director of the police department. 
(Prior code § 4-196) 
Chapter 2.24 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Department heads-Powers and duties. 
    The head of each department, under the supervision of the mayor and subject to the charter and code, shall: 
A.  Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of subordinate officers and employees within the department. 
B.  Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and employees within the department, and modify such assignments as need appears. 
C.  Supervise the work of the department through the divisions established by the administrative code and such other organization units as the head of the department may find necessary or desirable, and supervise and direct the work of the employees of the department. 
D.  Delegate to division heads such of his or her powers as he or she may deem necessary for efficient administration. 
E.  Report at least annually to the mayor and council in such form as shall be approved by the business administrator on the work of the department during the preceding year. 
(Prior code § 4-143) 
2.24.020 - Department heads-Full-time service required. 
    Department heads shall devote full time as required for the proper and efficient discharge of the duties of their respective offices. 
(Prior code § 4-144) 
2.24.030 - Division heads and bureau heads. 
    A director may serve as a division head, and a division head may serve as a bureau head, without additional compensation. 
(Prior code § 4-145) 
2.24.040 - Business administrator-Filling of vacancy by mayor authorized. 
    Whenever and so long as there is a vacancy in the office of business administrator, the mayor may serve as acting business administrator without additional compensation, and shall for the time being have all the functions, powers and duties of the administrator. 
(Prior code § 4-146) 
2.24.050 - Removal of department heads and other personnel. 
    Pursuant to the charter (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43 and 37): 
A.  The mayor may in his or her discretion remove any department head after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a department head, the mayor shall first file written notice of his or her intention with the council, and such removal shall become effective on the twentieth day after the filing of such notice unless the council shall prior thereto have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the council disapproving the removal. 
B.  The council may remove any municipal officer, other than the mayor or a member of council, for cause. 
C.  The council will consider notices under subsection A of this section and motions under subsection B of this section only after notice and an opportunity to be heard to the affected officer. The clerk shall cause a copy of the notice or motion, as the case may be, together with a statement of the charges involved and notice of the time and place fixed for hearing, to be served personally or by registered mail upon the officer affected. Hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after date of service. The hearing shall be open to the public. Pursuant to the charter, council may veto a removal under subsection A of this section by a two-thirds vote of councilmembers and may adopt or defeat a motion under subsection B of this section by a majority vote of the councilmembers. 
D.  Suspension of Department Heads. 
1.  The mayor may suspend for not more than five days any department head for inefficiency, incompetency, misconduct, negligence, insubordination or for other sufficient cause, upon notice to the department head, to be effective immediately or upon a date fixed in the notice. 
2.  At the expiration of the period of suspension, the department head shall be entitled to reinstatement unless he or she shall be served with notice of hearing why he or she should not be removed from office under subsections A, B and C of this section, in which event the mayor shall be authorized to continue the period of suspension until the date of hearing why the department head shall be removed. 
(Prior code § 4-147) 
2.24.060 - Employee supervision and removal-Grievances. 
A.  Each department head shall have power, except as otherwise specifically provided by law, to appoint, remove and suspend subordinate officers and employees within the department, subject to applicable civil service rules and regulations. 
B.  The business administrator shall on or before January 1, 1962, establish an employee grievance committee consisting of five officers and employees of the city, to hear, review and adjust informally such employee grievances as any department head or employee, in the event a department head has been unable to resolve the grievance, may present to it. The hearing, review and adjustment shall be in accord with Article 1, Section 19, of the New Jersey Constitution (1947). 
(Prior code § 4-148) 
2.24.070 - Vacancies in divisions. 
    Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of head of any departmental division by resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the director of the department may fill the vacancy temporarily by appointing an acting head of the division, who shall have and perform all the functions, powers and duties of the division until the office shall be filled permanently. Any such temporary appointment shall terminate not later than ninety (90) days after the date of the appointment, unless the council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions of the period. 
(Prior code § 4-149) 
2.24.080 - Official surety bonds. 
A.  Every officer or employee of the city who, by virtue of his or her office or position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public moneys or funds, and any other officer or employee who may be required so to do by the council, shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as may be fixed by resolution of the council, binding him or her to the city in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his or her duty. Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall execute such a bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the city clerk, except that the clerk shall deliver his or her bond to the director of finance before he or she enters upon the discharge of the duties of his or her office or employment. 
B.  If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his or her bond as herein required within thirty (30) days after due notification of his or her election or appointment, his or her office may be declared vacant by the council. 
C.  In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or by any ordinance of the city to give a bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties, the bond shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state and the premium therefor shall be paid by the city. Each such bond shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, and nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved. 
(Prior code § 4-150) 
2.24.090 - Conflict of interest-Prohibited solicitations and gifts-Penalty. 
A.  No officer or employee elected or appointed in the city shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract with the city or in the compensation for work done or for materials or supplies furnished to the city or to any contractor or other person furnishing the same to the city, nor shall he or she participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward for his or her services, except the salary or fees established by law or by ordinance or resolution of the governing body. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employee of the city from participating in the Elizabeth improvement program (E.H.I.P.), the neighborhood home preservation program (N.P.P.), and the rental rehabilitation program (R.R.P.), provided, that such participation is not violative of any federal laws, regulations or rules. 
B.  No officer or employee elected or appointed in the city shall accept or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her official duties, other than the fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to law. 
C.  Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this section or of any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal from office therefor. Any officer or employee who shall knowingly permit any provision of this section to be violated by any of his or her subordinates shall also be guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal therefor. 
(Prior code § 4-151) 
2.24.100 - Retirement. 
    On and after July 1, 1961, each appointive officer and employee of the city (other than a nonpaid member of a purely advisory body) shall retire upon attaining seventy (70) years of age or at the earlier age as may be required by law, except that the officer or employee may be continued in his or her employment on an annual basis, upon consent of the city council, as authorized by resolution and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 43:15A-47. He or she shall have such pension and retirement benefits as may be provided by statute or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4-152) 
2.24.110 - Administrative regulations-When effective-Filing required. 
    No rule or regulation made by any department shall, except upon written approval of the mayor, take effect until at least ten (10) days after it is filed with the municipal clerk as required by the charter. This limitation of time shall not apply, however, to any order, rule or regulation which relates solely to the organization or internal management of the city government or a part thereof. The city clerk shall maintain a docket of all orders, rules and regulations filed in his or her office, which docket shall show the name of the issuing department, a brief description of the subject matter, and the date of filing. At the close of each year the clerk shall, with the advice and assistance of the city attorney, compile, codify and bind all of the orders, rules and regulations which then remain in force and effect. The city clerk may arrange for the printing and sale of such complication within the limits of available appropriations. 
(Prior code § 4-153) 
2.24.120 - Public records-Preservation and inspection. 
A.  All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any city department shall be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved, and be and remain the sole property of the city, and shall not at any time be removed from the offices of such department except when required for use in the official business of the city, and shall then be returned to such office without delay. Each city officer shall be responsible for assuring that the requirements of the section are complied with in respect to his or her particular office. This section shall be subject to the provision of "Destruction of Public Records Law (1953)." (N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.) 
B.  All such documents and records of the city shall during office hours be open to public search, inspection and examination; provided, however, that such search, inspection and examination shall not extend to work papers of any department nor to materials prepared for the prosecution or defense by the city of any legal action or right; and provided that such search, inspection and examination be made under such regulations as the officer in whose custody such records, books and documents may be shall establish for the safety and preservation thereof. 
(Prior code § 4-154) 
2.24.130 - Public office hours. 
    The public, administrative and executive business offices of the city shall be open for the transaction of public business daily, except Saturdays and Sundays and legal holidays, between such hours as the business administrator may prescribe with the approval of council; except that during the summer period from June 15th to September 14th such business hours shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The police department, fire department, maintenance and construction divisions of the department of public works shall provide city services for twenty-four (24) hours a day. All other departments shall provide city services for twenty-four (24) hours a day in times of emergency. The business administrator or a department head may require any officer or employee to be in attendance for work on any day or days whenever he or she determines that a public exigency or emergency so requires. 
(Prior code § 4-155) 
2.24.140 - Independent annual audit required. 
    The council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the city's accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual audit shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected by the council. 
(Prior code § 4-156) 
2.24.150 - Department heads-Residency requirement. 
    At the time of the appointment of any department head, he or she need not be a resident of the municipality or state, but during his or her tenure of office he or she may reside outside the municipality only with the approval of council. 
(Prior code § 4-157) 
2.24.160 - Additional compensation. 
    A department head who serves as a division head shall receive no additional compensation. 
(Prior code § 114-2) 
Chapter 2.28 - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
Article 1. - General Provisions[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, sections 2.28.010-2.28.060 have been designated as article 1. 

2.28.010 - Business administrator-Appointment, qualifications, residency requirement. 
    There is a department of administration, the head of which is the business administrator. He or she shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his or her actual experience in or his or her knowledge of accepted practice in respect to duties of his or her office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she need not be a resident of this city or state, but during his or her tenure of office he or she may reside outside the city only with the approval of council. 
(Prior code § 4-31) 
2.28.020 - Departmental organization-Powers and duties. 
    The department of administration consists of the office of business administrator and divisions of budget and personnel and of central purchases. Through such office and divisions and otherwise, the business administrator, under the direction and supervision of the mayor, shall: 
A.  Exercise the general powers and duties of a department head as provided by the charter and code. 
B.  Assist the mayor in the preparation of the city budget and otherwise as the mayor may require. 
C.  Supervise the administration of each of the departments of the city government; provided that with respect to the department of law or department of finance, the authority of the business administrator under this subsection shall extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing. 
D.  Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient management of the city government, subject to the charter and administrative code. 
E.  Develop and enforce sound purchasing and personnel practices and procedures for all departments, offices and agencies of the city government. 
F.  Coordinate the operation and administration of the various departments, divisions, offices and agencies of the city government. 
G.  Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work programs and costs of municipal services. 
H.  Perform such other duties as council may prescribe. 
(Prior code § 4-32) 
2.28.030 - Division of budget and personnel-Administration, powers and duties. 
    The head of the division of budget and personnel is the budget and personnel officer. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by at least five years' training or experience or a combination thereof in budget administration and cost analysis. Under the direction and supervision of the business administrator, the budget and personnel officer shall: 
A.  Organize and administer the work of the division. 
B.  Prepare and install uniform forms and procedures for budget preparation by all departments. 
C.  Assist the business administrator in the review and analysis of budget requests. 
D.  Develop and install records and procedures to enable each department to produce work load and performance reports, expressed in appropriate work units to be used for budget purposes. 
E.  Assist in the preparation of the budget document. 
F.  Prepare a job classification and pay plan and other uniform personnel policies for the departments in the city government, as directed by the business administrator. 
G.  Install and maintain a complete system of personnel records for all officers and employees of the city government. 
(Prior code § 4-33) 
2.28.040 - Bureau of central license. 
    Within the department of administration, there shall be a bureau of central licensing, the head of which shall be the chief license inspector. Under the direction, supervision and final authority of the business administrator, the bureau shall administer and enforce the licensing ordinances of the city with respect to the following matters and subjects: 
A.  Newsstands; 
B.  Canvassers and solicitors; 
C.  Taxis, private livery and wreckers; 
D.  Peddlers; 
E.  Auctioneers; 
F.  Bankrupt and fire sales; 
G.  Transient merchants and itinerant vendors; 
H.  Bicycles; 
I.  Parking lots; 
J.  Public movers; 
K.  Tourist camps and trailers; 
L.  Sound trucks; 
M.  Junkyards; 
N.  Dance halls, pool and billiard parlors, bowling alleys and coin-operated amusements; 
O.  Such additional and other licenses as may be provided by ordinance or statute except as this Code otherwise provides; 
P.  Dog licenses shall be issued by the bureau of central licensing under the supervision of the chief license inspector, but the control of the dog warden and the assistants and enforcement of all ordinances pertaining to dogs shall remain the responsibility of the division of health and human services; 
Q.  Autobuses. The functions of the administration and enforcement of all ordinances in connection with autobuses are the responsibility of the bureau of central licensing under the supervision of the chief license inspector. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 2, 10-22-2013) 
2.28.050 - Agency of weights and measures. 
    There is established an agency of weights and measures within the bureau of central licensing, which shall inspect and seal weights and measures and enforce all laws and ordinances relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 2, 10-22-2013) 
2.28.060 - Bureau of rent control. 
    There shall be a bureau of rent control, the head of which shall be the business administrator. In the bureau of rental control there shall be a fair rental housing board. For so long as there exists a fair rental housing board, as authorized by Ordinance No. 1763, as amended and supplemented, within the city, the board as established thereunder, as well as all duties and functions with respect to rent leveling and stabilization shall be administered within the department of administration. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 2, 10-22-2013) 
Article 2. - Policy Prohibiting Discrimination and Harassment in the Workplace[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), adopted April 12, 2016, enacted provisions intended for use as article 1. At the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article 2, sections 2.28.070-2.28.120. 

2.28.070 - Certain conduct prohibited. 
A.  The City of Elizabeth is committed to providing every city employee and prospective city employee with a work environment free from prohibited discrimination or harassment. Under this policy, forms of employment discrimination or harassment based upon the following protected categories are prohibited and will not be tolerated: race, creed, color, national origin, nationality, ancestry, age, sex/gender (including pregnancy), marital status, civil union status, domestic partnership status, familial status, religion, affectional or sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic information, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, or disability. To achieve the goal of maintaining a work environment free from discrimination and harassment, the city strictly prohibits the conduct that is described in this policy. This is a zero tolerance policy. This means that the city and its agencies reserve the right to take remedial, corrective and/or disciplinary action, if appropriate, to address any unacceptable conduct that violates this policy, regardless of whether the conduct satisfies the legal definition of discrimination or harassment. 
B.  Prohibited discrimination and harassment undermines the integrity of the employment relationship, compromises equal employment opportunity, debilitates morale and interferes with work productivity. Thus, this policy applies to all employees and applicants for employment in city departments. The city will not tolerate harassment or discrimination by anyone in the workplace including supervisors, co-workers, or persons doing business with the city. This policy also applies to conduct that occurs in the workplace and conduct that occurs at any location, which can be reasonably regarded as an extension of the workplace of the city. 
C.  Unwelcome behavior involving any of the protected categories referred to above that is not directed at an individual but exists in the workplace and interferes with an individual's ability to do his or her job is also prohibited by this policy. This type of harassment is sometimes referred to as "Third party harassment" or "Bystander harassment." 
D.  It is a violation of this policy to engage in any employment practice or procedure that treats an individual less favorably based upon any of the protected categories referred to in subsection A. above. This policy pertains to all employment practices such as recruitment, selection, hiring, training, promotion, transfer, assignment, layoff, return from layoff, termination, demotion, discipline, compensation, fringe benefits, working conditions and career development. 
E.  It is a violation of this policy to use derogatory or demeaning references regarding a person's race, gender, age, religion, disability, affectional or sexual orientation, ethnic background or any other protected category referred to in subsection A. above. 
1.  Examples of behaviors that may constitute a violation of this policy include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Discriminating against an individual with regard to terms and conditions of employment because of being in one or more of the protected categories referred to in subsection A. above; 
b.  Treating an individual differently because of the individual's race, color, national origin or other protected category, or because an individual has the physical, cultural or linguistic characteristics of a racial, religious, or other protected category; 
c.  Treating an individual differently because of marriage to, civil union to, domestic partnership with, or association with persons of a racial, religious or other protected category; or due to the individual's membership in or association with an organization identified with the interests of a certain racial, religious or other protected category; or because an individual's name, domestic partner's name, or spouse's name is associated with a certain racial, religious or other protected category referred to in subsection A.; 
d.  Calling an individual by an unwanted nickname that refers to one or more of the above protected categories, or telling jokes pertaining to one or more protected categories; 
e.  Using derogatory references with regard to any of the protected categories in any communication; 
f.  Engaging in threatening, intimidating, or hostile acts toward another individual in the workplace because that individual belongs to, or is associated with, any of the protected categories; or 
g.  Displaying or distributing material (including electronic communications) in the workplace that contains derogatory or demeaning language or images pertaining to any of the protected categories. 
F.  It is a violation of this policy to engage in sexual (or gender-based) harassment of any kind, including hostile work environment harassment, quid pro quo harassment, or same-sex harassment. For the purposes of this policy, sexual harassment is defined, as in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Guidelines, as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. 
1.  Sexual harassment occurs when: 
a.  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
b.  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
c.  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
2.  Examples of prohibited behaviors that may constitute sexual harassment and are therefore a violation of this policy include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Generalized gender-based remarks and comments, discussion of sexual activities, unwelcome sexual advances, such as sexual flirtations, repeated requests for dates and/or other continued contact after rejection of overtures; 
b.  Unwelcome physical contact such as intentional touching, grabbing, pinching, brushing against another's body or impeding or blocking movement; 
c.  Verbal, written or electronic sexually suggestive or obscene comments, jokes or propositions including letters, notes, e-mail, text messages, invitations, gestures or inappropriate comments about a person's clothing; 
d.  Visual contact, such as leering or staring at another's body; gesturing; displaying sexually suggestive objects, cartoons, posters, magazines or pictures of scantily-clad individuals; or displaying sexually suggestive material on a bulletin board, locker room wall, or computer monitor; 
e.  Explicit or implicit suggestions of sex by a supervisor or manager in return for a favorable employment action such as hiring, compensation, promotion, or retention; 
f.  Suggesting or implying that failure to accept a request for a date or sex would result in an adverse employment consequence with respect to any employment practice such as performance evaluation or promotional opportunity; or 
g.  Continuing to engage in certain behaviors of a sexual nature after an objection has been raised by the target of such inappropriate behavior. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
2.28.080 - Applicability of this policy to non-employees of the municipality. 
    Non-employees of the city, including, but not limited to, those interacting with city employees as vendors of goods and services, independent contractors, substitute or temporary workers or fill-ins shall also be subject to each and every term of this policy to the fullest extent possible, should it be alleged by a complainant that they committed an act or conducted themselves in such a way as to commit an offense of discriminatory and/or harassing activity in the workplace in the course of dealing with the city. An employee of the city who is subjected to or witnesses any harassing behavior prohibited by this policy by any such non-employee may file a complaint in the same manner as if the behavior had been committed by an employee. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
2.28.090 - Employee responsibilities. 
    It is the duty of all employees, including supervisory personnel, to be familiar with this policy. More importantly, each employee has a stake in preventing harassing activity and thus shares responsibility with the city in eliminating discriminatory and/or harassing activity in the workplace. Employees who feel victimized by discriminatory and/or harassing behavior are encouraged to come forward with their complaints. Employees should also inform their co-worker or supervisor clearly that harassing conduct is offensive and unwelcome. Often, disputes arise only because of misconceptions and insensitivity, which can be corrected simply through communication. If informal remedies do not resolve the dispute, report the matter promptly to an appropriate supervisor, department head or the business administrator. 
    Supervisory personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with this policy; and, upon being informed of possible harassing behavior, are required to take appropriate immediate action in response, including, but not limited to informing employees of their right to file a complaint and taking any possible preliminary action designed to protect the interest of the accuser, the accused and the city, without same being any admission of wrongdoing or liability by any party. 
    Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is offensive and unwelcome. At the very least, employees should refuse to participate in such behavior. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all alleged incidents of sexual harassment. 
    Supervisors shall make every effort to maintain a work environment that is free from any form of prohibited discrimination/harassment. Supervisors shall immediately refer allegations of prohibited discrimination/harassment to their department director and to the business administrator or any other individual designated by the city agency to receive complaints of discrimination and harassment in the workplace. A supervisor's failure to comply with these requirements may result in administrative and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. For purposes of this section a supervisor is defined broadly to include any manager or other individual who is authorized to undertake tangible employment decisions of another employee or who is authorized to direct the day-to-day work activities of another employee. 
    All employees are expected to cooperate with investigations undertaken in response to a complaint of discriminatory and/or harassing conduct. Failure to cooperate, including maintaining confidentiality of facts discovered during the investigation shall be considered to be a violation of this policy and may result in administrative and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
    An employee who knowingly makes a false accusation of prohibited discrimination or harassment or knowingly provides false information in the course of an investigation of a complaint may be subjected to administrative and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. Complaints made in good faith, however, even if found to be unsubstantiated, shall not be considered a false accusation. 
    All complaints and investigations shall be handled, to the extent possible, in a manner that will protect the privacy interests of those involved. To the extent practical and appropriate under the circumstances, confidentiality shall be maintained throughout the investigatory process. In the course of an investigation, it may be necessary to discuss the claims with the person(s) against whom the complaint was filed and other persons who may have relevant knowledge or who have a legitimate need to know about the matter. All persons interviewed, including witnesses, shall be directed not to discuss any aspect of the investigation with others in light of the important privacy interests of all concerned. Failure to comply with this confidentiality directive may result in administrative and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
    Any employee found to have violated any portion or portions of this policy may be subject to appropriate administrative and/or disciplinary action which may include, but which shall not be limited to: referral for training, referral for counseling, written or verbal reprimand, suspension, reassignment, demotion or termination of employment. Referral to another appropriate authority for review for possible violation of state and federal statutes and regulations may also be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
2.28.100 - Training. 
    The city shall provide all employees and elected officials with training on the policy and procedures herein. 
    All employees in supervisory positions will receive training to make clear their responsibilities under the policy and procedures set forth in this section. 
    The training referred to shall be updated on an on-going basis in order to inform all employees and elected officials of any significant changes or developments in the law. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
2.28.110 - Notification to employees. 
    This policy shall be revised and updated periodically at the discretion of the city attorney and thereafter distributed to all employees by: 
A.  Posting a notice concerning this revised and updated policy in a prominent location within all of the city's buildings, on the bulletin boards of each department of the city within each city owned property. This notice shall state that a copy of the revised and updated policy is available in the personnel office. 
B.  Distribution to all current city employees and volunteers; 
C.  Distribution to all persons hired as city employees or volunteers subsequent to the effective date of this policy; 
D.  Issue an annual memorandum to update all municipal employees concerning the policy against discrimination and/or harassment; and 
E.  Discuss the policy against discriminatory and/or harassing activity in the workplace during any new employee orientation meetings, seminars, or training sessions held subsequent to the effective date of this policy. 
    Each employee receiving a copy of this policy shall sign a certification or receipt of a written copy of this policy. 
    As to sworn personnel of the city police department distribution and signature receipt of the city policy shall be completed via the departmental electronic document management system. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
2.28.120 - Procedures for reporting discriminatory and/or harassing activity. 
A.  Who May File. Any employee who has reason to believe that he or she has been subjected to conduct that constitutes discrimination and/or harassment as defined above or who witnesses acts of discriminatory and/or harassing activity in the workplace committed upon others is urged to report the incident or file a complaint promptly after such activity has occurred. Receipt of information, whether formal or informal will constitute a complaint and will be investigated to ensure that the rights of any person or work environment is protected from any type of harassing activity. 
B.  Complaint Procedure. 
1.  Employees are encouraged, but not required, to notify the alleged harasser that the employee considers the action in question to be offensive and unwelcome. Nevertheless, employees may file a complaint without first notifying the harasser. Every effort should be made to report complaints promptly. Delays in reporting may not only hinder a proper investigation, but may also unnecessarily subject the victim to continued prohibited conduct. 
2.  The complaint may be filed orally or in writing. The city shall provide forms for the filing of a complaint. If the complaint is made orally, the person taking the complaint shall complete the form for the complainant. The complaint filed must include the following information: 
a.  The name, department and position or title of the complainant; 
b.  The name, department and position or title of the charged party; 
c.  The date, nature and circumstances, in detail, of each individual act of alleged harassing activity; and 
d.  The names of any witnesses to such actions or persons having knowledge of the incidents; and 
e.  Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a supervisor or other person, and if so, when and to whom. 
f.  Any other information complainant believes is relevant to the complaint. 
    The complainant shall review the completed form, and if acceptable, sign the complaint. 
3.  As to employees other than sworn personnel of the police department, a complaint may be filed with the employee's supervisor, department head, or the business administrator. Although employees are encouraged to try to resolve disputes with the help of their immediate supervisor, there is no requirement that the employee exhaust the chain of command within the department. Any employee may go directly to the business administrator. 
4.  Sworn personnel of the city police department are encouraged to file their complaint with their immediate supervisor. If the harasser is in the employee's chain of command, the employee may file the complaint with the next level of command above the harasser or directly with internal affairs, chief of police, police director or business administrator. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit a complainant from filing a complaint outside the chain of command nor shall any disciplinary action be taken against a complainant for doing so. 
5.  If any employee believes that it is inappropriate to file the complaint with his or her immediate supervisor, department head or the business administrator, the employee may file the complaint with the city attorney. In such case, the city attorney shall have all the duties and responsibilities of the business administrator hereinafter set forth in conducting an investigation and making recommendations for remedial and/or corrective action. The business administrator shall implement the action recommended by the city attorney. 
6.  Any employee, including sworn personnel in the police department, may file a complaint with any external agency having jurisdiction over these matters without first utilizing the procedures set forth in this policy. 
7.  If a department director or supervisory personnel receives a complaint regarding any form of harassment or becomes aware of instances of harassment, he or she shall promptly report the incident to the business administrator. 
C.  Investigation. In every case, all complaints of harassment will be taken seriously and investigated discreetly, impartially, thoroughly and promptly. Investigations will vary from case to case, depending on a variety of circumstances; but the internal investigation will aim to protect the reputations of both the alleged harasser and the complainant. 
    The business administrator shall promptly investigate the allegations of harassment by conducting interviews with the complainant, the alleged harasser, and any witnesses or other persons the business administrator believes may have information relevant to the investigation. The business administrator may request the assistance of the city attorney and/or other city personnel in conducting the investigation. 
    If the business administrator believes it appropriate, the investigation may be referred to an independent, outside organization or person to investigate the charges and recommend appropriate action. If the business administrator has a conflict of interest in the matter, the city attorney shall conduct the investigation. 
    Confidentiality shall be maintained throughout the investigative process to the extent permitted by law. Nevertheless, the complainant shall be advised that all information contained in the complaint will be used for investigation purposes and will result in the alleged harasser and any named or potential witnesses being questioned to become aware of the matter. All such persons will be instructed that the interview, investigation and disposition are confidential. 
    Full cooperation of the complainant, the accused and all employees is required and includes, but is not limited to, giving true, complete and fully responsive oral and written statements to the business administrator and his/her designee. Failure of any party to cooperate in the investigation shall constitute a violation of this policy. 
    The extent of each investigation will vary depending on the circumstances. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes harassment as defined above, consideration will be given to the totality of the circumstances surrounding the incident including the context of the conduct. 
    The investigation shall be completed within a period of fifteen (15) working days from the receipt of the complaint, circumstances permitting, but in no event shall exceed thirty (30) working days. A confidential written report shall be prepared within five (5) working days of the conclusion of the investigation and submitted to the complainant and the alleged harasser. 
D.  Sanctions. Upon finding that harassment has occurred, the business administrator may initiate any remedial, corrective or disciplinary action the business administrator deems necessary. Sanctions for violating this policy may include counseling, change in work assignments, or disciplinary action up to and including termination. In cases involving non-employees such remedial or corrective action may include barring the harassing party from the premises or other action to ensure that such harassment will no longer occur. 
    Any disciplinary action shall comply with applicable New Jersey Civil Service Commission rules and regulations. 
    The business administrator may monitor future conduct of the parties involved in order to reasonably ensure that the remedial action taken has been effective in stopping the harassment and that no retaliation has occurred. 
    The victim of the harassing conduct shall be informed of the nature of any disciplinary action taken. 
E.  Appeal. If any individual is aggrieved with the investigation, findings and/or remedies pursuant to this policy, he or she may assert any right of appeal contained in the applicable collective bargaining agreements, the New Jersey Civil Service Commission rules and regulations, the New Jersey Division on Civil Rights regulations. Nothing in this policy shall prevent the complainant from taking any action to which he or she may be entitled under the laws and regulations of the United States or State of New Jersey. 
F.  Protection of All Parties. The filing of a bona fide complaint or otherwise reporting acts of discriminatory and/or harassing behavior in the workplace will not adversely affect the employment status or future terms and conditions of employment of the person making the report or complaint. A finding that no harassing conduct took place shall not, of itself, constitute a finding that the complaint was filed in bad faith. Never the less, a charge of harassment is a serious matter. Willfully false accusations of harassment and complaints filed in bad faith may result in disciplinary actions with possible sanctions appropriate for a person actually engaging in behavior that is proscribed by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 4694 , § 1(Att.), 4-12-2016) 
Chapter 2.32 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Departmental administration-Divisions. 
    There is a department of finance, the head of which is the director of finance. The director shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in governmental finance and fiscal management. Within the department there are the following divisions: 
A.  Accounts and control; 
B.  Assessments; 
C.  Revenue. 
(Ord. 3194 § 1, 1999; prior code § 4-61) 
2.32.020 - Financial advisory board-Appointment and terms-Powers and duties. 
    Within the department of finance there may be a financial advisory board of five members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. Each member of the board shall serve for a term of five years, except that of those first appointed, one shall serve for a term of one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one for five years. The members of the board shall, prior to their appointment, have had responsible experience in financial administration and in the investment of trust funds. They shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement of expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The board shall each year choose a chairperson from among its members. It shall: 
A.  Advise and consult with the director of finance with respect to the fiscal policies and procedures of the city; 
B.  Recommend desirable policies and practices for the custody, deposit and investment of city funds; and 
C.  Review the administration of the department from time to time and make recommendations to the director or to the mayor or council for changes or improvements as need appears. 
(Prior code § 4-62) 
2.32.030 - Division of accounts and control-Administration-Powers and duties. 
    The head of the division of accounts and control shall be the comptroller. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by at least five years' training or experience or a combination thereof in governmental accounting and financial control. Under the supervision and direction of the director of finance, the division shall: 
A.  Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including forms, standards and procedures for all departments of the city government. 
B.  Maintain and operate the city's central bookkeeping and accounting records according to sound accounting principles, including such records and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the business administrator for the determination of the cost of performance of each function or program or activity, measured in such work units as may be appropriate thereto. 
C.  Preaudit all bills, claims and demands against the city, including payrolls, and require each department head to certify that the materials, supplies or equipment have been received and accepted as specified and that the services have been duly rendered. 
D.  Audit receipts and disbursements of each department and require reports thereof to be made daily or at such intervals as will most efficiently protect the public interest. 
E.  Install, operate and maintain a central payroll system and all social security, pension and insurance records for personnel of all departments. 
F.  Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not exceeded, and maintain such books and records as may be required for the proper exercise of such budgetary control, including an encumbrance system of budget operation. 
G.  Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on behalf of any city department for conformity with the charter and ordinances of the city, and authorize only such expenditures and commitments as conform with all of the requirements of the administrative code. 
(Prior code § 4-63) 
2.32.040 - Division of accounts and control-Warrants for payment and listing. 
A.  Bills, claims and demands against the city, when duly authorized and approved, shall be paid upon the audit, warrant and approval of the comptroller, and disbursements shall be made by a combination warrant-bank cheek or draft individually warranted by the comptroller or assistant comptroller, signed by the treasurer or assistant treasurer, and countersigned by the business administrator or acting business administrator, except that city payroll checks may be signed by the treasurer or assistant treasurer alone upon voucher and warrant of the comptroller. 
B.  The treasurer shall prepare for each regular meeting of the council a list of all bills, claims and vouchers which have been paid through the close of business on the Friday next preceding the meeting and since the last preceding list was compiled. Such list shall be prepared in sufficient copy for each member of the council, for the mayor and business administrator, and at least one copy shall be filed with the city clerk as a public record open to examination in his or her office. 
(Prior code § 4-64) 
2.32.050 - Division of assessments-Administration-Powers and duties. 
    The head of the division of assessments is the city assessor. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve for the term provided by law, and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Prior to his or her appointment the assessor shall be qualified by at least five years' training or experience or a combination thereof in the valuation and assessment of real and personal property. Under the direction and supervision of the director of finance, the division shall: 
A.  Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties prescribed by law for a municipal assessor. 
B.  Make assessments for benefits for local improvement, and for that purpose to have and exercise the powers and duties of a board of assessment for local improvements, as provided by law. 
C.  Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real property assessed or exempted, and establish and maintain such files, records and procedures as may be required for the valuation and assessment of personal property pursuant to law. 
D.  Maintain a current tax map of the city as a public record, and cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of the real property assessed. 
(Prior code § 4-65) 
2.32.060 - Assistant assessors-Appointment authorized. 
    The director of finance may appoint assistant assessors and such technical and clerical personnel as may be required, within the limits of available appropriations. 
(Prior code § 4-66) 
2.32.070 - Division of revenue-Tax and water accounts-Administration and duties. 
    The head of the division of revenue is the treasurer. He or she is appointed by the director to serve for the term prescribed by law for the office of tax collector (N.J.S.A. 40:46-6.1), and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Prior to his or her appointment, the treasurer shall be qualified by at least five years' training or experience, or a combination thereof, in accounting, billing, collections and administration. Under the direction and supervision of the director of finance, the division shall: 
A.  Perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general law, including without limitation thereto the preparation and mailing of tax bills, enforcement of tax collections by tax sales and otherwise, and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such manner as may be prescribed or approved pursuant to the charter and code; and in furtherance thereof it shall install and administer tax bill forms which include a bill for the first two quarters of each year with the bill for the final half of the preceding year. 
B.  Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal property taxes, charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant to law. 
C.  Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax, water and other liens on real property as may be authorized by law, and charge and collect for the use of the city the fee required pursuant to law for any such search, and the division may appoint or designate one of its employees as official tax searcher to perform these functions within the division. 
D.  Provide for the reading of water meters at least once each year and for the recording of water consumption and the charging and collection of consumer accounts according to the rates duly established pursuant to the charter and ordinances, including without limitation thereto the power and duty to: 
1.  Receive applications and issue permits for water connections. 
2.  Render bills periodically (either actual or estimated) and to adjust bills based upon subsequent meter readings. 
3.  Receive and collect payments of water accounts. 
4.  Maintain adequate books and records to record all charges, payments, credits and delinquencies in water accounts. 
5.  Receive complaints relating to water service and charges therefor and adjust such complaints or refer them to the appropriate department. 
E.  Charge a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the issuance of each duplicate tax bill, except that this fee shall not apply to duplicate tax bills issued in compliance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. 
F.  Charge a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for any check issued to the city and returned for "insufficient or uncollected funds", or any other reason. The penalty charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be added to the original charge imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 1, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 4-67) 
2.32.080 - Division of revenue-Central cashier-Duties. 
    Within the division of revenue there is a central cashier's office. All cash receipts and payments to the city, except fines imposed for traffic violations or otherwise in the municipal court, shall be received and accounted for by the cashier. This shall include, without limitation thereto, all tax payments; water charges and rents; license, permit and inspection fees; filing fees; and all other revenue receipts of any department, except such receipts of the public library, housing authority and parking authority. Until such time, however, as the business administrator shall determine that proper procedures have been established for such central receipt and collection, he or she may direct that the operation of this section be deferred in whole or in part. 
(Prior code § 4-68) 
2.32.090 - Division of revenue-Duties of treasurer. 
    The treasurer, under the direction and supervision of the director of finance, shall: 
A.  Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department and deposit all funds received by him or her in depositories authorized by the council by resolution. 
B.  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city or in the possession of the city in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided by law, and keep the funds and all moneys of the city not required for current operations safely invested or deposited in interest-bearing accounts, with the advice of the financial advisory board. 
C.  Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. 
D.  Receive, account for separately and safely keep and disburse all moneys raised and received for the public schools, provided that no money is paid out of the public school funds by the treasurer except on warrant signed by the president and clerk of the board of education pursuant to an order or resolution passed at a stated meeting of the board of education and entered in its minutes. 
E.  Make disbursements of city funds upon warrant of the comptroller by an individual warrant check for each bill, claim, wage and salary payment, provided that every warrant check shall be payable to the order of the person entitled to receive the same, shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which it is chargeable and shall bear the signatures as are required by the administrative code. 
F.  Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements by the division according to the system of accounts approved by the director and at least once each month, and oftener if the council requires, furnish the council with a statement of all moneys received and expended by him or her, including school moneys. 
(Prior code § 4-69) 
2.32.100 - Chief financial officer. 
A.  There is created the position of chief financial officer who shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 110 of the Laws of 1988, as same may be amended and supplemented. 
B.  For services as chief financial officer, the person so appointed shall receive an annual compensation of eleven thousand two hundred eighty ($11,280.00) dollars. Thereafter, the compensation shall be set by ordinance in the same manner as compensation for other unclassified municipal employees is set and paid. 
C.  The chief financial officer shall be required to possess all the qualifications and perform all of the duties incident to the office as required by the provisions of Chapter 110 of the Laws of 1988 as the same may be amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 4-70) 
Chapter 2.36 - DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Departmental administration-Divisions. 
    There shall be a department of health and human services, the head of which shall be the director of health and human services, who shall be appointed pursuant to this Code and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance. Within the department there shall be the following divisions: 
A.  Division of health; 
B.  Division of human services; 
C.  Division of housing. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 3, 10-22-2013; Ord. 3284 § 1, 2001) 
2.36.020 - Division of health-Administration-Powers and duties. 
    There shall be a division of health, the head of which shall be the health officer who shall be certified by the state of New Jersey as a licensed health officer. The health officer shall be under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of health and human services, and the division shall: 
A.  Plan and administer a comprehensive public health programs in accordance with the public health laws of the state of New Jersey. 
B.  Administer and enforce the public health laws and ordinances. 
C.  Operate medical and dental inspection services for eligible public, parochial and private school children and preschool children, to promote the prevention of diseases, the correction and treatment of physical conditions and defects discoverable through periodic examination, and to administer programs of home calls and health education for such purposes. 
D.  Operate and administer programs and clinics for sexually transmitted disease control including interviewing, examination, diagnosis and treatment of patients and contacts and home visits for prevention and control. 
E.  Maintain and administer an office of vital statistics, including births, deaths and marriages in accordance with state law, and receive applications for and issue marriage licenses pursuant to law. 
F.  Operate maternal hygiene programs and baby stations for examination, detection and correction of defects, immunization and vaccination and health education for infants, babies and preschool children, including home visits for health supervision and inspection of residential homes for children. 
G.  Operate and administer a public health nursing program to assist in the performance of the function and activities of the division as required. 
H.  Must provide for bacteriological and chemical analysis of milk, food and water; the prevention, diagnosis and control of communicable diseases; the detection and control of diabetes and other special problems; and other research purposes in furtherance of programs and activities of city departments. 
I.  Conduct and administer sanitary inspections as required for the enforcement of laws and ordinances applicable to the city. 
J.  Make inspections under and enforce laws and ordinances regulating sanitation in food establishments, meat and meat products and poultry and poultry markets pursuant to law. 
K.  Plan, administer and operate an air pollution bureau within the division of health whose function shall be to take action to secure the abatement of specific air pollution problems that may be or are impairing the public health or welfare; to initiate and support and expanded program of development and research in the field of air pollution control; to implement an air resource management program; to formulate specific air pollution control ordinances and enforce the sanitary code and other codes in the city in addition to any new and specific codes to be adopted. 
L.  All inspectors shall assist the division of health in the administration of programs of rabies control, polio immunization, diabetes detection, and the investigation and isolation of communicable diseases, and otherwise as directed by the director of the department of health and human services or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 3284 § 2, 2001) 
2.36.030 - Division of human services-Administration-Offices. 
    There shall be a division of human services, the head of which shall be a human services professional, such as a licensed social worker. The division of human services shall be under the direction, supervision and the final authority of the director of the department of health and human services. Within the division of human services, there shall be the following offices: 
A.  Office of social services; 
B.  Office on aging; 
C.  Office of youth services; 
D.  Office of relocation. 
(Ord. 3284 § 3, 2001) 
2.36.040 - Office of social services. 
    There shall be an office of social services, under the direction of the division of human services, which shall provide referrals and social services to individuals, children, families, elderly and disabled persons. The office of social services shall also administer city ordinances which provide relief to those in need, including referrals for all forms of public, private, community and social service assistance for which they may be eligible. 
(Ord. 3284 § 4, 2001) 
2.36.050 - Office on aging. 
    There shall be an office on aging which shall provide assistance to the elderly and disabled, under the direction and supervision of the head of the division of human services. 
(Ord. 3284 § 5, 2001) 
2.36.060 - Office of youth services. 
    There shall be an office of youth services which shall provide support services for youth and families, disease prevention, health education information and referrals to children, adolescents and their families under the direction and supervision of the head of the division of human services. 
(Ord. 3284 § 6, 2001) 
2.36.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4263, § 1, adopted November 22, 2011, repealed the former section 2.36.070 in its entirety, which pertained to the office of relocation and derived from Ord. No. 3284, § 7, adopted in 2001. 
 For current provisions pertaining to the office of relocation, the user's attention is directed to section 2.48.043. 
2.36.080 - Division of housing-Administration, powers and duties. 
    There shall be a division of housing, the head of which shall be the code enforcement officer. Under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of health and human services, the code enforcement officer shall: 
A.  Administer the housing code of the city and make inspections and recommendations in connection therewith. 
B.  Provide supportive housing services in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 3, 10-22-2013) 
Chapter 2.40 - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - City attorney-Appointment, compensation and qualification. 
    There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the city attorney. He or she shall be appointed pursuant to the charter and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance. Prior to his or her appointment, he or she shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law in the state for at least five years. 
(Prior code § 4-52) 
2.40.020 - Professional assistants. 
    The city attorney shall appoint a first assistant city attorney and a second assistant city attorney, each to serve during the term of office of the city attorney appointing him or her. Prior to their appointment, each of them shall be admitted to the practice of law in the state of New Jersey for at least three years. 
(Prior code § 4-53) 
2.40.030 - City attorney-Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal advisor to the mayor, to the council and to all departments except as may be otherwise provided by the charter. He or she shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and against the city and every department thereof. In furtherance of these general powers, and without limitation thereto, he or she shall: 
A.  Advise the council as to the form and sufficiency of all ordinances and resolutions prior to their passage. 
B.  Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the city. 
C.  Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the city, as he or she may in his or her discretion determine to be necessary or desirable, or as directed by the mayor or council. 
D.  Have power to enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any claim or litigation in which the city is involved where the amount of the claim is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less. For all agreements, compromises or settlements of any claim or litigation in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), same shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
E.  Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him or her by the mayor, the council, the business administrator or the head of any department, with respect to their official powers and duties. 
F.  Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which relate to the city's interest, and report thereon from time to time as the mayor or council may require. 
G.  Conduct prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the municipal court of Elizabeth, except such crimes and offenses as it may be the duty of the county prosecutor to prosecute, including violations of ordinances of the city, complaints of any department under state law and for violations of rules or regulations duly promulgated by any department. 
H.  Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be provided by charter or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4-54) 
2.40.040 - First assistant city attorney-Powers and duties. 
    The first assistant city attorney shall, during the absence or disability of the city attorney, possess all other powers and perform all the duties of the city attorney; and in the event of the death or resignation of the city attorney or of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office for any other reason, the first assistant city attorney shall act as city attorney until the office is duly filled pursuant to the charter. 
(Prior code § 4-55) 
2.40.050 - Special counsel-Appointment and duties. 
    Whenever he or she deems the interests of the city so require, the city attorney may, with the approval of the mayor and council and within the limits of available appropriations, appoint special counsel to assist him or her in the preparation, trial or argument of such legal matters or proceedings as he or she may determine. If the city attorney should be disqualified with respect to any matter, the mayor shall appoint special counsel, with the approval of the city council, to represent the city for and with respect to such matter. 
(Prior code § 4-56) 
2.40.060 - Disposition of records and papers. 
    All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the administration of the department of law shall be and remain the property of the city. Upon the termination of his or her service with the city, the city attorney shall forthwith surrender to his or her successor all such property, together with a written consent to the substitution of his or her successor in all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the city is a party. Each assistant city attorney and legal assistant shall have a like duty and obligation upon the termination of his or her service with the city. 
(Prior code § 4-57) 
2.40.070 - Division of prosecution. 
A.  Division of Prosecution-Chief Municipal Prosecutor, Assistant Municipal Prosecutor, Temporary Municipal Prosecutor, Attorney Assigned by the City Attorney-Appointment and Qualifications-Use of County Municipal Prosecutor List. 
1.  There shall be a division of prosecution within the department of law, the head of which shall be the chief municipal prosecutor. In addition to the chief municipal prosecutor, there shall be three assistant municipal prosecutors and such other temporary municipal prosecutors deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the municipal court. The chief municipal prosecutor may also designate temporary municipal prosecutors, in emergent situations, from the county municipal prosecutor list. Temporary municipal prosecutors shall be paid at the rate of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per session. 
    The chief municipal prosecutors, the assistant municipal prosecutors and the temporary municipal prosecutors shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council of the city of Elizabeth. 
    The chief municipal prosecutor, the assistant municipal prosecutors and the temporary municipal prosecutors shall serve for a period of one year from the date of appointment and may continue to serve in office pending reappointment or appointment of a successor. Prior to their appointment, the chief municipal prosecutor, the assistant municipal prosecutors and the temporary municipal prosecutors shall be attorneys-at-law in the state of New Jersey in good standing. The chief municipal prosecutor, the assistant municipal prosecutors and the temporary municipal prosecutors shall be under the supervision of the city attorney and the Union County prosecutor. 
    The temporary municipal prosecutors shall possess all the power and duties of the chief municipal prosecutor and the assistant municipal prosecutors. 
2.  The city attorney may assign an attorney from the department of law when necessary to act as a municipal prosecutor in the absence of the chief municipal prosecutor, the assistant municipal prosecutor or any other temporary municipal prosecutor. 
B.  Powers and Duties. The chief municipal prosecutor, the assistant municipal prosecutors, temporary municipal prosecutors and any attorney that may be assigned from the department of law by the city attorney shall represent the state, the county or the municipality in the prosecution of all offenses within the statutory jurisdiction of the municipal court as defined by law; including municipal ordinance and municipal code violations pertaining to zoning, land or property use regulations, property maintenance, building or construction. Such other local officials as may be deemed appropriate may be called by the municipal prosecutor in such prosecutions. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the municipality from hiring special counsel to act as municipal prosecutor for these types of offenses. A municipal prosecutor shall be responsible for handling all phases of the prosecution of an offense, including but not limited to discovery, pretrial and post-trial hearings, motions, dismissals, removals to Federal District Court, appeals of municipal ordinance violations to the Superior Court and other collateral functions authorized to be performed by the municipal prosecutor by law or rule of court. 
(Ord. 3684 § 1, 2005: prior code § 4-58) 
Chapter 2.48 - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 

2.48.010 - Departmental administration-Bureaus. 
    There shall be a department of planning and community development, the head of which shall be the director of planning and community development, who shall be appointed pursuant to this Code and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance. There shall also be an executive assistant under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of planning and community development. The executive assistant shall act as staff and personal representative responsible for assisting in the execution of the department's functions through implementation of policy and development, management, and control of plans, programs, and operations by employing accepted techniques of management, and any other related duties as may be required. Within the department, there shall be the following bureaus: 
A.  Bureau of community development; 
B.  Bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs; 
C.  Bureau of planning and zoning; 
D.  Bureau of economic development; 
E.  Bureau of public information and citizen participation services; 
F.  Bureau of tourism, cultural and heritage affairs; 
G.  Bureau of construction. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 4, 10-22-2013; Ord. 3717 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 3348 § 1, 2001: Ord. 3282 § 1, 2001) 
2.48.020 - Bureau of community development-Administration, powers and duties. 
    There shall be a bureau of community development, the head of which shall be the director of community development program. The director of community development program shall be under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of planning and community development. The director of community development program shall be qualified by training or experience in executive and administrative areas relating to urban affairs and shall have knowledge of accepted practices with respect to duties of his or her office as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. 3282 § 2, 2001) 
2.48.030 - Bureau of community development-Organization. 
    The bureau of community development shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Advise and assist the department director with regard to the physical planning and public improvement aspects of matters related to the community development of the city. 
B.  Prepare, review, revise and modify a workable program as defined by law to comply with federal and state standards so as to be eligible for federal financial assistance for urban renewal. 
C.  Appoint or contract with technical and professional advisors and assistants as may be required and approved for any federally supported, state-aided or locally supported planning, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the making of any contract without the approvals required by law. 
D.  Assist the mayor in the appointment of advisory committees, neighborhood councils and other forms of citizen participation in urban rehabilitation and development. 
E.  Make recommendations to the business administrator in matters relating to the capital budget with regard to community development. 
F.  Perform duties related to federal and state grant programs. 
G.  Perform all duties related to urban renewal development and redevelopment of residential areas as may, from time to time, be engaged in by the city. 
H.  Plan and implement housing development which includes management of the city's housing rehabilitation and new construction programs and assistance to housing developers. 
(Ord. 3282 § 3, 2001) 
2.48.040 - Bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs (EHIP). 
    There shall be a bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs which shall perform certain functions as enumerated in this section under the direction, supervision and authority of the director of community development program and shall: 
A.  Administer the city's federal and state housing programs; 
B.  Provide technical assistance to home owners and property owners with loan packaging, building inspections, analyze contract cost estimates, prepare work writeups and certify final inspections; 
C.  Monitor and oversee the city's regional contribution agreements; 
D.  Review federal and state housing regulations and develop local guidelines in accordance therewith; and 
E.  Oversee and manage other projects involving housing programs and, in that regard, work with lenders and other local community groups and committees. 
(Ord. 3282 § 4, 2001) 
2.48.041 - Bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs (EHIP)-RCA administrator. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms needed for the execution of the city of Elizabeth's responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Administrative agent" means the entity responsible for administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program for the city of Elizabeth to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households. 
    "RCA administrator" means the employee charged by the governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the city of Elizabeth. 
C.  Establishment of RCA Administrator Position and Compensation-Powers and Duties. 
1.  Establishment of Position of RCA Administrator. Within the bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs (EHIP), there is established the position of RCA administrator for the city of Elizabeth. 
2.  Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), the RCA administrator shall be appointed by the mayor and may be a full- or part-time employee. 
3.  The RCA administrator shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the RCA and the RCA affordable housing program for the city, including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out: 
a.  Serving as the city's primary point of contact for all RCA inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents, and interested households; 
b.  Establishing an escrow account for the RCA funds and submitting to COAH a signed escrow agreement between the city, the bank and COAH for each RCA; 
c.  Monitoring the status of all restricted units the city's project plan; 
d.  Compiling, verifying, and submitting semi-annual reports as required by COAH; 
e.  Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative agents, as applicable; 
f.  Attending continuing education opportunities as offered or approved by COAH; 
g.  If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of the restricted units in the RCA project(s) in the city as described in subsection (C)(6) below. 
4.  Subject to approval by COAH, the city may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by the mayor, which entity shall have the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the city, except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out pursuant to subsection (C)(3) above. If the city contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the RCA administrator shall supervise the contracting administrative agent. 
5.  Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the appointment of the RCA administrator. 
6.  Administrative Powers and Duties Assigned to the RCA Administrator. 
a.  Affirmative Marketing. 
i.  Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of the city and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and 
ii.  Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law. 
b.  Household Certification. 
i.  Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with interested households; 
ii.  Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit; 
iii.  Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of eligibility or non-eligibility; 
iv.  Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; 
v.  Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living in the housing region and eligible applicant households with members working in the housing region where the units are located; and 
vi.  Employing the random selection process as provided in the affirmative marketing plan of the city when referring households for certification to affordable units. 
c.  Affordability Controls. 
i.  Furnishing to attorneys or closing agent's forms of deed restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted unit; 
ii.  Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate; 
iii.  Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit; 
iv.  Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and 
v.  Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10. 
d.  Resale and Rental. 
i.  Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information between owners and the administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rental; and 
ii.  Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental. 
e.  Processing Request from Unit Owners. 
i.  Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of their ownership; 
ii.  Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air conditioning systems; and 
iii.  Processing requests and making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers. 
f.  Enforcement. 
i.  Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it; 
ii.  Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent; 
iii.  The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can be made; 
iv.  Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4; 
v.  Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA; 
vi.  Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such affordability controls; and 
vii.  Providing reports to COAH as required. 
g.  The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder. 
(Ord. 3919 §§ 1-3, 2007) 
2.48.042 - Bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs (EHIP)-Municipal housing liaison. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms needed for the execution of the city of Elizabeth's responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Administrative agent" means the entity responsible for administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program for the city to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households. 
    "Municipal housing liaison" means the employee charged by the governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the city of Elizabeth. 
C.  Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position and Compensation-Powers and Duties. 
1.  Establishment of Position of Municipal Housing Liaison. Within the bureau of Elizabeth home improvement programs, there is established the position of municipal housing liaison for the city of Elizabeth. 
2.  Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), the municipal housing liaison shall be appointed by the mayor and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee. 
3.  The municipal housing liaison shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the city including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out, exclusive of subsection (C)(3)(f) which may be contracted out: 
a.  Serving as the city's primary point of contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents, and interested households; 
b.  Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the city's fair share plan; 
c.  Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by COAH; 
d.  Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative agents, as applicable; 
e.  Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as offered or approved by COAH; 
f.  If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of the restricted units in the city as described in subsection (C)(6) below. 
4.  Subject to approval by COAH, the city may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by the mayor, which entity shall have the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the city except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out pursuant to subsection (C)(3) above. If the city contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the municipal housing liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent. 
5.  Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the appointment of the municipal housing liaison. 
6.  Administrative Powers and Duties Assigned to the Municipal Housing Liaison. 
a.  Affirmative Marketing. 
i.  Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of the city and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and 
ii.  Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law. 
b.  Household Certification. 
i.  Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with interested households; 
ii.  Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit; 
iii.  Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of eligibility or non-eligibility; 
iv.  Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; 
v.  Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living in the housing region and eligible applicant households with members working in the housing region where the units are located; and 
vi.  Employing the random selection process as provided in the affirmative marketing plan of the city when referring households for certification to affordable units. 
c.  Affordability Controls. 
i.  Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted unit; 
ii.  Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate; 
iii.  Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit; 
iv.  Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and 
v.  Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10. 
d.  Resale and Rental. 
i.  Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information between owners and the administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rental; and 
ii.  Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental. 
e.  Processing Request from Unit Owners. 
i.  Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of their ownership; 
ii.  Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air conditioning systems; and 
iii.  Processing requests and making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers. 
f.  Enforcement. 
i.  Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it; 
ii.  Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent; 
iii.  The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can be made; 
iv.  Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4; 
v.  Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA; 
vi.  Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such affordability controls; and 
vii.  Providing annual reports to COAH as required. 
g.  The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder. 
(Ord. 3920 §§ 1-3, 2007) 
2.48.043 - Office of relocation. 
    There shall be an office of relocation which shall administer all applicable federal and state relocation laws under the direction and supervision of the head of the division of the Bureau of Elizabeth Home Improvement Program (EHIP). 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 11-22-2011) 
2.48.050 - Director of community development program-Additional duties. 
    The director of community development program shall perform such other duties and functions as the director of the department of policy and planning may prescribe. 
(Ord. 3282 § 5, 2001) 
2.48.060 - Bureau of planning and zoning. 
A.  There shall be a bureau of planning and zoning, the head of which shall be a supervising planner, licensed by the state of New Jersey. The supervising planner shall be under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of planning and community development. The supervising planner shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in executive and administrative areas and possess knowledge of accepted practices with respect to duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. 
B.  In addition, the supervising planner shall be responsible for the management and administration of the bureau, including but not limited to scheduling, budgeting, personnel matters and coordinating the bureau's action with other city agencies. 
(Ord. 3282 § 6, 2001) 
2.48.070 - Bureau of planning and zoning-Organization. 
    The bureau of planning and zoning shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Provide technical and administrative assistance to the planning board and zoning board of adjustment in matters relating to applications for development, as defined and provided for in Title 17 of this code, provided, however, that the assistance given shall represent the view, advice and opinion of the administrative branch of government of the city, which may or may not be adopted by the affected board. 
B.  Advise the administrative officer, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.). 
C.  Evaluate and study the effect of land use controls within the city and make recommendations to the director of the department of planning and community development for changes. 
D.  Assist the administrative officer in his or her administrative role to the planning board and zoning board of adjustment in scheduling all matters that are within the jurisdiction of these two boards. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to take away the authority and power reserved to these bodies by law. 
(Ord. 3282 § 7, 2001) 
2.48.080 - Bureau of economic development-Administration, powers and duties. 
A.  There shall be a bureau of economic development, the head of which shall be the project coordinator for redevelopment. The project coordinator for redevelopment shall be under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of planning and community development. The project coordinator shall be qualified by training or experience in executive and administrative areas and possess knowledge of accepted practices with respect to duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. 
B.  The bureau of economic development shall advise and assist the director with regard to intergovernmental relations, including, but not limited to, maintaining open communication lines with appropriate state agencies, the Port Authority, the county government, other municipalities, and city departments whose policies will affect the city. 
(Ord. 3282 §§ 8, 9, 2001) 
2.48.090 - Bureau of economic development-Organization-Additional duties. 
    The bureau of economic development shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Coordinate the procuring and monitoring of all federal, state and county grants in municipal departments. 
B.  Advise and assist the director in developing long range plans for both economic development and improvement of the quality of life for the residents of the city. 
C.  Shall work with the directors of other departments in developing the aforementioned plans and shall report to the director of the department of planning and community development with regard to these plans. 
D.  Advise the director of the department of planning and community development with regard to the physical planning and public improvement aspects of all matters related to development and redevelopment projects of the city. 
E.  Assist in the preparation of, and maintain a comprehensive master plan for the city and prepare such plans, studies, analyses, surveys and reports which may from time to time be necessary to implement the comprehensive master plan or to guide governmental policy for the assurance of the orderly and coordinated development of the city. 
F.  Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to serve as the basis for planning recommendations. 
G.  Prepare and assist in the preparation of, and maintain a workable program for a capital improvement program. 
H.  Make recommendations to the business administrator in matters relating to the capital budget with regard to economic development. 
I.  Whenever any project or course of action is related to or may affect the master plan, the bureau of economic development shall submit the matter to the planning board for review and recommendation. Such recommendations shall be annexed to and accompany any proposal transmitted to the city council with respect to any such project or course of action. 
J.  The bureau of economic development and its staff shall coordinate its activities with the zoning board of adjustment, the planning board, the housing authority, the board of education, and all other statutory agencies and city departments in the development of plans and programs for community improvement and in execution of the city's master plan. 
(Ord. 3282 § 10, 2001) 
2.48.100 - Bureau of public information and citizen participation services-Administration, powers and duties. 
    There shall be a bureau of public information and citizen participation services, the head of which shall be the public information officer, which shall be under the direction, supervision and final authority of the director of the department of planning and community development. The public information officer shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in executive and administrative areas and possess knowledge of accepted practices with respect to duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. 3282 § 11, 2001) 
2.48.110 - Bureau of public information and citizen participation services-Organization. 
    The bureau of public information and citizen participation services shall: 
A.  Apprise the residents of the city of the services that the city offers to its citizens. 
B.  Be responsible for making available to the citizens of the city a publication which shall delineate city-wide programs available to the citizenry. 
C.  Be responsible to answer inquiries and meet with community groups for the purpose of establishing a meaningful dialogue that shall lead to a better understanding of the concerns of the citizenry as it relates to the city government. 
D.  Advise and assist the director with regard to intergovernmental relations, including, but not limited to maintaining open communication lines with appropriate state agencies, the Port Authority, the county government, other municipalities, and city departments whose policies will affect the city. 
E.  Establish neighborhood councils throughout the city. Each neighborhood council will be staffed by a liaison and will include community members, as well as representatives of the police, fire, health, recreation and public works departments. The neighborhood council will meet regularly and develop plans for meeting service demands and improving the quality of life and business environment in the neighborhood. It will arrange for meetings with the mayor at least twice a year. In cooperation with other departments in the city, the liaison will develop new ideas and programs to improve the safety, cultural, recreational, and business retention programming for each neighborhood. 
F.  There is established a consumer fraud office whose function it shall be to protect against unlawful and illegal activities practiced upon consumers. The consumer fraud office shall enforce and adhere to all applicable federal and state statutes, rules and regulations affecting consumers. 
1.  Within the consumer fraud office there shall be an investigator who shall be authorized under this section to conduct inquires into the sale or offer for sale of any goods, services or merchandise within the city. 
    "Person" as hereinafter set forth in this section shall include any natural person or his or her legal representative, partnership, corporation, company, trust, business entity or association, or any agent, employee, salesperson, partner, officer, director, members, stockholder, association or trustee thereof, and "sale" shall be any transaction conducted within the city limits wherein, for value received, a person sells or offers to sell, trade or barter any item or service. 
2.  The consumer fraud office shall be under the direction and supervision of the public participation specialist. 
3.  The consumer fraud office shall, in addition to other powers and duties vested in it by this chapter or any other law: 
a.  Initiate investigation into all aspects of business enterprise carried on within the city, including those required to obtain a license as a condition precedent to operation and any others that do not require licensing by the city; 
b.  Receive, investigate and take appropriate action upon complaints or information received from citizens of the city. "Appropriate action" is deemed to include but not be limited to the initiation of a complaint in the municipal court of the city alleging the violation of this chapter and prosecuting the alleged offender before the court; 
c.  Create and promulgate such forms as may be necessary to the operation of the office, which shall be given force of law by the judge of the municipal court of the city; 
d.  Have the authority to conduct hearings in the aid of any investigation or inquiry, issue subpoenas to any person within the city, administer an oath or affirmation to any persons within the city and promulgate such rules and regulations that are deemed necessary and proper to the functioning of the consumer fraud office; 
4.  Any person who shall act, use or attempt to use any deception, false pretense, fraud, misrepresentation, false promise or unconscionable commercial practice or who shall knowingly conceal, omit or suppress any material fact with the intent that other persons rely on such concealment, omission or suppression as part of or in connection with the sale, attempt to sell or advertise any goods, services or merchandise of any kind, whether or not any person has in fact been damaged, misled or deceived thereby, is declared to be an unlawful practice and subject to the punishment prescribed in this chapter. 
5.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be applicable to the owner or publisher of newspapers, magazines, publications or printed matter in which such advertisement appears, nor to the owner or operator of any radio or television station which broadcasts such advertisement, when the owner, publisher or operator has no knowledge of the intent or purpose of the advertiser, and further provided that nothing in this section contained shall apply to any advertisement which is subject to the statutes, rules and regulations administered by the Federal Trade Commission. 
6.  The persons or person appointed to the position as investigator shall be provided with official and proper credentials indicating his or her position, and this document shall be carried at all times on his or her person and shall constitute his or her authority to conduct inquiries, inspections and investigations into all aspects of sales, attempts to sell, advertising or merchandising of goods and services within the city. In the event that an investigation requires the entry into premises, the investigator shall, in conjunction and cooperation with the police department, appear before the judge of the municipal court and prepare the necessary affidavit in order to secure a search warrant. The execution of such a search warrant shall only be accomplished in the company of, and in cooperation with, duly authorized members of the police department. 
7.  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both; and each sale or offer to sell, as defined in this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be subject to a separate penalty for each offense. 
(Ord. 3282 § 12, 2001) 
2.48.120 - Bureau of tourism, cultural and heritage affairs. 
A.  Under the direction and supervision of the director of planning and community development the bureau of tourism, cultural and heritage affairs functions and responsibilities shall include: 
1.  Create, support and encourage programs promoting public interest and participation in local arts, history and culture; 
2.  Maintain an annual preservation awards program commending noteworthy historic preservation; 
3.  Educate the public on local, state and municipal efforts to preserve historical sites; 
4.  Maintain an historic inventory as a resource for federal and state agencies and local planners. 
B.  Bureau Head. The director of the bureau of tourism, cultural and heritage affairs shall be the head of the bureau and responsible to the director of the department of planning and community development for its operation. 
(Ord. 3717 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 3348 § 2, 2001: Ord. 3282 § 13, 2001) 
2.48.130 - Bureau of construction. 
    Within the department of planning and community development, there shall be a bureau of construction, under the direction and supervision of the director of planning and community development. Within the bureau of construction, there shall be a construction code official and an assistant construction code official. 
    The bureau of construction shall perform certain functions as enumerated hereafter or as specified in Chapter 15.04 of the Code of the city or in the Uniform Construction Code or any other code or subcode recognized by the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Division of Housing and Development, Bureau of Construction Code Enforcement. The construction code official and the assistant construction code official who, in addition to other qualifications necessary to perform the duties as hereinafter set forth, shall be licensed construction officials as certified by the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Division of Housing and Development, Bureau of Construction Code Enforcement. 
    The construction code official and the assistant construction code official shall be under the administration, direction, supervision and authority of the director of planning and community development and shall: 
A.  Conduct and administer building inspections as required for the enforcement of laws and ordinances applicable to the city, as contained in the building code of the city, the state of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and supplements thereto and the zoning ordinance of the city as well as applicable provisions of Chapter 15.04 of this Code. 
B.  Administer the city building code and perform the duties of the building inspector there under. 
C.  Administer and enforce the electrical code of the city and all other ordinances and underwriters' regulations prescribing standards for electrical installations, plans and specifications, and make necessary inspections there for, through an electrical agency to be established within the division on and in accordance with Chapter 15.04 of this Code. 
D.  Enforce all other laws and ordinances establishing occupancy standards to protect the health and safety of persons using or occupying buildings or other structures within the city and make inspections as necessary there for, except that the bureau shall not duplicate inspections and enforcement allocated and assigned by this Code or the fire department. 
E.  Assist and coordinate with the State of New Jersey the enforcement of any construction or renovations or rooming house requirements as set forth in state law. 
F.  Consolidate and coordinate all regulatory inspections relating to building and structures which are not vested in any other department, division or bureau by the administrative code and, as to the latter, provide for cooperative inspection and enforcement so far as practicable. 
G.  Board of standards and appeals, as heretofore constituted in the city building code, is continued within the bureau of construction, except that the members thereof shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of city council. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 4, 10-22-2013) 
2.48.140 - Relocation assistance paid by city; repayment by landlord. 
A.  The city may pay relocation assistance from the city's relocation assistance fund to any displaced person who has not received the required payment from the owner/landlord of the structure at the time of eviction. 
B.  All relocation assistance costs incurred by a municipality pursuant to this chapter shall be repaid by the owner/landlord of the structure to the municipality in the same manner as relocation costs are billed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1 and N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.2. 
C.  All repayments shall be deposited into the city's relocation assistance fund. 
D.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  The city, in addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner/landlord of the structure for relocation assistance paid to a displaced tenant, shall require that an additional fine for zoning or housing code violations for an illegal occupancy, up to an amount to six (6) times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person, be paid to the city by the owner of the structure. 
2.  The municipal court and/or the superior court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of the penalty provided by this section, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g. 
(Ord. No. 4478, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4478, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 9, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as Section 2.48.140 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 2.52 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
Sections: 

2.52.010 - Departmental administration-Divisions. 
    There shall be a department of public works, the head of which shall be the director of public works. Within the department there shall be the following divisions: 
A.  Engineering and administration; 
B.  Water and sewer; 
C.  Maintenance and construction. 
(Prior code § 4-75) 
2.52.020 - Departmental powers and duties. 
    The department of public works shall provide for the proper and efficient conduct of all public works' functions of the city government, and shall provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other city departments as needed. Subject to the charter and ordinances, it shall administer and control the following functions and the construction, operation and maintenance of public works, improvements, facilities and services relating thereto: 
A.  Water supply and distribution; 
B.  Sanitary and storm sewers and drains; 
C.  Streets, roads, bridges and sidewalks; 
D.  Rivers, streams, waterfronts and flood damage control and reduction; 
E.  Traffic engineering and street lighting; 
F.  Parks, greens and trees; 
G.  Public buildings; 
H.  Garbage and refuse collection and disposal. 
(Prior code § 4-76) 
2.52.030 - Division of engineering and administration-Administration, powers and duties. 
    There shall be within the department of public works a division of engineering and administration, the head of which shall be the city engineer. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, hold a professional degree in civil or mechanical engineering from a recognized school or college of engineering, and shall be a licensed professional engineer recognized by the state of New Jersey, and shall be qualified by further training and experience of at least five years in responsible engineering work. The division, under the direction and supervision of the director of public works, shall: 
A.  Be responsible for the preparation of all plans and specifications for public works and improvements undertaken by the city, either on force account or by public contract, and for public scavenger contracts. 
B.  Supervise the performance of all contracts for public works and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder. 
C.  Provide and maintain surveys, maps, specifications and operating records with respect to all public property, works and facilities owned or operated by the city government. 
D.  Supervise and direct the installation and administration of departmental records, payroll and inventory controls, and cost analysis. 
E.  Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all city-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the department. 
F.  Exercise general supervision over and coordinate engineering and technical activities and services of all departments. The technical activities and services shall include, but not be limited to, advisor to the Elizabeth planning board in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 45:14A-1 et seq. during those times when there is no other professional planner in the employ, hire or contract of the city, and for this purpose the city engineer shall be a licensed professional planner of the state of New Jersey as required by law. 
(Prior code § 4-77) 
2.52.040 - Division of water and sewers-Administration, powers and duties. 
    Within the department of public works there shall be a division of water and sewers, the head of which shall be the superintendent. Prior to his or her appointment he or she shall have been duly licensed to operate a municipal water-distribution system. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. The division, under the direction and supervision of the director of public works, shall: 
A.  Operate and maintain the water supply and distribution system of the city, except for the commercial functions allocated and assigned to the division of revenue in the department of finance. 
B.  Maintain, repair, test and set water meters; maintain service maps and records; install and repair water mains, service connections, valves and appurtenances. 
C.  Install, maintain and service all fire hydrants in the city, subject to the approval of the fire department. 
D.  Operate and maintain the city's intercepting sewers, sewage pumping stations and all other sanitary and storm sewer installations, and install and repair sewer mains, lines and appurtenances. 
(Prior code § 4-78) 
2.52.050 - Division of maintenance and construction-Administration, powers and duties. 
    Within the department of public works there shall be a division of maintenance and construction, the head of which shall be the superintendent. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Under the direction and supervision of the director of public works, the division shall: 
A.  Maintain and repair all public streets, city bridges, culverts and drains within the city. 
B.  Undertake new road construction projects and road resurfacing projects which are to be performed by the department on force account; maintain all city streets in a clean and safe condition, free of obstructions and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as required. 
C.  Receive applications for and issue street opening permits, and administer the city's ordinances relating to street openings. 
D.  Supervise the administration and performance of public scavenger contracts for the collection and disposal of refuse and garbage. 
E.  Operate and maintain all public buildings owned by the city; trim, plant and care for trees, public parks and greens. 
F.  Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers, and paint control signals; and install and maintain parking meters, subject to agreement with the parking authority so long as a parking authority exists. 
G.  Provide custodial and janitorial services for all city buildings other than firehouses. 
H.  Operate and manage city properties, including city hall, other office quarters, yards, garages, markets, docks, wharves and piers. 
I.  Operate a garage or garages for the storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of city-owned motor vehicles other than fire engines, supervise such work as may be done with respect thereto pursuant to contract; and control the use and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the city, through vehicle operating records, cost studies and replacement schedules. 
(Prior code § 4-79) 
2.52.060 - Departmental bureaus-Establishment authorized. 
    The head of each division within the department of public works may establish such bureaus and assign and organize the work of the division within and among them as may be authorized by the director with the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 4-80) 
Chapter 2.56 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions and Fees 

2.56.010 - Department-Office of director established. 
    There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the director. The director shall, prior to his or her appointment, have had at least five years' experience in a responsible capacity in public safety administration. 
(Prior code § 4-107) 
2.56.020 - Departmental jurisdiction-Powers and duties. 
    The police department shall: 
A.  Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within the city, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages, and preserve order at all elections and public meetings and assemblages. 
B.  Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and facilitate the convenience of motorists and pedestrians, and to make and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the charter and ordinances for such purposes. 
C.  Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public places, inspect and observe all places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business requiring any state or municipal license or permit, and report thereon to the appropriate department. 
D.  Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires. 
E.  Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses, and cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of federal, state and county governments. 
F.  Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police efficiency of the members of the department. 
G.  Make, administer and enforce, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the force and for the disposition, conduct and discipline of the members of the department; for this purpose, the director of the police department shall be the appropriate authority to promulgate same. 
(Ord. No. 4106, § 1, 2-9-2010; prior code § 4-108) 
2.56.030 - Departmental personnel. 
    No member of the police department shall solicit or accept anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her official duties; nor shall any member solicit the sale of tickets in connection with any fund-raising campaign, nor request contributions directly or indirectly for the same, nor solicit anything of value for the benefit of self or other person or any police department member, group or organization, except as authorized by general regulations of the department or by written permission of the director. Nothing herein shall be construed to deny any member of the police department the right to solicit or contribute dues or assessments to the labor organization of his or her choice. 
(Prior code § 4-109) 
2.56.040 - Disposition of property-Registration and accounting required. 
    The director shall provide by rules and regulations for the custody and safekeeping of all property alleged to be found, abandoned, stolen or embezzled, all property taken from the person of any prisoner and all other property alleged to have been acquired or possessed unlawfully, which shall come into the possession of any member of the department. All such property and money shall be promptly described and registered and accounted for in detail in such manner as the director shall prescribe with the approval of the comptroller. 
(Prior code § 4-110) 
2.56.050 - Police department services-Rules by director authorized. 
    The director is authorized to prescribe rules and regulations governing the release of certain information contained in the official files of the police department. Unless ordered to do otherwise by a court of competent jurisdiction, he or she may refuse to issue any such information when, in his or her judgment, the interests of law enforcement and public safety require, and he or she may refuse to issue any such information which he or she has classified as confidential. 
(Prior code § 4-111) 
2.56.060 - Police department services-Fees established. 
    The following fees are established for certain services provided by the police department: 
A.  Copies of any report or portion of any report authorized for release shall be five cents ($0.05) for letter size page and smaller, and seven cents ($0.07) for legal size page or larger. If copies of reports are requested other than in person, there shall be an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) to cover administrative costs. 
B.  Research of files to verify certain information authorized for release by the rules and regulations shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
C.  Clearance visas and letters of good conduct shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
D.  Verification of existence shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
E.  Each set of fingerprints authorized to be taken by the rules and regulations shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
F.  Fingerprints necessary to obtain permits for weapons purchase, other permits, i.e., taxicabs operators, etc. shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
G.  Photographs (per CD, DVD) shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
H.  Research for records, physical inspection and preparation of report concerning traffic installations shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
I.  Search of communication tapes to verify information shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
J.  Recording of communications tapes or cassette recordings (per hour) shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Ord. No. 4235, § 2, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 7-28-2009; Prior code § 4-112) 
2.56.070 - Fee-exempt services. 
    No fee will be charged for any requested search or information made by any federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement department or agency. 
(Prior code § 4-113) 
2.56.080 - Requests for official information. 
    All requests for information in official files authorized for release by the rules and regulations, and for the other services provided for herein, shall be made to the records bureau at police headquarters, 33 Morrell Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excepting legal holidays. 
(Prior code § 4-114) 
2.56.090 - Disposition of revenue-Receipts required. 
    All moneys received in connection with the services provided as authorized in this chapter shall be forwarded daily to the city treasurer, city hall, except on Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays, when such moneys shall be so forwarded on the next succeeding business day. A receipt shall be prepared in triplicate for all moneys received, the original to be given to the person requesting the service, a duplicate to be forwarded to the city treasurer with the money received, and the triplicate copy to be retained by the records bureau. 
(Prior code § 4-115) 
Article II - Administration and Personnel 

2.56.100 - Establishment. 
    There shall be established a police department, which shall consist of one director of police in accordance with Plan F of the Optional Charter Plan of Chapter 210, Laws of 1950. 
(Prior code § 20-1) 
2.56.110 - Administration and personnel. 
A.  Police Department. In addition to the director of police, there shall be: 
Chief 1 Deputy chiefs 3 Captains 9 Lieutenants 21 Sergeants 39 Police officers assigned detective - first grade 30 Police officers assigned detective - second grade 28 Police officers 234 Total of police personnel 365  
B.  Civilian Personnel. 
Police signal system superintendent 1 Signal systems technician 3 1 Signal systems technician 1 9 Parking enforcement officers 7 Administrative secretary 1 Senior clerk-transcriber 1 Clerk-transcribers 2 Senior account clerk/typing 1 Data entry operator 9 Property clerk (bilingual) 1 Property clerks 2 Police surgeon 1 Police aide 1 School traffic guards 86 Administrative analyst 2 Laborer 1 Principal clerk-transcriber 1 Management specialist 1 Public safety telecommunicator 33 Personnel aide typing 1 Keyboarding clerk 1 10 Keyboarding clerk 2 4 Clerk 1 3 Clerk 2 2 Clerk 3 1 Security systems operators 5 Management assistant 1 Community relations specialist 1 Administrative clerk 1 Public safety telecommunicator 3 Traffic maintenance supervisor 1 Senior administrative analyst 1 Total of civilian personnel 206  
Ord. No. 4854 , § 1, 6-13-2017; (Ord. No. 4469, § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 4259, § 1, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 4111, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 4057, § 1, 7-28-2009; Ord. No. 3397, § 1, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 3280, § 1, 12-27-2000; Ord. 3742 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3379 § 1, 2002; Ord. 3183 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3165 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3159 § 1, 1999; prior code § 20-2) 
Article III - Training of Personnel 

2.56.120 - Training required for permanent appointment. 
    No person shall hereafter be given or accept a permanent appointment as a police officer in the city unless such person has successfully completed a police training course at a school approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the state of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1961. 
(Prior code § 20-8) 
2.56.130 - Probationary appointment authorized. 
    This article shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer for a period not to exceed one year, to enable a person seeking a permanent appointment to complete a police training course as prescribed by the Police Training Commission. 
(Prior code § 20-9) 
2.56.140 - Probationary appointment required for training-Leave of absence. 
    No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he or she holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the city, and such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of absence with pay during the period of the police training course. 
(Prior code § 20-10) 
Article IV - Residency Requirements 

2.56.150 - Appointment-Police department. 
    All applicants for appointment to the police department shall be qualified for appointment as required by law, ordinance and New Jersey Department of Personnel (Civil Service) rules and regulations. All applicants for appointment shall be residents of the city and must maintain continuous residency within the city from the announced closing date of the New Jersey Department of Personnel examination up to and including the date of appointment. 
(Prior code § 20-16) 
Article V - Voluntary Overtime 

2.56.160 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Certain members" mean members of the police department who hold the rank of patrol officer, plainclothes officer, detective, sergeant and members who are employed in the electrical bureau and vehicle maintenance bureau of the police department. 
(Prior code § 20-21) 
2.56.170 - Overtime employment authorized. 
    The director of the department of police is empowered to employ within the limit of the expenditures of the department's budget certain members of the police department of the city on an overtime basis for more than eight consecutive hours in any one day or more than forty (40) hours in any one week. 
(Prior code § 20-22) 
2.56.180 - Compensation. 
    The payment for overtime shall be time and one-half based upon the base wage being earned by the employee of the department at the time he or she is performing the overtime work, and the base wage shall be the sole criteria for calculating overtime payments to the specific exclusion of all other financial benefits and fringe benefits to which an employee may be entitled. There shall be no additional compensation paid for the work other than as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 20-23) 
2.56.190 - Overtime employment optional. 
    In no event, however, shall overtime work be compulsory by any member of the police department, and such work shall be on a voluntary basis and the members of the department if and when requested to work overtime shall have the option of either working more than eight consecutive hours per day or more than forty (40) hours per week at a time-and-a-half pay or refusing same. Refusal to work overtime shall not reflect unfavorably upon any police officer so affected. 
(Prior code § 20-24) 
2.56.200 - Exception in emergency. 
    No time-and-a-half pay for overtime shall be paid to any member of the police department on duty during the period of an emergency in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:11-13.2. 
(Prior code § 20-25) 
2.56.210 - Authorization by director. 
    Time-and-a-half pay shall only be paid in nonemergency situations where in the opinion of the director of police additional work is needed in the normal course of police work. 
(Prior code § 20-26) 
2.56.220 - Rules and regulations authorized-Powers and duties of director. 
    The director of police shall establish appropriate rules and regulations concerning overtime work to safeguard and protect the health and welfare of all members voluntarily assigned to overtime duties. The director of police shall be responsible for the allocation of voluntary overtime assignments and he or she shall, as aforesaid, set forth the conditions under which members of the department shall be eligible for such overtime work. He or she shall take into consideration the number of hours already worked on regular time each day and each week and the physical condition of the individual uniformed member, having in mind that it is the intent of this article to protect the health and efficiency of police officers regularly employed during their normal tour of duty. He or she shall not allow any member to perform long tedious periods of overtime without sufficient off-duty periods for rest, recreation and personal activities. The director of police shall also institute such rules and regulations, as necessary, to provide an adequate control over all overtime assignments to prevent abuse of any kind, and shall provide a centralized system of control which will assure adequate safeguards. 
(Prior code § 20-27) 
2.56.230 - Distribution of rules and regulations. 
    A copy of the rules and regulations set out in this chapter shall be given to each police officer. 
(Prior code § 20-28) 
Article VI - Leaves of Absence 

2.56.240 - Leaves of absence with pay authorized. 
    Leaves of absence with pay not exceeding one year are authorized to all members and officers of the Elizabeth police department who shall be injured, ill or disabled from any cause, subject to conditions set forth in this article. 
(Prior code § 20-35) 
2.56.250 - Physician's report. 
    The director of the police department shall determine whether or not to grant a leave of absence with pay as authorized in Section 2.56.240 after he or she has reviewed an examining physician's report which shall certify to such injury, illness or disability. The examining physician shall be one who is in the employ of the city and who shall have been appointed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 20-36) 
2.56.260 - Status report. 
    The director of the police department shall furnish a monthly report to the city council, as well as to the business administrator and personnel officer, as to the status of all members and officers of the police department who are on leaves of absence with pay for injury, illness or disability. 
(Prior code § 20-37) 
Article VII - Police Chief and Deputy Police Chiefs 

2.56.270 - Workweek. 
    Effective January 1, 1977, the normal workweek for the police chief and deputy police chiefs shall be eight (8) hours per day, five (5) days a week, Monday through Sunday, for a total of forty (40) hours per week. Work schedules shall be at the discretion of the police director. 
(Prior code § 20-46) 
2.56.280 - Holidays. 
A.  The police chief and deputy police chiefs shall receive wages based upon an eight-hour straight time hourly rate of pay for each of the following holidays: 
    New Year's Day; 
    Lincoln's Birthday; 
    Washington's Birthday; 
    Good Friday; 
    Memorial Day; 
    Independence Day; 
    Labor Day; 
    Columbus Day; 
    Election Day; 
    Veteran's Day; 
    Thanksgiving Day; 
    Friday after Thanksgiving; and 
    Christmas Day. 
B.  When the police chief or deputy police chief works on any of the above holidays, or if the holiday falls within his or her vacation period, he or she shall be credited with eight hours of time off for a future date to be determined by the police director. 
(Prior code § 20-47) 
2.56.290 - Vacation. 
    The police chief and deputy police chiefs shall be entitled to thirty (30) working days of vacation each year. Vacation time must be used in the vacation year in which it is earned. However, one year's accumulation may be carried into the next succeeding year. Should circumstances warrant, this provision may be waived by the police director. The vacation period shall be from the first of April through the 31st of March of the following calendar year. Vacations shall be scheduled by the police director. Upon completion of twenty-five (25) years of continuous service, the employee shall receive five working days of vacation for that anniversary year only. 
(Prior code § 20-48) 
2.56.300 - Acting chief-Compensation. 
    Effective June 1, 1985, the acting chief serving in the capacity of a chief for a period in excess of thirty (30) days for reasons of illness, disability, or extended leave prior to retirement, shall be entitled to compensation equal to the chief's base pay after the thirtieth day. 
(Prior code § 20-49) 
Article VIII - Special Law Enforcement Officers 

2.56.310 - Class one special law enforcement officers. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11, class one special law enforcement officers are authorized to issue summonses for disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 20-51) 
2.56.320 - Appointment. 
    Class one special law enforcement officers shall be appointed by the director of the police department for a term of one year from the date of appointment. 
(Prior code § 20-52) 
2.56.330 - Compliance with requirements. 
    Class one special law enforcement officers shall comply with all of the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. 
(Prior code § 20-53) 
Article IX - Outside Employment 

2.56.340 - Contracted off-duty employment. 
A.  Purpose. To authorize the outside employment of police officers of the city and to establish a policy regarding the use of said police officers including the setting of hourly rates in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations and laws. 
1.  The police department is hereby permitted to accept police related employment for other persons, public entities, or private entities only during off-duty hours and at such times that will not interfere with the efficient operations of the police department. 
2.  Any person, public entity, or private entity wishing to employ city police officers shall obtain the approval of the police department providing such employment would not interfere with the efficient operations of the police department. 
B.  Rates of Compensation; Administrative Fee; and Payment for Services. 
1.  Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty police officers shall be established from time to time by city council. 
    The rate of compensation per hour for contracting the services of off-duty police officers is as follows unless a higher rate is otherwise approved for a special circumstance by the police director, police chief, or a deputy police chief. Rates per hour. Thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour (general off-duty). 
    The rates of compensation per hour for police sergeants and lieutenants acting in a supervisory capacity includes an amount in addition to the above schedules as follows: 
Rank Additional Rates 
Per Hour Police sergeants $2.00 per hour Police lieutenants $4.00 per hour  
Events 
(Serving Alcohol other than late night bar events as defined below) Events 
(Not Serving Alcohol other than late night bar events as defined below) $50.00 per hour $40.00 per hour  
Rates per hour-Construction: 
Fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour (traffic or construction 7:00 a.m.-7:00 p.m.). 
Sixty dollars ($60.00) per hour (traffic or construction 7:00 a.m.-7:00 p.m.). 
Rates per hour-Late night bar events: 
Ninety-five dollars ($95.00) per hour (a "late night bar event" is an event where there is entertainment and/or the serving of alcoholic beverages after 9:00 p.m.). 
The rates of compensation per hour for police sergeants and lieutenants acting in a supervisory capacity for events, construction and late night bar events includes an amount in addition to the above schedules as follows: 
Rank Additional Rates 
Per Hour Police sergeants $4.00 per hour Police lieutenants $8.00 per hour  
2.  Administrative costs for contracting the services of off-duty police officers shall be established from time to time by city council to cover the costs incurred by the city for administration, payroll costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses. 
    The administrative rate per hour for contracting the services of off-duty law enforcement officers is as follows: 
Additional rate per hour: Five dollars ($5.00) per hour. 
    Therefore, the total hourly rate due from any persons, public entities, or private entities that contracted for off-duty police officers includes the administrative rate per hour added to the rate of compensation and to the supervisory rate if applicable. For example, if a police officer worked twelve (12) hours for a traffic of construction assignment between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. his or her pay would be six hundred dollars ($600.00) (12 hours × $50.00 per hour). The amount to be collected by the city would be six hundred sixty dollars ($660.00) (12 hours × $55.00 per hour ($50.00 per hour + $5.00 administrative rate per hour)). 
3.  Payment for services to off-duty police officers for outside employment shall be made through the city's payroll system. Therefore, persons, public entities, or private entities must contact directly with, and remit payment directly to, the city for the services of police officers during their off-duty hours. Circumventing this regulation could jeopardize the police officers' pension and health and accidental death benefits. 
C.  Requests for Services. All requests by any person, public, or private entity for the services of off-duty police officers of the city shall be made to the police department of the city. 
D.  Payments from Persons or Entities Employing Off-Duty Police Officers. Payments from any person, public entity, or private entity for the services of off-duty police officers of the city shall be made to the city accounts and control department prior to the payment of the off-duty police officers through the city payroll system. Effectively, police officers of the city will not be paid through the city until moneys are received from persons, public entities, or private entities contracting such off-duty services. The division of local government services recommends that advance payments be made by the person, public entity, or private entity contracting off-duty police officer services in order to ensure timely payments to the police officers. 
(Ord. No. 4737 , § 1, 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 4351, 12-26-2012; Ord. 3698 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3505 § 1, 2003: prior code § 20-3) 
Article X - Constables 

2.56.410 - Appointment of constables. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-120, the governing body may, by resolution, appoint not less than two (2) nor more than fifty (50) constables. 
    To be eligible, individuals to be appointed constable shall be residents and qualified voters of the municipality for at least three (3) years prior to his or her appointment, and be of good moral character. 
    Individuals seeking to be appointed constable must first complete an application form from the police department. Subject to approval of the application by the chief of police, the constable candidate must then pass a background check and be fingerprinted, both of which must be paid for by the person seeking appointment as constable. Provided that the constable candidate meet these requirements, he or she must additionally pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee to the city clerk for the privilege of holding the office, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-123. Only after these requirements have been met, and the requisite fees paid, may the governing body, by resolution, appoint the individual a constable. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.420 - Constables; powers and duties. 
    Constables may serve any warrant, any process issued by the court, assist in landlord-tenant court proceedings, and perform such other duties as may be allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.430 - Jurisdiction of constables. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-120, constables may exercise their functions and perform their duties anywhere in the county wherein the appointing municipality is located. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.440 - Constables; terms of office. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-121, every constable shall qualify within 30 days from the date of resolution of appointment and shall hold office for a term of three (3) years from the date of the resolution of appointment, unless the governing body by its resolution of appointment shall fix a one-year term. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.450 - Constable's oath. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-124, every person appointed as a constable, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take, subscribe and file with the municipal clerk the following oath: 
    "I (state name), constable of the County of Union do solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the Constitution of this State and of the United States, and to perform the duties of my office as constable faithfully, impartially and justly to the best of my ability." 
    The oath may be administered by the municipal clerk or by any person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.460 - Constables; badges. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-122, the city shall supply each constable with a badge suitably inscribed, to be returned at the expiration of the constable's term. 
    The constable's badge of the city shall be an encircled cross, in gold, with the seal of the city in the center. The circle shall be inscribed with the word "CONSTABLE" above the seal of the city, and the words "CITY OF ELIZABETH" inscribed on the circle below the seal of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.470 - Constable's reports. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126.1, every constable shall on or before the first Wednesday following the first Monday of every month, file with the city council by filing with the city clerk, a report of his/her official activities, other than in connection with court or judicial proceedings, for the month immediately past. The city clerk shall forward a copy of the constable's report to the chief of police. 
    The report shall list the names and addresses of all persons contacted by the constable in his/her official capacity, together with the date, time and purpose of the contact. In addition the report shall contain an accurate statement of all fees collected by the constable and from whom and for what service each fee was collected. 
    The failure by a constable to file such a report, for two (2) consecutive months, unless he or she was prevented from so doing by reason of physical incapacity, shall result in the office being deemed vacant and he/she shall be barred from exercising the rights and privileges thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.480 - Annual charges payable by constables. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-123, there shall be an annual charge for the privilege of holding the office, to be paid by each constable in an amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the city clerk when appointed, and on the anniversary date of such appointment, yearly. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.490 - Constable's bond. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-125, every person appointed as a constable, before entering upon the execution of his/her office, shall give bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The terms and conditions and the surety of said bond must be acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
2.56.500 - Actions on constable's bond. 
    Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126, actions on a constable's bond may be prosecuted in the superior court in like manner as in the case of actions on a sheriff's bond. Applications incidental to such actions may be made to the superior court in similar manner as in the case of applications incidental to actions and proceedings on official bonds as provided in Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes. In any such action or proceeding any party in interest shall be entitled on demand to a jury trial. In any such action or proceeding a municipality shall not be liable for costs unless otherwise provided by the rules of the court. 
    If any person shall sustain loss by the neglect or default of any constable in the discharge of his/her official duties such person shall have an action in his/her own right upon the constable's bond. 
(Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
Article XI - Police Department Firearms Range Use By Retired Law Enforcement Officers 

2.56.510 - Use of firearms range by retired law enforcement officers-Requirements. 
    Retired law enforcement officers of the state are permitted to utilize the city police department firearms range for the purpose of qualifying to carry and use a firearm in accordance with the attorney general guidelines and state law under the following conditions: 
A.  There shall be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each use of the firearms range of the city by a retired law enforcement officer who is not a resident of the city. 
B.  A retired law enforcement officer who is a bona fide resident of the city shall be exempt from the payment of the fifty dollar ($50.00) fee as set forth in subsection A. 
C.  All retired law enforcement officers whether a resident of the city or a non-resident of the city shall provide and pay for any ammunition required to qualify at the firearms range of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4788 , § 1, 12-27-2016) 
Chapter 2.60 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

2.60.010 - Departmental director-Qualifications. 
    There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the director. The director shall, prior to his or her appointment, have had at least five years' experience in a responsible administrative capacity relating to firefighting or the prevention and control of fire risks. 
(Prior code § 4-94) 
2.60.020 - Departmental jurisdiction-Powers and duties. 
    The fire department shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the control, fighting and extinguishment of any conflagration which occurs within the city limits. The department shall: 
A.  Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the control, disposition and discipline of the department and its officers and employees and, within the limits of available appropriations, for the establishment and maintenance of fire stations and the disposition, use and care of their equipment and apparatus; 
B.  Provide firefighting service for the extinguishment of fires and the necessary and incidental protection of life and property throughout the city and upon vessels in any waters within the city or upon any dock, wharf, pier, warehouse or other structure bordering upon or adjacent to such waters; 
C.  Direct or cause any vessel moored to or anchored near any dock or pier or in any waters within the city to be removed to and secured at such place as shall be designated by the director or the fire chief whenever any such vessel shall be afire or in danger of igniting or may be, by reason of its condition or the nature of its cargo, a menace to life or property; 
D.  Designate and fix the location of fire alarm telegraph and signal stations in the city and operate, repair and maintain a city fire alarm and signal system; 
E.  Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report to the city police department and to the county prosecutor every case of suspicion of arson; 
F.  Have power to inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm system or fire-extinguishing equipment; 
G.  Be authorized to enter upon without fee or hindrance, all premises, grounds, structures, buildings, vessels and passages whenever necessary in the performance of its duties; 
H.  Operate a training program to maintain and improve the firefighting efficiency of the members of the department; 
I.  Maintain a bureau of fire prevention and fire safety inspection and administer the fire prevention code of the city, except as therein otherwise provided. 
(Prior code § 4-95) 
2.60.030 - Departmental personnel. 
    No member of the fire department shall solicit or accept anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her official duties; nor shall any member solicit the sale of tickets in connection with any fund-raising campaign nor request contributions directly or indirectly for same, nor solicit anything of value for the benefit of self or other person or any fire department member, group or organization, except as authorized by general regulations of the department or by written permission of the director; provided that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny any member of the fire department the right to solicit or contribute dues or assessments to the labor organization of his or her choice. 
(Prior code § 4-96) 
2.60.040 - Fire department services-Regulations by director authorized. 
    The director is authorized to prescribe rules and regulations governing the release of certain information contained in the official files of the fire department. Unless ordered to do otherwise by a court of competent jurisdiction, he or she may refuse to issue any such information when, in his or her judgment, the interests of law enforcement and public safety require, and he or she may refuse to issue any such information which he or she has classified as confidential. 
(Prior code § 4-97) 
2.60.050 - Fire department services-Fees. 
    The following fees are established for certain services provided by the fire department: 
A.  Typed verification of the fact that a fire occurred at which the fire department rendered service, or services of department personnel at an emergency (other than fire) on a given date, address or area location: two dollars ($2.00); 
B.  Copies of fire or emergency report as taken from the official record of the department, verifying that such fire or emergency occurred at a given time, date, address or area location. This report would also include facts pertinent to the fire or emergency: five dollars ($5.00). 
(Prior code § 4-98) 
2.60.060 - Fee-exempt services. 
    No fee will be charged for any requested search for information made by any federal, state, county or municipal police or fire department or municipal law enforcement department or agency. 
(Prior code § 4-99) 
2.60.070 - Requests for official information. 
    All requests for information in official files authorized for release by the director, and for the services provided for in this chapter, shall be made to the bureau of fire prevention, No. 733 New Point Road, Elizabeth, New Jersey, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excepting legal holidays. 
(Prior code § 4-100) 
2.60.080 - Disposition of revenue-Receipts required. 
    All money received in connection with the services provided as authorized in this chapter shall be deposited daily in an account in the name of the city fire prevention bureau, in a bank authorized to accept municipal funds. Such funds shall then be forwarded at least once a month through established fire department procedure to the city treasurer, City Hall, Elizabeth, New Jersey. Receipts shall be numbered consecutively (printed) and made out in duplicate and signed by the member accepting the fee, the original to be given to the person requesting the service and the duplicate to be retained by the fire prevention bureau as a record. Receipts that may have been torn, mutilated or improperly filled out shall be preserved for official audit. Checks shall be made out to the city and shall be processed as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 4-101) 
Article II - Administration and Personnel 

2.60.090 - Organization and personnel. 
    The fire department of the city shall consist of a director, in accordance with this code, as supplemented and amended, and shall further consist of not more than: 
A. Firefighting Personnel    Fire chief 1    Deputy fire chiefs 6    Battalion fire chiefs 6    Fire captains 45    Firefighters 204    Fire prevention specialists, U.F.D. 6  Total of firefighting personnel 263 B. Civilian Personnel    Laborer 1    Emergency medical technicians 40    Supervising emergency medical 
technicians 5    Chief emergency medical technicians 1    Clerk 1 3    Keyboarding clerk 3    Management assistant 1    Clerk 2 2    Emergency medical technicians 4    Keyboarding clerk 2 2    Keyboarding clerk 3 2    Clerk 3 2    Supervising emergency medical technician 1  Total of civilian personnel 67  
(Ord. No. 4855 , § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4470, § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 4371, § 1, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 4260, § 1, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 4112, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 7-28-2009; Ord. 3741 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3588 § 1, 2004; prior code § 9-1) 
2.60.100 - Appointments and promotions. 
    The appointment of the fire director shall be in accordance with this code, and all other appointments and promotions shall be in accordance with applicable rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission, State of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 9-2) 
2.60.110 - Salaries. 
    The annual salary for all members and employees of the fire department shall be in accordance with budgetary appropriations authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Prior code § 9-3) 
2.60.120 - Administration by director. 
    The director of the fire department shall be the chief executive officer of the department. From time to time, he or she is authorized to make rules and regulations for the proper administration of the department. 
(Prior code § 9-4) 
2.60.130 - Chain of command. 
    The chief of the fire department shall be second in command, and in the absence of the director, unless otherwise provided in this code, the chief shall assume overall command. In any emergency involving the absence of the chief, the deputy chief with greatest seniority shall assume overall command of the department. In the absence of deputy chiefs, the battalion chief having greatest seniority shall assume temporary command of the department. 
(Prior code § 9-5) 
2.60.140 - Eligibility requirements. 
    To be eligible to the fire department, a candidate must meet the health and age qualifications and the provisions of all other applicable statutes, including but not limited to those as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-1 et seq., and the Civil Service Law rules and regulations. In addition, all applicants shall be required to be examined by the fire department physician in order to determine that each applicant has the physical and mental qualifications that would enable him or her to properly perform designated duties in the department. 
(Prior code § 9-6) 
2.60.150 - Departmental discipline, rules and regulations. 
    Any member of the department against whom charges may be preferred for a violation or violations of the rules and regulations of the fire department, after hearing and consistent with requirements of this code, may be reprimanded, fined, suspended and/or dismissed from the department. The rules and regulations set out in Article VII of this chapter are adopted and promulgated as the official rules and regulations for the government of the Elizabeth fire department in force and for the discipline of its members. 
(Prior code § 9-7) 
2.60.160 - Interpretation. 
    Nothing herein is intended to conflict with any of the present provisions of the administrative code adopted January 24, 1961, as supplemented and amended to the date of this code. 
(Prior code § 9-8) 
Article III - Voluntary Overtime 

2.60.170 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    "Certain members" means members of the fire department who hold the rank of firefighter, captain or battalion chief and members who are employed in the bureau of communications and the motor vehicle repair bureau in the fire department. 
(Prior code § 9-16) 
2.60.180 - Overtime employment authorized. 
    The director of the department of fire is empowered to employ within the limits of the expenditures of the department's budget certain members of the fire department of the city on an overtime basis for more than the required number of hours. 
(Prior code § 9-17) 
2.60.190 - Compensation. 
    The payment for overtime shall be time-and-one-half based upon the base wage being earned by the employee of the department at the time he or she is performing the overtime work, and the base wage shall be the sole criteria for calculating overtime payments to the specific exclusion of all other financial benefits and fringe benefits to which an employee may be entitled. There shall be no additional compensation paid for work other than as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 9-18) 
2.60.200 - Overtime employment optional. 
    In no event, however, shall overtime work be compulsory by any member of the fire department. Such work shall be on a voluntary basis, and the members of the department, if and when requested to work overtime, shall have the option of either working more than the required number of hours at time-and-one-half pay or refusing same. Refusal to work overtime shall not reflect unfavorably upon any firefighter so affected. 
(Prior code § 9-19) 
2.60.210 - Exception in emergency. 
    No time-and-one-half pay for overtime shall be paid to any member of the fire department on duty during the period of an emergency in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:47-47 et seq. 
(Prior code § 9-20) 
2.60.220 - Authorization by director. 
    Time-and-one-half pay shall only be paid in nonemergency situations where, in the opinion of the director of the fire department, additional work is needed in the normal course of that department's work. 
(Prior code § 9-21) 
2.60.230 - Rules and regulations authorized-Powers and duties of director. 
    The director of the fire department shall establish appropriate rules and regulations concerning overtime work to safeguard and protect the health and welfare of all members voluntarily assigned to overtime duties. The director of the fire department shall be responsible for the allocation of voluntary overtime assignments, and he or she shall, as aforesaid, set forth the conditions under which members of the department shall be eligible for overtime work. He or she shall take into consideration the number of hours already worked on regular time each day and each week and the physical condition of the individual uniformed member, having in mind that it is the intent of this article to protect the health and efficiency of firefighters regularly employed during their normal tour of duty. He or she shall not allow any member to perform long tedious periods of overtime without sufficient off-duty periods for rest, recreation and personal activities. The director of the fire department shall also institute such rules and regulations as necessary to provide an adequate control over all overtime assignments to prevent abuse of any kind and shall provide a centralized system of control which will assure adequate safeguards. 
(Prior code § 9-22) 
2.60.240 - Distribution of rules and regulations. 
    A copy of these rules and regulations shall be given to each firefighter. 
(Prior code § 9-23) 
Article IV - Residency Requirements 

2.60.250 - Appointment-Fire department. 
    All applicants for appointment in the fire department shall be qualified for appointment as required by law, ordinances and New Jersey Department of Personnel (Civil Service) rules and regulations. All applicants for appointments shall be residents of the city and must maintain continuous residency within the city from the announced closing date of the New Jersey Department of Personnel examination up to and including the date of appointment. 
(Prior code § 9-32) 
Article V - Leaves of Absence 

2.60.260 - Leaves of absence with pay authorized. 
    Leaves of absence with pay not exceeding one year are authorized to all members and officers of the fire department who shall be injured, ill or disabled from any cause, subject to conditions set forth in this article. 
(Prior code § 9-37) 
2.60.270 - Physician's report. 
    The director of the fire department shall determine whether or not to grant a leave of absence with pay as authorized in Section 2.60.260 after he or she has reviewed an examining physician's report which shall certify to such injury, illness or disability. The examining physician shall be one who is in the employ of the city and who shall have been appointed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 9-38) 
2.60.280 - Status report. 
    The director of the fire department shall furnish a monthly report to the city council, as well as to the business administrator and personnel officer, as to the status of all members and officers of the fire department who are on leaves of absence with pay for injury, illness or disability. 
(Prior code § 9-39) 
Article VI - Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chiefs 

2.60.290 - Workweek. 
    Effective January 1, 1977, the normal workweek for the fire chief shall be eight hours per day, five days a week Monday through Sunday, for a total of forty (40) hours per week. The normal workweek for those serving in the title of deputy fire chief shall be an average of forty-two (42) hours per week computed over the period of the full calendar year. The work schedules for those serving in the above titles shall be at the discretion of the fire director. 
(Prior code § 9-46) 
2.60.300 - Holidays. 
A.  Deputy fire chiefs shall be entitled to holiday pay in compensatory time off for a total of one hundred twelve (112) hours per year. The allocation of compensatory time off shall be by mutual agreement between the director and the employee. 
B.  The fire chief shall receive wages based upon eight hours' straight-time hourly rate of pay for each of the following holidays: 
    New Year's Day; 
    Reverend Martin Luther King's Birthday; 
    Lincoln's Birthday; 
    Washington's Birthday; 
    Good Friday; 
    Memorial Day; 
    Independence Day; 
    Labor Day; 
    Columbus Day; 
    Election Day; 
    Veterans Day; 
    Thanksgiving Day; 
    Friday after Thanksgiving; and 
    Christmas Day. 
C.  When the fire chief works on any of the above holidays, or if the holiday falls within his or her vacation period, he or she shall be credited with eight hours of time off for a future date to be determined by the fire director. 
(Prior code § 9-47) 
2.60.310 - Vacation. 
A.  The fire chief shall be entitled to thirty (30) working days of vacation each year. 
B.  Deputy fire chiefs shall be entitled to twenty-four (24) working days of vacation each year. Vacation time must be used in the vacation year in which it is earned or it shall be forfeited. However, one year's accumulation may be carried into the next succeeding year. Should circumstances warrant, this provision may be waived by the fire director. 
C.  The vacation period shall be the calendar year, from the first of January through the 31st of December, giving preference to employee seniority where practicable and where consistent with efficient operations. 
D.  Upon completion of twenty-five (25) years of continuous service, the employee shall receive five working days of vacation for that anniversary year only. 
(Prior code § 9-48) 
2.60.320 - Acting chief-Compensation. 
    Effective June 1, 1985, the acting chief serving in the capacity of a chief for a period in excess of thirty (30) days for reasons of illness, disability, or extended leave prior to retirement, shall be entitled to compensation equal to the chief's base pay after the thirtieth day. 
(Prior code § 9-49) 
Article VII - Rules and Regulations of the Fire Department 

2.60.330 - General rules and regulations. 
1.  All officers and members of the department irrespective of the division or bureau to which they are assigned, the duties they perform or whether uniformed or nonuniformed, shall be subject to all rules and regulations, particularly those which apply to conduct, discipline and violation of the law. 
2.  Any wilful violation, breach of discipline or infraction of any of the rules and regulations, general orders, special notices, or other directives officially issued, shall subject the offender to dismissal from the service, demotion in rank, fine, reprimand or such other form of punishment as the circumstances may warrant or as the fire director may deem fit to impose. 
3.  It shall be the duty of every officer and member to promptly and implicitly comply with all rules and regulations, general orders, special notices and directives governing the department. All written directives shall be read and signed on the reverse side by all officers and members of all units. 
4.  For the purpose of recall all officers and members of the department are considered to be on duty at all times and subject to recall at any time their services may be required. Officers and members must respond to all recalls to duty communicated in times of emergency unless on sick leave, injury leave, vacation or when properly excused by an officer having the authority to do so. 
5.  Tours of duty and working schedules for officers and members of the department shall be in accordance with the hours prescribed for each respective division. Punctuality will be strictly enforced and only valid reasons will be accepted for a member failing to report for duty on time. 
6.  Members shall be registered at all times in the company or unit to which they are assigned, the personnel division registration shall include address, telephone numbers and badge number. It is the responsibility of each member to notify his or her immediate superior and the personnel division promptly relative to any change of address or telephone number. 
7.  Members of the department shall not violate their oath of office, nor be guilty of neglect or cowardice, or shirk any duty. 
8.  Members shall devote their entire time while on duty to the work of the department. 
9.  No member shall absent himself or herself from quarters, fires or any assignment without leave granted by a superior officer. 
10.  All members shall be held accountable for any disorderly conduct or violation of the law whether such action occurs when a member is actually on-duty or off-duty, in accordance with civil service law and regulations. 
11.  The use of any alcoholic beverage or debilitating substance by any member actually on-duty is prohibited. 
12.  The use of any alcoholic beverage or debilitating substance to such extent as to make any member unable to perform his or her duty will be cause for immediate suspension from duty. 
13.  No alcoholic beverage may be brought into any quarters nor carried on any fire department vehicle. 
14.  Members shall not engage in altercations nor be guilty of improper, unprofessional, indecent or immoral conduct. Members shall, at all times, be civil and orderly in their conduct and refrain from actions which may bring discredit upon themselves or the department. 
15.  Members shall not make false statements or reports with intent to deceive. 
16.  No member shall loan, sell, give away or remove from quarters any property assigned to the fire department nor shall they damage or use department property in a careless, reckless or wasteful manner. 
17.  Economy shall be exercised by all members in the use of stationery, fuels, electric power and all other supplies. 
18.  No members shall solicit or accept anything of value as a consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her duties; nor shall any member, without the permission of the director, solicit, whether directly or indirectly, any moneys or other valuables for the benefit of any organization or member of the department. 
19.  No member shall receive or accept a reward, gratuity or gift of any kind, directly or indirectly, in connection with an official act performed, without the permission of the director of the department. 
20.  Theft of anything of value from any department building or vehicle shall be grounds for immediate suspension and dismissal. 
21.  Theft of any article or anything of value from any property to which the department may be dispatched, shall be grounds for immediate suspension and/or dismissal. 
22.  Members shall be required to give their name, rank, badge number and company designation in a respectful manner when requested by a civilian. 
23.  On the fireground, or when performing an assigned duty in view or hearing of the public, any differences between members of the department shall be resolved in a professional, expeditious manner. 
24.  Smoking while riding on apparatus is forbidden. 
25.  The use of department telephones shall be strictly limited to official business. No member shall be permitted to use department telephone for a personal purpose without the expressed permission of a superior officer. 
26.  Telephone in company quarters shall not be used while an alarm is in progress, except for an emergency. 
27.  Telephones in company quarters shall not be used during roll call or radio test, except for an emergency. 
28.  All inquiries on information relative to the business or affairs of the department shall be referred to the chief in charge at headquarters. No department information or data shall be furnished by the officers or members of the department except that duly authorized by the chief of the department or chief in charge. 
29.  No department document shall be removed from any company quarters or office without the permission of the chief of department. 
30.  No member shall lecture on department activities without the permission of the director of department. 
31.  No member shall recommend any private firm to any individual who is in need of a private fire protection service. 
32.  No member shall leave the city on official business without the consent of his or her division/bureau commander or the chief of department. 
33.  Repair, cleaning or polishing of private vehicles on fire department property is forbidden. 
34.  Applications for transfer, either intratour or inter-tour may be submitted in writing at any time through a member's unit commander and chief officer. This subsection does not intend to supersede the article on bidding in negotiated contracts with respective bargaining units. 
35.  Any member may submit his or her intention to terminate employment by resignation or retirement at any time to the personnel officer. Members are advised that in order to avoid problems beyond the control of the department, notice of intent to retire should be completed and submitted at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the effective date of retirement. 
36.  When a member is terminated, resigns or retires, he or she shall deliver all department property issued to him or her to the personnel officer. 
37.  Any member, either on-duty, or off-duty who may be required to attend court in any criminal or civil case, shall notify his or her immediate superior, who shall make necessary notifications and arrangements to excuse the member from duty, if necessary. 
38.  A written report shall be made by any member who must attend court and forwarded through proper channels to the member's division commander. 
39.  Any member receiving a questionnaire from a jury commission regarding jury duty, shall complete such questionnaire and return it to the jury commission. Uniformed fire department members are excused from jury duty under New Jersey Statutes. Should a member receive a summons for jury duty, it shall be promptly forwarded to the personnel officer, who shall take steps necessary to ensure the member is excused. 
40.  No member shall be permitted to take into any department building, any firearm or weapon of any type. 
41.  No member who may be on an eligibility list for promotion shall offer, directly or indirectly, to any other member a consideration with the intention of creating a vacancy, thereby expediting his or her own promotion. 
42.  No member who may be contemplating retirement or resignation shall solicit, directly or indirectly, consideration from a member on an eligibility list for promotion, thereby expediting that member's promotion. 
43.  All members off-duty on either sick leave or injury leave are expected to be at their place of residence in accordance with Section 2.60.560(27). 
44.  Members under a doctor's care for either sickness or injury, shall make themselves available for light duty, as soon as possible. 
45.  Disability reports shall be completed in entirety including available date for light duty, available date for full duty and the physician's name and address. 
46.  All disability reports shall be completely legible. 
47.  "Apparatus" shall be defined as all vehicles operated by the fire department excluding automobiles. 
48.  "Quarters" shall be defined as all buildings and land under fire department control. 
49.  "Company quarters" shall be defined as building and land assigned to a unit of the department. 
50.  "Company area" shall be defined as either response, inspection or hydrant district. The geographic boundaries of each shall be known by all company personnel. 
51.  "Company response area" shall refer to the geographic area of the city where that unit responds as the first unit of a particular type on the first alarm (first due engine or first due truck). 
52.  "Company inspection area" shall refer to that geographic area of the city wherein all pertinent occupancies shall be inspected annually, consistent with established procedures. 
53.  "Company hydrant area" shall refer to that geographic area of the city within which all hydrants shall be inspected and maintained, consistent with established procedures. 
54.  A "day tour" shall be defined as a tour of duty commencing at 8:00 a.m. and concluding at 6:00 p.m. 
55.  A "night tour" shall be defined as a tour of duty commencing at 6:00 p.m. and concluding at 8:00 a.m. the following morning. 
56.  All members shall familiarize themselves with all aspects of fire department response procedures. 
57.  All members shall familiarize themselves with all apparatus and equipment assigned to their quarters to the extent that rotation of tasks among personnel does not adversely affect operational efficiency. 
58.  All apparatus and equipment shall be inspected and serviced in accordance with department directives. 
59.  An inventory of all equipment assigned to a company shall be taken the first day each tour reports for duty. The result of the inventory check shall be logged in the company journal. Discrepancies shall be reported to the duty chief. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 100) 
2.60.340 - Officers. 
    Officers shall: 
1.  Set an example to subordinates relative to dignity, sobriety, courtesy, skill and observance of discipline. 
2.  Exercise authority with firmness and fairness and be just and professional in their dealings with subordinates. 
3.  Appear clean and neatly attired at all times. 
4.  Control and Command. Should any subordinate fail or neglect to perform his or her required duty, it is incumbent upon the officer to recommend that such subordinate be disciplined. 
5.  Familiarize themselves with all aspects of emergency response operations including initial operations on the fireground where subsequent units will arrive and operate. 
6.  Not exact, request or permit any personal services from any subordinate. 
7.  Alter or cancel any standing order of an officer of equal or superior rank. 
8.  Alter or order changes in the arrangement of firefighting equipment on apparatus or in quarters unless sanction has been received by the division commander. 
9.  A member serving as an acting officer shall conduct himself or herself with the same authority and responsibility as that position entails for as long as he or she serves in that position. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 200) 
2.60.350 - Chief of department. 
A.  The fire director shall: 
1.  Be the administrative head of the fire department. The authority and responsibilities of the fire director are contained in the administrative code of the city. 
B.  The chief of the department shall: 
1.  Be the operational head of the fire department. 
2.  Be subordinate and subject to the fire director, except in the discharge of duties at fires where he or she shall exercise supreme command. 
3.  Have charge of the various divisions/bureaus of the department delineated in the table of organization, and be responsible to the fire director for the proper discharge of his or her duties. 
4.  Enforce all rules and regulations, general orders, special notices and directives governing the department. 
5.  Be responsible for maintaining the discipline, morale and efficiency of the various divisions/bureaus of the department and shall make periodic reports and recommendations which may require the attention of the fire director. 
6.  Have the authority to suspend from duty, pending formal charges, any member of the department, for any flagrant violation or disregard of any of the rules and regulations or order of the department. He or she shall promptly report the facts and reason for the suspension to the fire director. 
7.  Prepare a report of the activities of the department annually and submit same to fire director. 
8.  Make reports to the fire director with recommendations for such changes in personnel and/or equipment as he or she deems necessary to maintain or improve the efficiency of the department. 
9.  Periodically visit and inspect the various companies and units under his or her command. 
10.  Respond to such alarms of fire or emergencies at which he or she may deem his or her presence necessary. 
11.  In case of emergency, have the authority to summon and retain on duty any or all members of the department, while such emergency exists. 
12.  Have the authority to furnish personnel and equipment aid to other communities to such degree that the capability and efficiency of the department is not seriously impaired. 
13.  Order periodic inspections and tests of all apparatus and equipment and be responsible for their proper maintenance, repair and serviceability. He or she shall report any apparatus or equipment which has become unserviceable to the fire director. 
14.  With permission of the fire director, shall schedule vacation leaves for himself or herself and all deputy chiefs in a manner designed not to impair the efficiency of department operations. 
15.  Keep a record of the personnel assigned to each company under his or her command. 
16.  Order made a thorough investigation of any outstanding or meritorious acts performed by any members of the department. He or she shall forward a report of his or her findings and recommendations to the fire director. 
17.  Determine whether such acts of merit were individual or collective. Individual or unit citations shall be recommended for award. 
18.  In the event of a death of a member, whether active or retired, the chief of department shall order the desired funeral arrangements as requested by the family of the deceased. 
19.  When necessary designate members of any of the various ranks to temporarily perform the duties of the next higher rank. He or she shall exercise sound judgment in selecting such individuals and base his or her selection on the ability of the member selected and continued or improved department efficiency. 
20.  Specifically designate a deputy chief to act in his or her stead when, for any reason, he or she must absent himself or herself from his or her duties. 
21.  Conduct the semi-annual inspection of all personnel, personal uniforms and equipment. The tour chief shall accompany the chief of department on the inspection. 
22.  Periodically meet with his or her staff officers for the purpose of discussing matters that may increase the efficiency of the department. 
23.  To the best of his or her ability, perform such other duties as ordered by the fire director. 
24.  Cause to have issued special notices and directives, consistent with the law, as the efficiency of the department may require. All members of the department are obligated to strictly conform to the special notices and directives so issued. 
25.  Prepare an accurate record of all fires and emergencies to which the department has been dispatched. 
26.  Prepare an accurate record of fire loss sustained in the city. 
27.  Determine the necessity for the purchase of materials, or work to be performed as requisitioned by various department units. Requisitions over his or her signature shall be forwarded to the fire director for action. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 300) 
2.60.360 - Deputy chiefs. 
    Deputy chiefs shall: 
1.  Rank next in command to the chief of department. 
2.  Be directly responsible to the chief of department for the proper discharge of their duties. 
3.  Be responsible for the efficient operations of the division to which they are assigned. 
4.  Serve a tour of duty as assigned by the chief of department. 
5.  In the absence of the chief of department, have absolute authority and exercise command over all department operations at fires or emergencies. 
6.  If two or more deputy chiefs are present at an incident, the deputy chief senior in time of service in grade shall assume command. 
7.  Respond to serious fires in accordance with pertinent department directives. 
8.  Perform other duties as prescribed by the chief of department. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 400) 
2.60.370 - Battalion chiefs. 
    The battalion chiefs shall: 
1.  Rank next in command to deputy chiefs. 
2.  Be responsible to the deputy chief of fire division. 
3.  On special assignment outside the fire division shall be responsible to the chief of department. 
4.  Be responsible for the operations of a tour of the department. 
5.  Ensure that proper response is made to all incidents. 
6.  Respond to all incidents in accordance with department directives or to where they deem their presence necessary. 
7.  Ensure that all training and safety policies are enforced. 
8.  Ensure that all company quarters and equipment are maintained and kept clean. 
9.  Ensure that all personnel are properly attired in regulation clothing and have neatly trimmed hair and mustaches. 
10.  Ensure that companies are drilled frequently in the use of all equipment. 
11.  Ensure that manpower is equitably maintained in all companies. 
12.  Determine, or cause to have determined, the cause of all fires to which they respond. 
13.  Suspend any member deemed unfit for duty. 
14.  Recommend awards for units and/or individual members for meritorious acts performed. 
15.  Notify the deputy chief of the fire division of any unusual condition or incident which takes place while they are on duty. 
16.  Perform such other duties as prescribed by the chief of department. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 500) 
2.60.380 - Captains. 
A.  1.  Captains shall rank next in command to battalion chiefs. 
2.  Captains in the fire division shall be responsible to the battalion chief in charge of their tour. 
3.  Captains assigned to any other division shall be responsible to the deputy chief in charge of that division. 
B.  Captains shall: 
1.  Promptly obey and carry out all orders received from their superiors. 
2.  Ensure that all reports, ledgers, records books and forms are arranged properly and kept available for use by authorized personnel. 
3.  Compile a list of all buildings in their company inspection district with automatic protection devices. This list shall include the type of device (sprinkler, standpipe etc.), address, type of occupancy, description, location of shut-off valves, drains, tanks, siamese connections and fire pumps. This list shall be updated annually, in the month of January. 
4.  Ensure that all personnel assigned to their company are fully trained so that company efficiency is maintained at a peak level. 
5.  Ensure that all members of their company are fully trained so that the duties of individuals may be inter-changed without adversely affecting operational efficiency. 
6.  Be responsible for the efficient operation of their company including the cleanliness and proper operation of all apparatus housed in their quarters, and the cleanliness of the building and grounds. 
7.  Transmit proper reports in a timely manner. 
8.  Familiarize themselves and company members with their company districts regarding location of streets, hydrants and hazardous occupancies. 
9.  Maintain a company journal. It shall be the official register entered in chronological order, a complete and accurate record of the daily activities of the company. 
10.  Maintain a personnel record of all members of their command, including badge number, address, telephone number and leaves, both taken and accrued. 
11.  Approve or deny requests for exchange of shift in their company, keeping in mind the maintenance of company efficiency. 
12.  Make a radio transmission to the dispatcher when arriving at the scene of an incident as the first arriving unit. Such transmission shall include a concise appraisal of conditions present. 
13.  Observe the condition of dress and work uniforms of the members of their company and shall, when necessary, direct such members to comply with department regulations. 
14.  Report to the dispatcher when their company leaves or returns to quarters. 
15.  Determine, or cause to be determined, the cause of all fires at which they are the officer in command. 
16.  Ensure that all scheduled activities of their company are carried out in an efficient manner. 
17.  Whenever two or more companies are housed in the same quarters, captains shall maintain their respective apparatus. The maintenance of any reserve apparatus shall be equally apportioned. 
18.  When two or more companies are housed in the same building, quarters duties shall be equally apportioned. 
19.  Grass and hedges shall be maintained in a neat appearance. 
20.  Snow and ice shall be removed promptly so as not to accumulate. 
21.  Captains are responsible for the operations of their company to the extent that all members conduct themselves in a professional, efficient manner at all times. 
22.  Unless ordered by the dispatcher or a superior officer, captains shall not take their company outside its response area without the permission of their tour chief. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 600) 
2.60.390 - Training division. 
    The training division shall be maintained for the purpose of instructing members of the department in all phases of fire department activities. Properly conducted drills and instruction periods, under the supervision of the training division or company officer, are vital to maintaining operations at a high standard of efficiency. Knowledge, understanding and constant review of the fundamentals of all phases of fire fighting and fire prevention activities are essential in order to achieve and maintain this high standard. 
1.  The commanding officer of the training division shall be designated training officer and assigned by the chief of department subject to the approval of the director. 
2.  Whenever the training officer is absent from duty, or on detached assignment from the division, the next highest ranking officer assigned to the division shall assume all duties and responsibilities of the training officer. 
3.  A division journal shall be maintained in the office of the training officer. Daily entries shall be made listing the members on duty, activities performed and arrangements made. Any other information pertinent to the members of the training division shall also be recorded. 
4.  The training officer shall establish a course of instruction for the training of newly-appointed members of the department. 
5.  The training officer shall establish a continuous cycle of training carried on throughout the fire division, both in company quarters and at suitable outside locations. 
6.  Lists of drill subjects recommended to company officers as guides are contained in the fire department training manual issued by the training division. These lists do not include every subject meriting time and attention, nor can there be any prescribed length of time allotted to a particular subject. Officers shall realize these lists are only outlines; and are expected to exercise initiative in utilizing related subject matters which will enhance the value of drills and instruction. 
7.  Training instructors shall maintain a record of all instruction given. 
8.  A record of each member's individual training shall be maintained by the training officer. 
9.  Company records shall be maintained for all training sessions conducted. Monthly drill reports (department form #DR16) shall be submitted to the training officer showing date, subject, instructor, time and man-hours for each tour. Specialized instruction under the direct supervision of the training division shall be entered in red ink. 
10.  No member may absent himself or herself from any training session without the consent of the training officer. 
11.  Officers shall require full cooperation and active participation by all members in order to achieve the purpose of drill and instruction period. 
12.  Members shall give their undivided attention to all instruction. 
13.  The training officer shall forward an annual report of all activities of the training division to the chief of department. 
14.  The commanding officer of the training division shall perform such other duties as prescribed by the chief of department. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 700) 
2.60.400 - Bureau of repair. 
A.  The commanding officer of the bureau of repair shall be designated supervising mechanic UFD and assigned by the fire director. 
B.  The supervising mechanic of fire apparatus shall: 
1.  Be responsible to the chief of department for the condition of all fire department apparatus and vehicles. 
2.  Be responsible for the efficiency and conduct of the members under his or her supervision, recommending disciplinary action when necessary. 
3.  In conjunction with the training officer, instruct, demonstrate and lecture operators of fire apparatus. 
4.  Perform the required inspections and tests of apparatus as ordered by the chief of department. 
5.  When requiring the assistance of personnel assigned to the division of fire, the assistant superintendent of fire apparatus shall make necessary arrangements through the tour chief and company officer. 
6.  Supervise the annual pump test of apparatus. 
7.  The assistant superintendent of fire apparatus and/or his or her designee shall respond to multiple alarms and incidents requiring his or her presence. 
8.  Have the authority to summon any member of the bureau of repair to respond to any incident where such member's presence is deemed necessary. 
9.  Maintain an accurate record of the condition and maintenance of every fire department vehicle. 
10.  Submit an annual report of all activities performed by the bureau of repair to the chief of department. 
11.  Perform such other duties as prescribed by the fire director and/or the chief of department. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 800) 
2.60.410 - Bureau of communications. 
A.  The bureau of communications is a uniformed branch of the fire department and all members shall be subject to all rules and regulations, orders and directives governing the department. 
1.  The commanding officer of the bureau of communications shall be designated the fire signal system superintendent and under the immediate supervision of the chief of department, to whom he or she shall be responsible for the proper discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall be in charge of the personnel, property and operations of the bureau. 
B.  The fire signal system superintendent shall: 
1.  Include telephone, telegraph, vocal alarm and computer systems. 
2.  Subject to the approval of the chief of department, the fire signal superintendent shall be responsible for providing proper signals for the rapid transmission of alarms; or for information for fire signal operations. 
3.  Be responsible, subject to the approval of the fire director and chief of department, for establishing policy concerning communications and operations within the bureau. 
4.  Have supervision of, and be responsible for, the proper operation of fire signal system operations. 
5.  Promptly report all matters pertaining to the bureau to the chief of department. 
6.  Maintain, complete and keep accurate records of all materials, supplies and equipment assigned to and used in connection with the operations of the bureau. 
7.  Conduct such inspections and tests of the fire signal system devices and appurtenances as may be necessary to assure their perfect working condition at all times. Proper records of such tests shall be maintained. 
8.  Be responsible for maintaining a modern and efficient communication system including all research and planning pertaining to equipment. 
9.  Enforce all rules and regulations, orders and directives governing the department and ensure that all members under his or her supervision fully understand them. 
10.  When away from his or her office, shall keep the dispatcher(s) informed as to his or her whereabouts, in case of an emergency. 
11.  Be responsible for the maintenance of the fire alarm system in accordance with the standards of the National Fire Protection Association and the provisions of pertinent electrical codes as they may apply. 
12.  Be responsible for the maintenance of an emergency power source for the operation of the fire alarm system. 
13.  He or she or designee shall respond to multiple alarms and incidents requiring his or her presence. 
14.  Perform such other duties as prescribed by the fire director and/or the chief of department. 
15.  Be responsible for the orientation, training and efficiency of fire department dispatchers. 
16.  Ensure that dispatchers keep complete records of all incidents and related matters. 
C.  Dispatchers shall: 
1.  Conduct a daily roll call of their tour at 8:05 a.m. and 6:05 p.m. and record the results in the proper location. 
2.  Conduct a daily radio test of all fire apparatus at 8:15 a.m. Steps shall be taken to ensure that all apparatus is receiving and/or transmitting properly. 
3.  Conduct a test of all portable radios of fire units at 6:15 p.m. of the first night of their tour. Steps shall be taken to repair any unit not receiving and/or transmitting properly. 
4.  Conduct a complete test of the computer dispatch system daily at 8:20 a.m. Steps shall be taken to repair any unit not receiving the test. 
5.  Always conduct themselves in a professional manner when communicating over the telephone or radio. 
6.  Be subject to the lawful orders of the superintendent of communications and their superior officers in the fire division. 
7.  Be under the direct supervision of their tour chief for scheduling and the fire superintendent for operations. 
8.  Maintain complete records of all alarms, transmissions and radio broadcasts. 
9.  Dispatchers coming on-duty shall acquaint themselves with all happenings since their last tour of duty. They shall carefully note all entries made in the journal, record books and computer; note all orders received as well as any other matter affecting the fire alarm system. 
10.  Dispatchers going off duty shall, before leaving, inform the dispatchers on the on coming tour of every detail of existing conditions. 
11.  Furnished with a list of the names and telephone numbers of all persons who must be called or notified on multiple alarms or emergencies. Such list should clearly indicate under what circumstances such person should be notified. 
12.  No unauthorized message shall be transmitted on communications equipment. 
13.  Supervise the testing of all fire alarm circuits and equipment. Registers and tape recorders shall be carefully checked for correct time, date, paper supply and voice recording. 
14.  Assume the responsibility for dispatching units requested by mutual aid. Such cases shall immediately be brought to the attention of the tour chief. 
15.  Transmit all alarms received without delay. They shall not omit an alarm assignment when transmitting a multiple alarm. 
16.  The code of signals, as well as all equipment and facilities, shall be used only for the purpose for which it was designed. 
17.  Keep all fire alarm devices and equipment clean and in good order. 
18.  Remain within the communication room at all times, while on duty. 
19.  Not permit visitors in the communications center without the expressed approval of a chief officer or the fire director. 
20.  There shall be maintained in the communications center a journal, together with such records as designated by the chief of department of fire, in which shall be recorded the daily activities affecting the bureau of communications. 
D.  Members of the Bureau of Communications. 
1.  Fire signal system repairmen and electronics fire repairmen shall come under the immediate supervision of the superintendent of communications, to whom they shall be responsible for the proper discharge of their duties. 
2.  Members of the bureau of communications shall perform all tasks assigned them in a professional and efficient manner. 
3.  No vehicle, equipment or material may be removed from quarters without the express consent of a superior. 
4.  Members of the bureau of communications shall test any equipment, device or instrument forwarded to the bureau of communications and intended for use by its members. After acceptance, all equipment shall be maintained in a state of readiness. 
5.  Members of the bureau of communications shall record in the bureau journal all repairs to equipment and receipt of all supplies. 
6.  All newly acquired equipment and supplies for the bureau of communications shall be carefully inspected for completeness of order and defective or damaged items. If any order is found to be defective, damaged, or incomplete, that fact shall be reported to the fire signal system superintendent. 
7.  While on duty, the members of the bureau of communications shall remain in contact with the communications center by radio, telephone or other means. At no time shall they ignore any report of malfunction, for which they are required to take remedial action. 
8.  The fire signal system superintendent shall arrange a schedule of operation whereby at least one member of the bureau of communications shall be "on call" to render emergency service of temporary repair to any and all equipment under his or her jurisdiction. 
9.  As members of the uniformed force, repairmen of this bureau shall be subject to general recall. They shall also be available for recall to duty whenever the fire alarm system is damaged or otherwise impaired. 
10.  The recall procedure for the bureau of communications shall be explained to its members. Members shall acknowledge such procedure in the bureau journal. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 900) 
2.60.415 - Division of emergency medical services. 
    The fire department will administer and operate the emergency medical services of the city, including but not limited to the equipment and employees therein. 
(Ord. No. 4106, § 2, 3-9-2010) 
2.60.420 - Fire duty. 
1.  Upon receipt of an alarm, all members on duty shall be prepared to respond and shall respond to all incidents to which they are dispatched. 
2.  Officers shall be equally responsible with the member assigned to floor watch for the proper receipt of alarms and the response to the correct location. 
3.  Response to alarms shall be as expeditious as possible, consistent with accepted safety practices. Members shall exercise care to avoid injury when boarding and riding apparatus. Donning of boots and fire clothing should be done prior to boarding apparatus. 
4.  Members riding apparatus shall use hand rails and safety belts. Where provided, jump seats on the sides of apparatus shall be used. 
5.  For the safety of members, full protective gear shall be worn by all members responding to and returning from alarms of fire. As safety and apparatus configurations may dictate, this article does not strictly pertain to vehicle operators. 
6.  Full protective gear shall be defined as helmet, coat, boots and gloves. 
7.  When responding to reports of fire or other serious emergencies, sirens and horns shall be sounded with a frequency dependent upon traffic conditions. 
8.  Members shall exert their greatest energy and best ability to do their full duty under any and all circumstances; and promptly cause any persons in danger at fires to be removed therefrom as safely as possible. 
9.  Professional conduct shall be employed by all members at all times. 
10.  The first officer to arrive at the scene of a fire or emergency shall assume command, ascertain the location and extent of the emergency, transmit such information by radio, call for additional assistance or special equipment as he or she may deem necessary and direct the operations of the firefighting force until the arrival of a higher ranking officer. 
11.  Upon arrival of chief officers at the fire scene, he or she shall immediately inform the dispatcher and shall transmit the required progress reports and radio signal(s). 
12.  Officers in command at fires shall, at all times, be mindful of the safety of the members engaged on the scene and shall not jeopardize the life or limb of any member unnecessarily. Subordinate officers shall be equally responsible for safeguarding the members of their immediate command. 
13.  Officers shall be responsible for the actions of the members of their command. 
14.  Members shall not wander around the street or building when working at a fire. 
15.  All members shall obey the lawful commands of their superior officers. 
16.  Wilful disobedience of an order given by an officer at a fire or emergency shall be considered a serious offense for which the offending member shall be immediately suspended from duty. 
17.  The serving of coffee or refreshments at fires shall not be permitted without the permission of the officer in command. 
18.  All members, when operating on the interior of structures, or whenever conditions so dictate, shall wear and use self-contained-breathing-apparatus, in accordance with general order 19-82. 
19.  Full protective gear shall be worn by all members working at fires, with the exception of motor pump operators. 
20.  Officers in command of fires or emergency operations may, during unusual weather or difficult operational conditions, temporarily modify regulations governing the wearing of firefighting gear when the efficiency of such operations shall be increased. 
21.  Unauthorized personnel are prohibited from riding on any apparatus without the permission of a chief officer. 
22.  Unauthorized personnel are prohibited from using department ladders without the permission of a chief officer. 
23.  Unauthorized personnel shall not enter a building in which fire operations are being conducted without the permission of the officer in command. 
24.  Whenever a civilian is granted permission to enter a building, at least one member shall accompany the civilian. 
25.  Articles of value recovered and not claimed at a fire scene shall be delivered to the officer in command who shall forward such property to the commanding officer of the division of fire. A written report of such transaction shall be forwarded to the chief of department. 
26.  The Union County arson squad shall be notified whenever a multiple alarm is transmitted; whenever a large-loss fire is in progress; whenever a loss of life occurs, or may occur due to fire injuries sustained; or whenever the officer in command deems their presence necessary per established guidelines. 
27.  Members who report to quarters for duty and find the working tour at a fire, shall contact the dispatcher and be guided by his or her instructions. 
28.  Response to a fire beyond city limits shall, with the exception of calls for assistance through mutual aid, cause that fire department to also be notified. Immediate action to prevent loss of life and property shall be taken. As soon as that department's units arrive on the scene, all Elizabeth fire department personnel and equipment shall be returned to quarters, unless assistance is requested by the chief of that department. Status of our apparatus shall be transmitted to department dispatcher by radio. 
29.  Officers shall ensure that all equipment used at fires is accounted for before returning to quarters. 
30.  Any equipment lost or damaged at a fire shall be reported, by the captain by telephone to the tour chief upon return to quarters. Such report shall be followed by a written report by the captain to the commanding officer of the fire division. 
31.  Any equipment assigned to another unit that is found on the fireground shall be reported to the tour chief by telephone upon return to quarters, by the captain. 
32.  Apparatus operators are responsible for the safe operation of apparatus while responding to, operating at or returning from alarms, as well as all other occasions when the apparatus is taken from quarters. 
33.  Tillermen shall be responsible for the proper handling of the tiller wheel. 
34.  Apparatus not being used at fire should be placed in a position so as not to impede fire operations and be ready to be moved into position for any contingent operation. 
35.  Motor pump operators shall remain at their pumpers and give complete and constant attention to their required duties, avoiding unnecessary conversation. 
36.  During freezing weather, precautions should be taken to prevent damage to equipment. 
37.  Motor pump operators, not pumping with their apparatus, shall don full protective gear and report to the officer in command. 
38.  Officers shall use sound judgment in the stretching of hose lines and avoid the removal of surplus hose from the apparatus. 
39.  Hose lines should be stretched as near to the curb as practical, on the same side of the street as the hydrant and/or the pumper. 
40.  Whenever possible, pumpers should be placed in front of the first building beyond the fire building. 
41.  Whenever possible, trucks should be placed in front of the fire building. 
42.  Whenever possible, the rescue squad should be placed on the opposite side of the street from the fire building. 
43.  Each member shall carry a door wedge in his or her turnout coat. The wedges shall be used to keep doors open through which hose lines have been advanced. 
44.  As time and conditions warrant each member shall carry a spanner wrench in his or her coat. Such wrenches shall be used to tighten loose hose couplings, as time and conditions warrant. Care should always be exercised to avoid unnecessary water damage to property. 
45.  When fire occurs in a building with a standpipe system, it is intended that the system be used in firefighting operations. 
46.  All members entering such premises shall transport needed equipment to the floor below the fire floor, which shall be the staging area for fire operations. 
47.  At least one line of three-inch feeder hose shall be connected to the siamese inlet; if conditions warrant, additional line(s) shall be connected to the inlet. 
48.  The standpipe hose pack, assigned to various units, shall be used during operations in these premises. 
49.  When a fire occurs in a building equipped with a sprinkler system, and the system is operating, a member shall be positioned at the system control valve. He or she shall not leave this post until relieved by the officer in command. 
50.  When the sprinkler control valve is ordered closed, the officer in command shall contact a responsible person on the premises who shall be notified of the closed valve and the necessity for the replacement of fused sprinkler heads, and the restoration of the system to service. 
51.  Officers shall exercise every precaution during operations to prevent the possibility of a fire occurring after the department leaves the scene. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1000) 
2.60.430 - Uniforms. 
1.  All permanent members of the department are required to purchase, maintain in good condition and replace when necessary, complete dress and work uniforms. 
2.  Dress and work uniforms shall be maintained in such condition as to reflect favorably on the individual and the department. 
3.  All members in uniform shall present a neat, well-groomed appearance. 
4.  Uniforms shall be in compliance with pertinent department specifications and directives. Copies of exact specifications are available from the administration division. 
5.  Firefighting gear shall include helmet, coat, boots and gloves. 
6.  All firefighting gear shall meet with pertinent department specifications and directives and be consistent with maximum protection and safety standards. 
7.  All members shall wear the prescribed uniform while on duty or special assignment. 
8.  The dress uniform shall include overcoat, blouse coat, trousers, socks, shoes, shirt, tie and cap. 
9.  When appearing as a guest at a function of a civic organization, a member officially representing the department, may substitute a dark blue blazer, with appropriate pocket crest, and contrasting trousers for the dress uniform. 
10.  Socks shall be black. Exception shall be granted for certified medical reasons. 
11.  Shoes shall be of black leather with straight cut and conservative in design. No side or top stitching should be present. Toes may be capped. 
12.  The breast badge shall be worn with the dress uniform over the left breast on the outside of the outermost garment. 
13.  Gray gloves shall be worn with the dress uniform at all funeral details and formations. 
14.  White gloves shall be worn with the dress uniform at all parades and other formal occasions. 
15.  All officers shall wear a white shirt, firefighters light blue. 
16.  The tie shall be of dark blue woven material (Air Force blue.) 
17.  Chief officers shall wear appropriate collar insignia and breast badge on all dress and work uniforms. 
18.  The work uniforms shall consist of dark blue trousers, black socks and shoes. Officers shall wear a white shirt; firefighters a dark blue color, to match the trousers. Shoes shall be plain in design and either of the oxford or low boot configuration. The uniform cap shall be part of the work uniform while outside quarters on official department business. 
19.  An appropriate identification patch shall be permanently sewed on the left sleeve of the overcoat, blouse coat and all work shirts and jackets. The patch shall be affixed one to two inches below the shoulder seam. 
20.  A work jacket of department specifications shall also be maintained. 
21.  When actually performing or assisting in routine tasks, hose test, hose change or training evolutions, the regulation work shirt may be replaced. 
22.  In warm weather, regulation tee-shirts may be worn by company personnel while working. 
23.  Officers may wear regulation white tee-shirts; firefighters dark blue. 
24.  In cold weather, long sleeve regulation sweat shirts may be worn. 
25.  An approved baseball-type cap may be worn during training, hydrant or related activities. 
26.  Logos or insignia, other than official department identification, must be approved by the fire director. 
27.  Union or other fire organization identification are not acceptable as a fire department insignia. 
28.  The helmet for all members shall meet accepted safety standards. 
29.  The fire coat for all members shall meet accepted safety standards, and marked with yellow horizontal stripes. 
30.  Fire boots for all members shall be regulation fire boots with safety toes. 
31.  All members shall use innersoles in boots. The inner soles shall be of metal or hard leather. 
32.  Fire gloves shall meet accepted safety standards. 
33.  The wearing of any department uniform beyond the time required to reach home is prohibited, except as delineated elsewhere in these rules and regulations or with the permission of the chief of department. 
34.  All members shall adhere to New Jersey Public Employees Occupational Safety and Health Act, when purchasing firefighting equipment. (OSHA). 
35.  The director shall retain the right to order replacement firefighting gear and uniforms consistent with improvements and technology and legal standards and the replacement schedule shall be determined by the director. 
36.  Colors of helmets: chief officers-white. Captains and firefighters-black. 
Class A Uniform Cap 
Chief Officers Material White Naugalite. Style Commonly known as the New York City regulation bell top style with long peak as manufactured by Sentry Uniform Corporation Company model #F5303, cushioned sweatband one eyelet in front for badge. Braid To be trimmed with white braid. Strap Can strap to be gold flexible gilt metal snake style strap 1/2? wide. To be attached with two gold buttons. Captains Material White Naugalite. Style Same as for chief officers. Braid To be trimmed with fast color black braid. Strap Can strap to be silver colored flexible metal snake system 1/2? wide attached with two chrome buttons. Firefighters Material Regulation blue serge. Style Same as for chief officers. Strap Can strap to be black patent leather type material attached with two chrome fire department buttons.  
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1100) 
2.60.440 - Quarters. 
1.  Company officers shall have charge of company quarters, be responsible for its cleanliness, heating and cooling installations, fuel supply tanks and other appurtenances: and shall exercise rigid economy in the use of potable water, fuels, electricity and other supplies. 
2.  No changes or permanent alterations to quarters for equipment shall be permitted without the written approval of the chief of department. 
3.  Members shall be assigned various duties for the proper maintenance of quarters, apparatus and equipment. Officers shall direct and supervise the cleaning of quarters, apparatus, tools and equipment for the purpose of maintaining a clean, orderly condition at all times. 
4.  Daily housework schedules have been previously published. Officers shall ensure that these schedules are followed. 
5.  Upon completion of daily quarters duties, the company officer shall make a suitable entry in the company journal as to what work was completed and why scheduled work, if any, was not completed. 
6.  A record shall be maintained in all companies regarding the use of diesel fuel and gasoline. This record shall include date, operator, quantity of fuel taken, vehicle designation and quantity still on hand. 
7.  Fuel storage tanks shall be checked every Wednesday for quantity of fuel in the tank(s). This amount shall be recorded in the company journal and be compared to the running total maintained in the company. Serious discrepancies shall be immediately reported to the administrative officer. 
8.  In order to preserve the apparatus floor, structural and electrical components of quarters, the use of water in apparatus area shall be kept to a minimum. Cleaning of apparatus floors shall be done by the use of brooms and damp mops. Water shall be used sparingly when it becomes necessary to wash down the floor area used to house apparatus. 
9.  When washing walls in quarters becomes necessary, care shall be exercised to avoid wetting electrical telephone and alarm equipment and wiring. 
10.  Before any repairs to quarters are started by an outside contractor, the administrative officer shall be contacted. Suitable entries shall be made in the company journal indicating work performed, contractor, time started and time completed. 
11.  Quarters shall be used solely for department business. Visitors shall be extended every courtesy but shall not be permitted to remain in quarters after 10:00 p.m. Loitering shall be prohibited at all times. 
12.  Department bulletin board shall be maintained in a conspicuous location in quarters. Only department or company information shall be displayed. An area shall be provided for the location of a bulletin board for respective bargaining units. Such unit(s) shall be responsible for the cost and installation of such board as well as material displayed thereon. No offensive or controversial material shall be displayed at any time. 
13.  Officers shall not permit photographs to be taken in quarters without the approval of the chief of department. 
14.  The apron in front of quarters and all sidewalks around quarters shall be maintained free from snow, ice and other obstructions which may hinder the prompt response of apparatus and the safe passage of pedestrians. 
15.  No private vehicles shall be parked on the apron in front of quarters. 
16.  Members shall not place chairs or benches nor shall they congregate in front of quarters. 
17.  Members shall, when engaged in work about quarters, observe every precaution to avoid injury to themselves, and others and to avoid damaging any property. 
18.  The national flag shall be displayed at full-staff at company quarters from sunrise to sunset every day of the year. It shall not be displayed in inclement weather. 
19.  The national flag may be displayed after sunset only in locations where it is properly illuminated. 
20.  Directives concerning the authorized display of the national flag at half-staff shall be obeyed. 
21.  Each quarters shall be provided with a national flag suitable for display. 
22.  Whenever a national flag is deemed no longer suitable for display, it shall be disposed of in a suitable fashion. Any questions concerning same shall be referred to the administrative officer. 
23.  Bed linen (three sheets and two pillow cases) shall be supplied to each member. Each item shall be marked with that member's company number (e.g. T3 #7). All linen shall be stored in an appropriate location. 
24.  After the second night tour is completed, each member shall ensure that his or her bottom sheet and case is placed with the outgoing laundry. The top sheet shall be placed with the clean linen. 
25.  Soiled linen shall be picked-up every other week in accordance with established procedures as per general order 19M77. 
26.  Clean linen shall be delivered every other week in accordance with established procedures. 
27.  Officers shall ensure that a correct count and status of company laundry is maintained. 
28.  Members detailed to other companies shall be responsible for their own linen per general order #S-4-78. 
29.  Officers shall be responsible for the security and proper maintenance of portable radios in quarters. 
30.  No equipment shall be removed from quarters without the approval of the tour chief. Such removal shall be noted in the company journal as well as noting the authorizing officer. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1200) 
2.60.450 - House watch duty. 
1.  Officers shall ensure that an active floor watch is maintained from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily to be composed of a subordinate member whose duty it shall be to remain in the immediate area of the watch desk, except when properly relieved. 
2.  A passive floor watch shall be maintained from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following morning. During this time, the member assigned to floor watch is responsible for the receipt and proper entry of all communications concerning his or her company, but is not required to remain in the immediate area of the watch desk at all times. 
3.  A company officer, tour chief or chief of department may institute an active floor watch of twenty-four hours with just cause. 
4.  Officers shall ensure that a company journal is maintained in each company. A complete and accurate record of all occurrences concerning the company shall be recorded in the journal. 
5.  The company journal shall be complete and accurate daily record of all matters affecting the interests of the department, or the administration of units and personnel assigned thereto. Entries shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Roll call entries by the company officer listing the duty status of all personnel assigned to that company on that tour. 
b.  Changes in the duty status of personnel on duty. 
c.  Descriptions of all injuries sustained by members of that company, or civilians injured at incidents where the company was operating. 
d.  All incidents; time and manner of receipt, apparatus response, location, time in-service. 
e.  Failures of alarm system to operate satisfactorily. 
f.  Supplies of any nature received and/or delivered; kind and quantity; by whom received. 
g.  Names of visitors entering quarters and the purpose of such visit. 
h.  Descriptions of any training session held outside or beyond company quarters. 
i.  Hose changes. 
j.  Inspection details. 
k.  All other matters of actual or possible interest to the department or its members. 
6.  The company officer shall enter in the company journal all pertinent data concerning incidents to which the company responds. Data shall include incident number, address, owner and occupant(s), a description of the situation found and any action(s) taken. The cause of any fire and the insurance company involved shall also be listed. 
7.  Company journals shall be kept in the watch desk drawer when not in use. 
8.  Company officers shall assign subordinates to floor watch duty on a rotational basis. Professional judgment and discretion shall be exercised in making such assignments. 
9.  Members assuming floor watch shall record their rank and name in the company journal (e.g. Firefighter Green on floor watch). 
10.  A company in "relocated quarters" shall maintain a floor watch, entering such information that would be of concern to that company. 
11.  A member on floor watch, on visitation of a chief officer, shall sound a tap on the alarm gong, whereupon all on-duty members of the company shall report to the floor watch area and form in-line for inspection. The company officer shall then call roll of on-duty personnel. 
12.  A member on floor watch, on visitation of the fire director or other city official, shall sound a tap on the alarm gong, and summon the company officer to the floor watch area. 
13.  Members assigned to floor watch shall appear in regulation work uniform and maintain a businesslike appearance. 
14.  Members on floor watch shall promptly answer all telephone calls, properly identifying themselves by unit, rank and name. 
15.  When a member is summoned to the telephone, he or she shall answer by giving his or her rank and name. 
16.  Members on floor watch shall be responsible for the neat and orderly appearance of the floor watch desk and surrounding area. 
17.  During floor watch, a member shall make periodic inspections of the front of quarters to ensure that sidewalks and ramps are clear so that apparatus will not be hindered when leaving quarters. 
18.  All entries in the company journal shall be neat and legible. 
19.  All entries of incidents and important communications shall be in red ink. 
20.  All other entries shall be in blue or black ink. 
21.  At the start of each tour of duty, each company officer shall read the company journal and take note of pertinent entries since his or her last tour of duty. He or she shall then make note of such research (e.g. "contents read and noted Captain Johnson"). 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1300) 
2.60.460 - Care of apparatus. 
1.  Company officers shall be held strictly accountable for the condition of company apparatus and all equipment carried thereon, as well as any other department vehicles assigned or located in their quarters. 
2.  Company officers shall maintain a currently accurate list of all tools and equipment carried on apparatus under their jurisdiction. One copy of the list shall be in the office file cabinet, one copy shall be incorporated in the inventory book and kept in the glove compartment of the apparatus. 
3.  Any reserve apparatus housed in their quarters shall have similar records of tools and equipment maintained. 
4.  An inventory of all equipment carried on the apparatus shall be taken on every first day tour of duty. And instances where equipment on hand differs from the list of equipment assigned to the company, shall be brought to the immediate attention of the company officer. 
5.  The company officer shall report any discrepancies in the company inventory to the tour chief. 
6.  Appropriate entries shall be made in the company journal regarding each inventory taken including any discrepancies noted. 
7.  Engine companies shall be considered out-of-service whenever less than ten (10) lengths of one and three-fourths inch hose is available for service on the apparatus. 
8.  Hose threads on apparatus shall conform to the following specifications: 
Size Thread Type Outside Diameter Thread Per Inch 3/4? National Standard 1.375? 8 1 1/2? National Standard 1.990? 9 1 3/4? National Standard 1.990? 9 2 1/2? New York Corp. 3.000? 8 3? New York Corp. 3.000? 8 4 1/2? National Standard 5.7609? 4 6? Mack 6.230? 4  
9.  Assignment to the position of operator of any apparatus shall be made by the company officer, subject to the approval of the tour chief and the chief of department. 
10.  Operators shall ensure that the apparatus fuel supply is replenished whenever, upon return to quarters, the fuel supply is less than three-fourths capacity. 
11.  All routine maintenance (checking fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, etc.) shall be performed every day. 
12.  Company officers shall ensure that all apparatus and equipment are maintained in a clean, serviceable condition at all times. 
13.  Upon return to quarters from an incident, all equipment shall be checked and restored to acceptable condition, as soon as conditions warrant. 
14.  All apparatus shall be waxed and polished quarterly. Company officers shall ensure this task is rotated equitably among all tours. 
15.  Operators shall be responsible for the condition and proper operation of the apparatus under their control. They shall be ever alert for any defects, required repairs or supplies and, when such becomes necessary, immediately notify company officer. 
16.  Reservoirs of air brake systems shall be purged of moisture at the start of each tour. 
17.  Company officers shall promptly report all vehicular accidents in connection with the operations of the department. 
18.  An initial verbal report to the dispatcher shall be transmitted citing location, unit, injuries, whether or not injuries require medical attention, and whether or not the damage sustained warrants the company being placed out-of-service. 
19.  Written reports of the incident shall be forwarded to the tour chief as soon as practical by both the operator and company officer. 
20.  All vehicular operators shall possess a valid driver's license issued by the state of New Jersey. 
21.  Reserve apparatus, which either replaces assigned apparatus, or/is housed in the same quarters as company apparatus, shall receive the same attention required for assigned apparatus. 
22.  Company officers receiving reserve apparatus as temporary replacement, shall ensure that all systems on the apparatus are checked for serviceability, before accepting the reserve apparatus. 
23.  When the assigned apparatus is returned to the company, similar checks shall be made prior to acceptance. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1400) 
2.60.470 - Hose and ladders. 
1.  Company officers shall ensure that a current inventory of hose assigned to the company is maintained. 
2.  Such inventory shall include hose size, type, manufacturer, year of issue, company number and disposition. 
3.  A day-to-day list of all hose carried on the apparatus shall also be maintained. 
4.  Each coupling on all hoses shall be painted with the prescribed company color. 
5.  All hose shall be stamped on the female coupling (not swivel) with the company number followed by the number assigned to that length of hose (e.g. 8-46). 
6.  Company officers, in accordance with monthly hose-change schedules, shall ensure that hose is removed, cleaned when necessary and replaced on apparatus. Reserve hose shall be placed on apparatus first, to ensure that all hose received as even wear and use as possible. 
7.  Suitable entries shall be made in the company journal; a report (form #9) of such hose change shall be submitted to the tour chief. 
8.  All members of the department shall be responsible for the proper care and handling of department hose. 
9.  Hose shall be packed on apparatus in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and prescribed department procedures and directives. 
10.  When rolled in a coil, the male coupling shall be on the inside of the coil. 
11.  Dirty hose shall not be repacked on the apparatus. Hose, contaminated at incidents or training, shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried before it is replaced on apparatus. 
12.  Unless absolutely necessary, vehicles shall not pass over hose line, unless such lines are protected by hose bridges. 
13.  All hose shall be tested annually and an accurate record of such test shall be maintained by each company. 
14.  When salt water or brackish water has passed through hose, such hose shall be flushed with a hydrant stream as soon as possible after use. 
15.  Ground ladders shall be removed from apparatus once a month, inspected and tested for serviceability. 
16.  Suitable entries shall be made in the company journal. 
17.  Elevating platforms and aerial ladders shall be fully extended, inspected and tested for serviceability once a month. 
18.  Suitable entries shall be made in the company journal. 
19.  Upon return to quarters from an incident or training session where ladders were used, such ladders shall be removed from apparatus, cleaned and replaced on apparatus. 
20.  Ladders shall be placed on apparatus and secured thereon in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and department directives. 
21.  Ground ladders shall be painted on the beam near the butt-end with the prescribed company color. 
22.  All ladders over twenty (20) feet in length shall be painted on the beam at the fly-end with a luminous paint. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1500) 
2.60.480 - Self-contained breathing apparatus. 
1.  Self-contained-breathing-apparatus shall be referred to as SCBA and shall include a regulator with harness, facepiece and tank. 
2.  Company officers shall ensure that all members use SCBA at all times where conditions so dictate. 
3.  Company officers shall ensure that there is at least one SCBA for each member on duty. 
4.  It is the responsibility of each member to check and don his or her SCBA at the beginning of every tour of duty. 
5.  SCBA shall be marked for identification per pertinent department directives. 
6.  All SCBA shall be stored on apparatus in such a manner as to ensure maximum protection of the SCBA against needless damage caused by apparatus movement. 
7.  Members shall exercise the greatest care in the handling and use of the SCBA. 
8.  Any SCBA found to be in a non-functioning condition shall be reported to the company officer immediately. 
9.  The company officer shall examine any such unit, diagnose the problem and report the circumstances to the tour chief as soon as possible. 
10.  Upon return to quarters after every incident or training session where SCBA have been used, the units shall be thoroughly cleaned and tested for serviceability before replacing them on the apparatus. 
11.  After securing the approval of the officer in command at the fireground, replacement tanks may be secured from apparatus carrying spare tanks, as conditions warrant. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III §§ 1600-1610) 
2.60.490 - Mandatory mask rules. 
1.  All company members shall don respiratory protective equipment before entering a building for firefighting operations or other incidents that require respiratory protection. Masks may be removed after the fire has been extinguished, and the building thoroughly ventilated. 
2.  Members raising ladders, operating outside lines, performing exterior ventilation, or other outside activities are not mandated to use masks. However, any member of the department may wear respiratory protective equipment at any alarm to which he or she responds. 
3.  To reduce injuries, members are not required to don respiratory protective equipment when responding to alarm of fire. An exception to this rule is apparatus equipped with ziamatic brackets. 
4.  Chief officers shall don respiratory equipment when it is necessary to enter a fire building for extended periods. It will not be mandatory at the initial stage of a fire while directing operations and maintaining radio communication with dispatch. 
5.  Members responding to working fires or multiple alarms shall have their masks on when they report to the fire ground commander. 
6.  When masks are removed, they are not to be dropped or left in the fire building. They are to be taken from the fire building, and placed on the apparatus with the assistance of the chauffeur. 
7.  SCBA cylinders in need of painting will be painted by the company the cylinder is assigned to. 
8.  All SCBA equipment shall be cleaned, and marked for identification. 
9.  At the time of annual inspection a form #5 will be submitted. The following shall be incorporated in the form #5: company number, serial number of tank and regulator and time of last test. Captains of the first tour are responsible for maintaining inventory and inspection records of all SCBA equipment. 
10.  Company number will be printed on lower front right of face piece, neck of bottle, harness strap (right and left side), bottom front of bottle, and regulator. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III §§ 1611-1617) 
2.60.500 - Hydrants. 
1.  All members shall familiarize themselves with the location of all hydrants in their first alarm area. 
2.  Only regulation fire department hydrant wrenches shall be used in the operation of a hydrant. 
3.  No permission may be granted to any individual, firm or corporation to use any hydrant. 
4.  Persons desiring to secure the use of any hydrant must apply to the water department in city hall for metered service from the hydrant. 
5.  Captains shall maintain a list of all hydrants in their hydrant district. This list shall include address, manufacturer, type, size of main, type of base and location of the shut-off valve. 
6.  In the spring of each year all hydrants shall be inspected for serviceability and drained. Leaking hydrants should be noted. Graphite oil may be applied to threads as deemed necessary. 
7.  In the fall of each year all hydrants shall be inspected for serviceability and drained. Leaking hydrants should be noted. 
8.  Weeds, grass and debris shall be cleared from all hydrants when necessary. 
9.  All hydrants shall be hand-pumped after use, during months in which freezing weather may be anticipated. 
10.  During freezing weather, hydrants shall be inspected as often as necessary to ensure serviceability. 
11.  Hydrants found to be out-of-service shall be reported to the dispatcher stating location and reason for the condition. 
12.  The dispatcher shall notify the water department and all department units whenever a hydrant is out-of-service. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1700) 
2.60.510 - Inspections. 
1.  Company officers shall ensure that all commercial, industrial and pertinent residential occupancies in their inspection district are inspected at least once every year. 
2.  Each tour shall be assigned a section of the company's inspection district by the senior captain of that company. 
3.  Sections shall be rotated each year to ensure that company members become familiar with all occupancies in their inspection district. 
4.  Inspections shall be conducted Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Company officers can thus determine which time period is most appropriate for the efficient inspection of particular occupancies. 
5.  Companies shall conduct inspections on alternate days as set forth by the commanding officer of the division of fire prevention. 
6.  Company personnel shall conduct inspections in complete work uniform including cap. Work jackets may be worn when deemed appropriate. 
7.  Members shall always conduct themselves in a professional manner during inspections. 
8.  Prior to inspecting an occupancy, the company officer shall introduce himself or herself to the owner or property representative; present proper I.D. and explain the purpose of the inspection. 
9.  After completing the inspection, the company officer shall inform the owner or property representative that the inspection is completed and the nature of any violations found. 
10.  All serious violations to pertinent codes shall be reported to the prevention division. 
11.  Less serious violations shall be noted and the occupancy shall be reinspected for correction(s) after a reasonable time has elapsed. Failure to correct these deficiencies shall be cause for further action by the fire Prevention division. 
12.  Complete records of inspections shall be maintained in each company. 
13.  A record of each occupancy shall be maintained on record cards already in use. 
14.  An overall record of occupancies inspected and occupancies still to be inspected, shall be maintained in each company. 
15.  Reports of inspections (department form #12) shall be submitted weekly to the fire prevention division. 
16.  Periodic summary reports shall be submitted to the fire prevention division chief as requested. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1800) 
2.60.520 - Records, reports and communications. 
1.  Company officers shall maintain a flexible record system under the direction of the administration division chief. 
2.  All company records shall be standardized and maintained in a professional manner. 
3.  A unit record book shall be maintained in the company officers' room. It shall contain all information pertinent to personnel, apparatus, equipment and supplies assigned to and used by each company. 
4.  All entries shall be legible, and in ink. 
5.  Specific guidelines as to the contents of the unit record book shall be set forth by the chief of the division of administration. 
6.  Company officers shall make a report of every incident to which they respond. 
7.  Specific guidelines and instructions for completing pertinent reports are set forth in the NFIRS Manual and department directives. 
8.  Company officers shall submit a separate narrative report to the tour chief whenever respective companies have responded to a multiple alarm fire, or when special or unusual circumstances occur, deeming such a report necessary. 
9.  Tour chiefs shall submit a deputy chief's report (department form #DCR-1-74) for every multiple alarm or incident of unusual consequence to which they respond, to the chief of department. 
10.  Members shall submit written notification of any change in their address and/or telephone number to their tour chief and to the personnel division normally within twenty-four (24) hours of the change. 
11.  All requests for material, supplies or special work to be performed shall be forwarded to the tour chief on a department requisition form. Such requests shall be signed by the senior captain of the company. In the event the senior captain will not be on duty in the company for a period of time, any company officer is authorized to sign the requisition. 
12.  A voucher (department form #27), signed by the company officer, shall be submitted to the tour chief whenever materials or supplies are received, to or special work is performed to the apparatus or in quarters. 
13.  A department form #5 shall be used for any narrative report which must be submitted. The report shall be neat and legible. It shall be typed, whenever possible. 
14.  Whenever any hose or other equipment is damaged or becomes inoperable, a form #5 shall be submitted to the tour chief describing the damage(s) and relating the circumstances of the event causing same. 
15.  Whenever applicable, a tag shall be secured to the equipment, briefly describing the damage as accurately as possible (e.g. hose burst ten (10) feet from male coupling). Equipment shall then be forwarded for repair. 
16.  A projected work schedule for the following month shall be forwarded to the tour chief no later than the twenty-third of each month. Schedules shall be checked for accuracy and signed by the company officer for each tour prior to submission. 
17.  The tour chief shall maintain a summary of the roll calls for all companies on a department form #1. 
18.  Projected work schedules for all units outside the fire division shall be forwarded to the administration division chief prior to the twenty-fifth of each month. 
19.  As long as probationary firefighters are assigned to any unit, a monthly probationary report (department form MPR-1-74) shall be submitted to the training division by the company officer having direct supervision of such member(s). 
20.  When applicable, overtime reports shall be submitted every Saturday to the administration division chief. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 1900) 
2.60.530 - Recall. 
1.  All members of the Elizabeth fire department are subject to emergency recall. Failure to respond to recall shall be considered a serious offense. 
2.  Recall procedures shall be instituted whenever a chief officer deems it necessary to protect the lives and property of the citizens of Elizabeth. 
3.  Recall procedures shall be instituted whenever the officer in command of an incident deems it necessary to grant relief to the members operating at the incident. 
4.  Recall procedures shall usually be on a tour-by-tour basis, however, exceptions may be made with just cause. 
5.  The first tour to be recalled shall be the tour which is next scheduled to report for regular duty. 
6.  The second tour to be recalled shall be the tour which is scheduled to be off-duty less than forty-eight (48) hours. 
7.  A general recall shall involve every member of the department. 
8.  When a recall is instituted each company officer, on the tour being recalled, shall be contacted by telephone. The company officer shall then contact all members of his or her unit and inform them of the recall. 
9.  In the event the company officer cannot be contacted, the operator of the apparatus shall be called, and he or she shall then contact other members of his or her unit and inform them of the recall. 
10.  On all multiple alarms, the recall of chief officers shall be instituted following guidelines set forth by the chief of department. 
11.  Members responding on recall shall report to their own quarters and contact the chief officer at the communications center. All members shall be guided by his or her orders. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 2000) 
2.60.540 - Valor awards. 
1.  Tour chiefs shall, when recommending the degree of award for meritorious acts, voluntary duty acts or outstanding unit actions, be guided by the classifications established for such citations. It is highly desirable that there should be uniformity in deciding which degree of citation shall be awarded. 
Class 1 To entitle a member to a rating of this class, the act under consideration should involve a degree of danger characterized as extreme personal risk. Class 2 To entitle a member to a rating in this class, the act under consideration should involve a degree of danger characterized as great personal risk. Class 3 To entitle a member to a rating in this class, the act under consideration should involve a degree of danger characterized as unusual personal risk. Class 4 To entitle a member to a rating of this class, the act under consideration should involve an act worthy of recognition, but which does not meet the criteria described above.  
2.  Unit Citation. To entitle a unit to this citation, the act under consideration should involve an outstanding company operation, dependent upon teamwork and cooperation. 
3.  Valor awards shall be considered by a review board, composed of the commanding officer of the personnel division, and one member of each subordinate rank. 
4.  The board shall meet at least quarterly and make its recommendations to the chief of department. 
5.  The chief of department shall comment on the recommendations and forward same to the fire director for his or her approval. 
6.  An appropriate awards ceremony should be held at least semi-annually. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 2100) 
2.60.550 - Charge procedures. 
1.  Allegations of misconduct in office, conduct unbecoming a public official, or violation of any of the provisions of the rules and regulations of the Elizabeth fire department, or provisions of respective collective bargaining agreements may be brought by any member against another, with just cause. 
2.  Such allegations shall be made known in writing to the administration division chief within ten (10) days of the alleged incident. 
3.  The administration division chief shall appoint an impartial investigating officer to determine the facts of the incident. 
4.  The investigating officer shall, to the best of his or her ability, gather all facts of the matter in question and present his or her findings to the administration division chief. 
5.  The entire case shall then be presented to the chief of department who shall determine whether or not the allegations are justified. 
6.  If the allegations are determined to be unjustified, a written explanation shall be transmitted to the charging party. 
7.  If the allegations are determined to be justified, exact charges and specifications shall be preferred against the defending party. 
8.  A date for hearing the case shall be made by the fire director, who shall be the hearing officer. 
9.  The disposition of all disciplinary matters shall be governed by applicable New Jersey state statutes, the New Jersey State Civil Service Administrative Code and this code. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 2200) 
2.60.560 - Authorized leaves of absence. 
1.  Leaves from duty shall be governed by existing contracts between the city and bargaining agents for members of the department. 
2.  In order not to jeopardize the efficiency of department operations, the number of members absent from duty on leave, may be limited by company and/or tour. 
3.  Holiday leave shall be defined as those days granted to members of the department per contractual agreements. 
4.  Members of the municipal honor guard (firefighters) shall be entitled to a minimum of seven days special leave with pay, to be taken at a time (during current year) other than during the regular vacation period. 
5.  Honor guard leave shall be taken in increments of entire tour(s). 
6.  Special leave may be granted to members who have accumulated time due them by the city. 
7.  Special leave shall be taken in increments of one hour. 
8.  A day tour shall be defined as ten (10) hours. 
9.  A night tour, for the scope of this section, shall be defined as ten (10) hours. 
10.  Any and all leaves (excepting sick leave) may be cancelled by authority of the chief for emergency reasons. 
11.  Members on special leave when directed to report for duty on the designated date, and failing to do so, shall be considered as absent without leave. 
12.  Any member of the department who absents himself or herself for five consecutive days, in a manner counter to departmental rules, shall be deemed to have resigned from the department. 
13.  In a case of a wife, husband, child, parent, brother or sister of a member in serious condition due to accident or illness, a leave of absence may be granted by the chief, or chief in charge. The duration of the special leave shall be determined by the circumstances of each case. 
14.  Deliberate falsification of a reason for special leave, or utilizing special leave, for purpose other than specified in these rules, shall be construed as a departmental violation. 
15.  Special leave and/or holiday requests shall be submitted at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to time of effectiveness. For emergency situations not specifically covered in these rules, the twenty-four (24) hour period may be waived. 
16.  Special leave for accumulated time shall be forwarded on special leave forms to the office of the chief of department for approval. 
17.  Sick leave shall be defined as a leave of absence from duty due to the illness of a member. 
18.  Abuse of sick leave is prohibited. 
19.  Verification of sick leave shall be determined by provisions in collective bargaining agreements. 
20.  In a case where a member is reporting (or being reported) on sick leave, applicable address and telephone number must be furnished. 
21.  If a member on sick leave is directed to report for duty in concurrence with the decision of the department physician, and fails to report on the designated date shall be considered as "absent without leave." Members on limited service shall continue to submit periodic medical reports signed by the attending physician or department physician. 
22.  A member of the department shall not conceal the fact that he or she is a victim of a communicable disease, for the purpose of remaining on duty. A member so afflicted shall not report for duty until such has been authorized by the department physician. 
23.  In case of a contagious disease in the home of a member, the fact shall be reported to the captain as soon as possible. The department physician shall then advise a course to be followed. 
24.  A member, unable to report for duty due to illness, shall so notify his or her company at least one hour prior to the start of his or her next scheduled tour of duty. 
25.  Extenuating circumstances, such as sudden illness or accident proved beyond reason of doubt, may preclude the strict compliance with the preceding rule. 
26.  A member reporting available for duty from sick leave shall so notify his or her company at least one hour prior to the start of his or her scheduled tour of duty. 
27.  Members of the department while on sick leave shall not leave their residences or places of confinement except when: 
a.  They are engaged in exercising their right to vote or attending religious services, except they shall not leave in instances where the fire physician has made a prior determination that doing so would be detrimental to their health; 
b.  They have the permission of the department physician who shall not withhold such permission, except where their leaving the residence or place of confinement would not, in the department physician's professional opinion, further the recovery of such member; 
c.  They show that an emergency necessitated their absence. Such an emergency shall be reported as soon as reasonably possible to the duty chief. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III §§ 2300-2326) 
2.60.570 - Unauthorized absence. 
1.  Subject to Rule #2325 members who absent themselves in an improper manner shall be subject to loss of pay during such absence, and shall be subject to charges being preferred against them. Members are guilty of unauthorized absence: 
a.  Who are not at home or who are not at their place of confinement, while on sick leave, when visited by the department physician or a superior officer; 
b.  Who feign illness or injury; 
c.  Who deceive the department physician in any way as to their true condition; 
d.  Who are injured or become sick as the result of improper conduct or of intemperate, immoral or disorderly conduct; 
e.  Who violate any provisions concerning the reporting of sickness or injury. 
2.  Injury leave shall be defined as a leave of absence from duty due to an injury sustained while on duty. 
3.  Injuries sustained on duty shall be treated by the department physician or an area hospital; such treatment, with duty recommendations, shall be documented by the attending physician. 
4.  Such documentation shall be forwarded to the tour chief by the injured member as soon as possible. 
5.  In order to ensure the health and safety of members, illness occurring while on-duty, shall be treated by the department physician or area hospital; such treatment, with duty recommendations, shall be documented by the attending physician. 
6.  Such documentation shall be forwarded to the tour chief by the affected member as soon as possible. 
7.  Personnel off-duty on injury leave, shall submit a disability report to the personnel officer not less than once every seven days. 
8.  Personnel off-duty on injury leave, shall report to the department physician prior to returning to full duty. 
9.  Any member sustaining an injury, whether on-duty or off-duty shall document the injury in writing to his or her company officer and the personnel officer. 
10.  Members working additional hours beyond their normal work hours, may accumulate time to be paid in like fashion at a later date. This subsection does not intend to supercede article(s) regarding overtime in collective bargaining agreements. 
11.  Time so earned shall be referred to as accumulated time. 
12.  A form #5 shall be submitted by each member receiving bereavement leave listing the name and relationship of the relative for whom the leave was granted; the location and date of the funeral service. A verification shall accompany the form #5. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III §§ 2327-2338) 
2.60.580 - Company equipment identity colors. 
    Listed below are the colors designated to the various companies to identify their equipment. 
    Engine Company #1 Gray 
    Engine Company #2 White 
    Engine Company #3 Gold 
    Engine Company #5 Green 
    Engine Company #6 Red 
    Engine Company #7 Burnt orange 
    Engine Company #8 Blue (skyline) 
    Rescue Squad - Light blue and dark blue 
    Note: Truck company members will paint equipment as follows: 
    First: Color entire area to be painted, three inches from end of equipment to ten (10) inches from same end of equipment, with base color. 
    Second: Assigned stripe color one and one-half inch wide strips. 
Base Color Stripe Color Truck company #1 - White 1 - Red Truck company #2 - Yellow 2 - Orange Truck company #3 - Red 3 - Yellow  
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 2400) 
2.60.590 - Housework. 
A.  Routine Housework. 
1.  Routine housework shall consist of the sweeping of all areas in quarters, dusting of apparatus and furnishings, thorough cleaning of stove, sink kitchen area, disposing of any and all garbage in proper containers. The proper disposing of old newspapers (tying in bundle or bagging). If newspapers are being salvaged, an accumulation of no more than two weeks shall be kept in quarters, in neat orderly bundles, in an out of sight storage area. Area outside of fire station to be kept clean. 
2.  In case of snowfall and accumulation on public walk or apron, snow shall be removed prior to any accumulation that may become an unsafe condition for public passage. If the snowfall is such that an accumulation is anticipated prior to relief time the tour on duty shall remove the snow before dismissal. In case of ice storm the duty tour shall sand public walkway and aprons. Reserve apparatus stored in quarters to be maintained by personnel assigned to those quarters. 
B.  Monday. Routine housework, hosewetting and changing on allocated day, generator and light equipment to be checked. On Mondays other than "hose" days, tops of locker and other standing furnishings shall be dusted and cleaned. 
C.  Tuesday. All brass and chromium work on apparatus and quarters shall be polished, plus routine housework. 
D.  Wednesday. Windows to be cleaned inside and outside (company officer shall determine course of action in inclement weather, regarding outside cleaning of windows). Routine housework, beds to be aired and cleaned, bedding is not to be exposed to public viewing. Airing of bedding to be done with bedding taken apart and windows of dormitory opened for ventilation of dormitory. Bedding to be remade by 3:00 p.m. 
E.  Thursday. Extra attention to dormitory section, locker room, shower and toilet, and basement. Routine housework. Truck company bed ladders to be removed from truck, examined and cleaned. Rugs and runners swept out of quarters. 
F.  Friday. Routine housework, apparatus wall tiles to be washed, apparatus floors to be mopped with soapy water. 
G.  Saturday. Same as Tuesday. 
H.  Sunday and Holidays. 
1.  No work, other than necessary. When any holiday occurs on a weekday, the housework detail for that day, shall be performed on the day preceding the holiday. When the holiday occurs on a Monday the allocated housework detail shall be performed on the following day. 
2.  Breathing apparatus shall be inspected on the first day of each tour, an entry shall be made in the book provided for same, noting date, condition of masks and signed by person making the inspection, and countersigned by the captain or acting captain. 
3.  Apparatus inventory of all equipment shall be made on the first day of each tour. Results of the inventory shall be logged in the book provided for same and signed by the captain or acting captain. 
(Prior code Appx. Part III Ch. 2500) 
Chapter 2.64 - RECREATION DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.64.010 - Departmental administration. 
    There shall be a department of recreation, the head of which shall be the director of recreation. Prior to his or her appointment, the director shall have had at least five years' experience in a responsible administrative capacity relating to the planning and direction of public recreational programs. 
(Prior code § 4-121) 
2.64.020 - Departmental functions. 
    The department of recreation shall: 
A.  Administer and operate playgrounds, facilities for indoor and outdoor sports, and athletic and recreational programs and activities for children and adults. 
B.  Administer and operate community centers, social centers and recreational functions and activities relating thereto. 
C.  Use and operate public school property to the extent that it may be adaptable and available for recreational programs and purposes of the department. 
D.  Maintain and repair all recreational structures, playgrounds and facilities. 
(Prior code § 4-122) 
2.64.030 - Recreational planning. 
    The department of recreation shall plan and develop public recreation areas and facilities; it shall promote and direct a year-round program of leisure activities for children, youth and adults of the city; and shall stimulate the constructive use of leisure time of residents of the city, work toward the reduction of delinquency and the optimum coordination and development of public and private recreational facilities within the city. 
(Prior code § 4-123) 
2.64.040 - Charges and fees authorized. 
A.  The department may sponsor, arrange and provide for the giving of indoor and outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and contests, and may use and employ public property for such purposes. The department may charge and collect, for the use of the city, a reasonable admission fee for each person entering or using facilities, exhibitions, concerts, games or contests provided under this chapter, except that the department may not use or employ public playgrounds or recreation places with an admission charge or fee for more than eight hours in any week nor on more than two days in any week, and when any such playground or recreation place is used for such purpose, no admission fee shall be charged or collected from children under twelve (12) years of age. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  All funds collected from fees shall be transmitted to the city treasurer within forty-eight (48) hours of collection, to be put into the general revenue account. The department of recreation shall maintain appropriate books and records with regard thereto. 
E.  Use of boat launching ramp at the waterfront marina, including parking for the transporting of vehicles on the site, providing sufficient parking space is available, the facilities to be used on a first come/first served basis, regardless of residency: 
1.  Resident: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
2.  Nonresident: Twenty dollars ($20.00). 
3.  The boat launching fee in this subsection is a daily charge based on the one time placing of a boat in the water and its retrieval within one calendar day. 
4.  The owner of each boat in the above-described category must complete an application blank in duplicate and pay the prescribed fee. The owner's copy of the application must be kept in the boat and produced upon request. 
    Season rates for users of the boat launching ramp are as follows: 
Resident $100.00 per season Nonresident $200.00 per season  
F.  1.  Use of the docking slips at the waterfront marina shall be as follows: 
Summer Season (April 1st through October 31st) Resident $45.00 per foot/slip size 
$45.00 each additional foot for entire summer season Nonresident $60.00 per foot/slip size 
$60.00 each additional foot for entire summer season Winter Season (November 1st through March 31st) Resident $485.00 up to 28 feet 
$17.25 per foot over slip size for entire winter season Nonresident $685.00 up to 28 feet 
$25.00 per foot over slip size for entire winter season  
    The docking slip rates are based upon the foot size of the slip and not the boat size. If the boat exceeds the slip size, there would be an additional charge based on the same rate for each additional foot. The period for summer rental of the docking slips shall be from April 1st through October 31st of each year with the renewal payment required to be made by the first Monday in the month of February. The period for winter rental of the docking slips shall be from November 1st through March 31st of each year with the renewal payment required to be made by the first Monday of October. 
2.  Utility hook-up surcharges for the summer season per month are as follows: 
Electric $20.00 Air conditioning 20.00 Refrigeration 20.00 Stove 20.00 Water heater 20.00  
3.  The docking slip rates for the winter season will include electric. Utility charges will apply to large boats with occupants living on them while in the marina. 
4.  The rental of the docking slips will be made on a lottery basis. Advertising for same will be made in a local newspaper. The city through the public works department will conduct a lottery for the renting of its boat slips and wet-dry racks whenever there is a waiting list. One-third of both types of rentals will be for five years, one-third for six years and one-third for seven years. When the period expires, there will be another lottery for that period. If a rental slip becomes vacant before that period expires, it will be filled from an existing waiting list. No preference will be given to residents over nonresidents in the lottery selection. 
5.  All charges for the first rental period will be on a pro-rata basis, since the waterfront marina will not be completed until after the first rental period commences. 
6.  Fees for extension of summer season: 
Resident $25.00 per week in advance Nonresident $35.00 per week in advance  
7.  The department of public works of the city will administer the marina. 
G.  Winter rates for the storage of boats on marina land: 
Resident $400.00 for boats up to 28 feet 

$20.00 for each additional foot for boats over 28 feet Nonresident $650.00 for boats up to 28 feet 

$25.00 for each additional foot for boats over 28 feet  
H.  Use of the docking slips by transient boat owners: 
Transient mooring fees $25.00 per day or night for boats up to 28 feet 
$45.00 per day or night for boats over 28 feet  
I.  Charges for any emergency work performed by marina personnel on boats in the marina: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour. 
J.  Sale of ice: Three dollars ($3.00) per eight-pound bag. 
K.  Hull or bottom steam cleaning: Four dollars ($4.00) per foot. 
L.  Use of municipal waterfront. See Chapter 12.64 of this Code. 
M.  All fees contained in this section may be changed by the director of public works and/or his or her designee except the fees contained in subsections F.1. and G. 
N.  Fees for the rental of boat rack slips shall be as follows: 
Summer Season (April 1st through October 31st) Resident $36.00 per foot/slip size 
$36.00 each additional foot for entire summer season Nonresident $51.00 per foot/slip size 
$51.00 each additional foot for entire summer season Winter Season (November 1st through March 31st) Resident $485.00 up to 28 feet 
$17.25 per foot over slip size for entire winter season Nonresident $685.00 up to 28 feet 
$25.00 per foot over slip size for entire winter season  
O.  Fees for the use of certain city facilities shall be as follows: 
Residents Non- 
Residents Athletic Fields (Youth) N/C $12.00 Elizabeth Schools N/C Football/Baseball/Softball Fields (3 Hour Time Slot) $12.00 $24.00 Soccer Fields (2 Hour Time Slot) $12.00 $24.00 Leagues No Maximum Amount Lighted Fields  Football/Baseball/Softball (3 Hour Time Slot) $95.00 $190.00  Soccer (2 Hour Time Slot) $65.00 $130.00 Waterfront Synthetic Turf Fields  Football (3 Hour Time Slot) $25.00 $50.00  Soccer (2 Hour Time Slot) $25.00 $50.00 Lighted Waterfront Synthetic Turf Fields  Football (3 Hour Time Slot) $150.00 $300.00 Soccer (2 Hour Time Slot) $125.00 $250.00  
    No refunds. 
    In the event of unplayable field conditions, a credit will be issued for that day. 
P.  City department of recreation use of gymnasiums and community rooms at recreation centers and community centers (does not include senior citizen centers). 
1.  A fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour shall be charged for the use of the community rooms Monday through Friday. The hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Saturday hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m. 
2.  A fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, minimum of four (4) hours, shall be charged for the use of the community rooms on Sunday and holidays. The hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Saturday hours shall be limited to 4:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. 
3.  A fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per hour, minimum of two (2) hours, shall be charged for the use of the gymnasiums Monday through Friday. The hours shall be limited to 3:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. Saturday hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m. 
4.  A fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) an hour, minimum of four (4) hours, shall be charged for the use of the gymnasiums on Sunday and holidays. The hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Saturday hours shall be limited to 4:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. 
5.  Permits will be issued only to non-profits, social organizations and religious organizations. Permits will not be issued for private parties. 
6.  There will be no charge for non-profit youth organizations Monday through Friday from 3:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. and Saturday from 10:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m. This does not include AAU teams and leagues. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 3, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3932 § 1, 2007; prior code § 4-124) 
2.64.050 - Recreation department-Rules and regulations. 
A.  The department shall control and care for all lands, playgrounds and recreation places in a safe and wholesome condition for use, and may adopt suitable rules, regulations and bylaws for the conduct of all persons while on or using such property. Any person who shall violate any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be adjudged to be a disorderly person. 
B.  The custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed by the director shall, while on duty and for the purpose of preserving order and the observance of the rules, regulations and bylaws of the department, have the power and authority of special police officers of the city. 
C.  Any organization, group or team which applies for and is granted permission to conduct recreational activities or functions at city recreation centers shall be required to provide a certificate of insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), combined single limit, covering bodily damage, property damage, and workers compensation, and naming the city as an additional insured with a thirty (30) day notice of cancellation. 
(Prior code § 4-125) 
Chapter 2.68 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sections: 

2.68.010 - Establishment. 
    A municipal court for the city is established as of January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 16-1) 
2.68.020 - Name. 
    The name of the municipal court shall be the "Municipal Court of the City of Elizabeth." 
(Prior code § 16-2) 
2.68.030 - Seal designated. 
    The municipal court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the name of the court. 
(Prior code § 16-3) 
2.68.040 - Municipal judge-Appointment and term. 
    There shall be two municipal judges of the municipal court, one of whom shall be designated as presiding municipal judge, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of their appointment and until their successors are appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the municipal judge who shall be in office upon this chapter becoming effective shall be the presiding municipal judge and shall continue to serve in such capacity for the balance of the term to which he or she was originally appointed. 
(Prior code § 16-4) 
2.68.050 - Municipal judge-Compensation. 
    The municipal judges shall receive an annual salary to be paid in the same manner as other municipal officials are paid and shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 16-5) 
2.68.060 - Duties, powers and jurisdiction conferred. 
    The municipal court and the municipal judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented, or by any other law. 
(Prior code § 16-6) 
2.68.070 - Municipal court clerk-Appointment, term and compensation. 
    There shall be a clerk of the municipal court who shall be appointed by applicable law and who shall serve for the term therein stated from the date of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the court clerk who shall have been transferred to the municipal court pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented, shall be the clerk of the municipal court and shall continue to be such clerk for a term equal to the balance of the term for which he or she was originally appointed. The clerk of the municipal court shall receive an annual salary of not less than four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00), to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever. The clerk shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him or her by law, the rules applicable to municipal courts, and by the municipal judge. 
(Prior code § 16-7) 
2.68.080 - Sessions. 
    The municipal court shall be held at Morrell Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey, or at such other locations as may be provided for by the city and as approved by the Administrative Director of the Courts for the State of New Jersey. The municipal court shall sit from 9:30 a.m. until the calendar is completed and at such other times as the business of the court may require, subject to the rules applicable to municipal courts. 
(Prior code § 16-8) 
2.68.090 - Municipal court administrator. 
    There shall be a municipal court administrator who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice of the presiding municipal judge, and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of the appointment, and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The municipal court administrator shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed by law, the rules applicable to municipal courts, and by the presiding municipal judge. The municipal court administrator shall have all of the qualifications required by law and applicable municipal court rules and regulations. The municipal court administrator may only be terminated for just cause, upon written charges. 
(Prior code § 16-9) 
2.68.100 - Application fee for public defender. 
    Any person applying for representation in the municipal court by the municipal public defender shall pay an application fee of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). The municipal court judge shall set the required fee and may waive the required application fee, in whole or in part, if the court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. 
(Ord. 3751 § 1, 2005: prior code § 16-10) 
Chapter 2.72 - STATUTORY AGENCIES 
Sections: 

2.72.010 - Administrative powers of mayor. 
    The administrative functions, powers and duties of statutory and other agencies of the city government not allocated and assigned by this code shall be subject to the supervision of the mayor, except as otherwise specifically required by law, and for this purpose, such statutory and other agencies are allocated and assigned to the office of the mayor. 
(Prior code § 4-129) 
2.72.020 - Public library. 
    The trustees of the Free Public Library, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law (N.J.R.S. 40:54-1 et seq.), is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-130) 
2.72.030 - Housing authority. 
    The housing authority, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law, is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-131) 
2.72.040 - Parking authority. 
    The parking authority of the city, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1), is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-132) 
2.72.050 - Redevelopment agency. 
    The redevelopment agency, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law, is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-133) 
2.72.060 - Planning board. 
    The planning board, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.4 et seq.), is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-134) 
2.72.070 - Zoning board of adjustment. 
    The zoning board of adjustment, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55.36 et seq.), is continued, and the members shall be appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of the council. 
(Prior code § 4-135) 
2.72.080 - Municipal court. 
    The municipal court, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law, is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-136) 
2.72.090 - Industrial commission. 
    The industrial commission, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55B-1 et seq.), is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-137) 
2.72.100 - Elizabeth human relations commission. 
    The Elizabeth human relations commission, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law, is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-138) 
2.72.110 - Civil defense council. 
    The civil defense council, as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to law, is continued. 
(Prior code § 4-139) 
Chapter 2.76 - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.76.010 - Division of human rights-Members. 
    The division of human rights shall consist of the human rights commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor, along with its chairperson and co-chairperson. 
(Prior code § 4-140(A)) 
2.76.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    "Affirmative action officer" means the affirmative action officer for the city. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Commission" means the human rights commission for the city. 
    "Executive director" means the executive director of the human rights commission. 
    "Human rights" means any action or activity which has an effect upon any person based on race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, sex or physical or mental disability. 
    "Person" means and includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, labor organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
(Prior code § 4-140(B)) 
2.76.030 - Legislative intent. 
    It is determined that in order to foster, through community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation among the groups and elements of the neighborhoods of the city, a commission be formed and be given certain power and authority, consistent with law and as may be elsewhere provided herein, and more particularly to bring about the objectives authorized by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:5-10, as same may be amended and supplemented. The power and authority of the commission shall, however, be limited in its scope to matters affecting human rights only, and the commission shall not infringe upon or in any manner usurp the power and authority granted by law to the mayor or the city council of the city in matters including but not limited to the hiring and removing of personnel or the general supervision over all departments, offices, agencies, officials or employees of the city. Further, the authority of the commission shall not be deemed to replace or in any manner infringe upon the authority of the Commission on Civil Rights in the Division on Civil Rights within the New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety, as provided for in the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq., as same may be amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 4-140(C)) 
2.76.040 - Commission-Members. 
    There shall be a commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor to aid in effectuating the purposes of law and this chapter. The commissioners shall be representative citizens serving without compensation and who may be removed from office at will by the mayor. 
(Prior code § 4-140(D)) 
2.76.050 - Commission staff. 
    Subject to the availability of sufficient funds as same may be appropriated in the annual municipal budget and civil service law and regulation, the commission shall have a staff consisting of: 
A.  An executive director whose salary shall be established in the same manner as all other municipal employees' salaries are determined. 
B.  An affirmative action officer whose salary shall be established in the same manner as all other municipal employees' salaries are determined. 
C.  A secretary or other clerical assistant whose salary shall be established in the same manner as all other municipal employees' salaries are determined and who may be furnished to the commission by the city from available secretarial or clerical positions already established and filled. 
D.  The appointing authority with respect to the executive director and the affirmative action officer shall be the commission. 
(Prior code § 4-140(E)) 
2.76.060 - Powers. 
    The commission, in its attempt to foster, through community effort, good will, cooperation and conciliation among all groups and elements of the city, shall have the following powers: 
A.  Coordinate activities with respect to the celebrating of holidays, block parties and the like, among the various and diverse ethnic groups of the city. 
B.  Mediate and conciliate and seek reconciliation of problems brought to its attention by persons within the government of this city and from the private sector with respect to matters involving human rights. 
C  Coordinate a program for the observance of an annual Human Rights Day. 
D.  The commission shall coordinate the affirmative action program of the city and same shall be reflected in the following functions: 
1.  The formulation and implementation of policies and procedures in general, consistent with applicable law, and programs of formal and informal education that will aid in all types of discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, sex and physical or mental disability. 
2.  The supervision of the city's compliance with state and federal regulations, pertaining to affirmative action, required to ensure the city's eligibility for all relevant aid and grants. 
3.  The monitoring and review of minority representation in all phases of city government, as well as any unique problems endemic to any minority or agency or position; and working with these agencies and minorities to ameliorate the situation consistent with applicable law. 
E.  Conduct administrative hearings in its capacity as a review board for all complaints lodged by any person against any city agency or employee. The commission may hold hearings on these complaints and would request the mayor to require the presence of any city official or employee thereat. The commission may seek reconciliation, accommodation or some resolution by the complainant and agency or official in question. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the commissioners' findings and recommendations would be made to the mayor, the city council and to the department or agency involved. 
F.  The commission may conduct individual inquiries into governmental actions on matters relating to human rights only. In this connection it may analyze and report on any proposed actions of various city agencies for their impact on human rights. In this connection all proposed ordinances of the city council dealing with human rights are to be presented to the commission prior to introduction and passage on first reading so as to enable the commission to present its opinion and views at the subsequent public hearing thereon. With respect to resolutions of the city council which affect human rights, the commission shall be given a two-week notice thereof. 
G.  The commission is authorized to act as the administrative agency for the city in implementing and enforcing the provisions of Chapter 226 of the Laws of 1981 of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, and known and cited as the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act." 
1.  For purposes of receiving and processing applications for registration of conversion to condominium or cooperative units, the affirmative action officer for the city, within the office of the commission, shall be responsible therefor, in accordance with the provisions of the Act aforementioned. 
2.  All appeals taken in accordance with the Act as a result of application processing shall be heard and decided by the commission. 
3.  Fees. 
a.  Applications to the affirmative action officer on a form prescribed by the Division of Housing of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs pursuant to P.L. 1981. c.226, as may be amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.): fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit. 
b.  For hearings on appeal from a decision of the affirmative action officer to the commission, pursuant to P.L. 1981, c.226, as may be amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.): one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Prior code § 4-140(F)) 
2.76.070 - Jurisdictional disputes. 
    In the event that a dispute arises with respect to the jurisdiction of the commission in any matter arising under this chapter, the same shall be submitted to the city attorney for a legal opinion with respect to the powers and duties of the commission. 
(Prior code § 4-140(G)) 
Chapter 2.80 - TAXICAB COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.80.010 - Establishment. 
    There is established in the office of the city clerk a commission which shall be known as the "taxicab commission of the city of Elizabeth" hereinafter referred to as "commission". 
(Prior code § 4-50(A)) 
2.80.020 - Purpose. 
    A commission is established for the purpose of acting in an advisory capacity and making recommendations to the city council concerning legislation for the regulation of the taxicab industry as it pertains to both airport taxis and city taxis in Chapter 5.100 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4-50(B)) 
2.80.030 - Membership. 
    The commission shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the mayor or designee; one of whom shall be a member of the city council; one of whom shall be taxicab driver licensed by the city; one of whom shall be taxicab owner licensed by the city; and three of whom shall be members of the public and residents of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-50(C)) 
2.80.040 - Appointment-Terms. 
    With the exception of the mayor or his or her designee, all members of the commission shall be appointed by city council. Initial appointments shall be for the following terms: mayor or his or her designee and member of city council, one-year terms; one licensed driver and one licensed owner, two-year terms; the three members of the public, three-year terms. Thereafter all appointments shall be for a three-year term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified. In case of vacancy caused other than by expiration of a term, a successor shall serve for the unexpired term only. In the event that any member during his or her term ceases to possess the qualifications which enabled his or her appointment, he or she will be no longer able to serve as a commissioner. The determination as to whether the office of any member appointed to the commission shall be deemed vacant shall be made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1. 
(Prior code § 4-50(D)) 
2.80.050 - Chairperson-Rules and bylaws-Meetings. 
    Each year the commission shall select one of its members to be the chairperson and shall adopt such rules and procedure and such bylaws as are necessary to fulfill its purpose as set forth in Section 2.80.020. The commission shall hold meetings at least once every two months and more frequently as it shall from time to time deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 4-50(E)) 
2.80.060 - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To perform studies and to make recommendations to the city council of the city concerning legislation regulating the taxicab industry in the city and at Newark International Airport Terminal A or whatever passenger terminal is geographically located in the city. 
B.  To adopt by-laws and rules of procedure to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. 
C.  To make recommendations to the city council as to the need for additional certificates of public convenience and necessity and permits and criteria as to who shall be eligible to receive any certificates of public convenience and necessity and permits and the method for distribution of same. 
(Prior code § 4-50(F)) 
Chapter 2.84 - PARKING AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

2.84.010 - Establishment. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Parking Authority Law of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1 et seq., there is created a public body corporate and politic under the name and style of "parking authority of the city of Elizabeth." 
(Prior code § 18-1) 
2.84.020 - Powers and duties. 
    The parking authority of the city created by this chapter is a parking authority as contemplated and provided for by the Parking Authority Law and shall have and exercise the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by the Parking Authority Law and any other statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto. 
(Prior code § 18-2) 
2.84.030 - Composition-Appointment of members. 
    The parking authority of the city shall consist of seven members, to be known as "commissioners," and the commissioners shall be appointed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of the Parking Authority Law of the state of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:11-A-1 et seq. 
(Prior code § 18-3) 
2.84.040 - Certification and filing. 
    Upon the adoption of this chapter and the creation of the parking authority of the city, the city clerk shall certify a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter creating the parking authority and also certify a copy of the resolution appointing the commissioners thereof, when appointed, which certifications shall be filed with the county clerk of Union County, to be recorded in the records of certificates of incorporation, and thereafter the county clerk of Union County shall cause duplicate certified copies of the certifications to be filed forthwith with the Secretary of State of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 18-4) 
Article II - Agreement 

2.84.050 - Authorization to execute agreement. 
    The proper city officials of the city are authorized to execute a contract between the city and the parking authority of the city, the terms and conditions of which are hereinafter incorporated within this article. 
(Prior code § 18-5) 
2.84.060 - Contents of agreement. 
    The contract authorized to be executed by the provisions of Section 2.84.050 is as follows: 
AGREEMENT 
This Agreement made and entered into by and between the City of Elizabeth, a municipal corporation of New Jersey, (hereinafter called "City"), party of the first part, and the parking Authority of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey, (hereinafter called "Authority"), a public body corporate and politic and a political subdivision of the State, party of the second part. 
WITNESSETH: 
That WHEREAS, the "City" is authorized by the provisions of N.J.S. 40A:11-7.1 et seq. to aid and cooperate with the party of the second part in the planning, undertaking, construction or operation of parking projects within the area in which the "Authority" is authorized to act; and 
WHEREAS, the "City" has heretofore turned over the operation and maintenance of all on-street and off-street parking facilities and equipment heretofore owned by the "City" to the "Authority" subject to the right of the "City" to exercise proper police power over the streets and highways of the City; and 
WHEREAS, by an Agreement between the "governing body," (City) the then existing Board of Public Works of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey, and the "Authority" dated April 6, 1955, it was agreed that the "Authority" would not authorize the issuance of any additional Parking Revenue Bonds or Refunding Parking Revenue Bonds without the consent of the governing body; and 
WHEREAS, the "Authority" contemplates erecting a Parking Garage on Lot No. 6 owned by it and to borrow one million four hundred thousand dollars ($1,400,000.) by issuing bonds for that amount payable over a period of twenty (20) years; and 
WHEREAS, it is contemplated by the parties hereto that the provisions of this Agreement shall constitute part of the security for the Parking Revenue Bonds to be issued from time to time by the "Authority": 
NOW, THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the premises and of the mutual promises hereinafter contained, and other good and valuable considerations, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this Agreement: 
(a) "Off-Street Parking Project" shall mean the areas or places constructed or acquired or to be constructed or acquired and owned and operated, or to be owned and operated, by the "Authority," or operated by the "Authority," for the parking or storing of motor and other vehicles, and shall include all real and personal property, driveways, roads, approaches, structures, garages, meters, mechanical equipment, and all appurtenances and facilities either on, above or under the ground, which are used or usable in connection with such parking or storing of such vehicles. 
(b) "Metered On-Street Parking Facilities" shall mean the places presently on or in the streets in said City and the parking meters or other parking equipment, machinery or devices installed, located and existing at or near curbs of the street and adjacent to such places, for collecting parking charges, and all such facilities hereafter located, constructed, acquired by the "City" or the "Authority" and operated by the "Authority" for which charges for parking are fixed, established or collected. 
(c) "Gross Revenues" shall mean all moneys derived by the "Authority" from the use and operation of said metered on-street parking facilities. 
(d) "Net Revenues" shall mean the amount of gross revenues less the cost of operation and maintenance of metered on-street parking facilities. 
(e) "Parking Revenue Bonds" shall mean the bonds issued initially by the "Authority" and any additional bonds issued by the "Authority" for the purpose of construction or acquisition of Off-Street Parking Facilities. 
(f) "Refunding Parking Revenue Bonds" shall mean any Bonds issued to refund any Parking Revenue Bonds or Additional Parking Revenue Bonds. 
(g) "Additional Parking Revenue Bonds" shall mean any Parking Revenue Bonds issued by the "Authority" other than the bonds described in paragraphs (e) and (f) hereof. 
SECTION 2. On and after the effective date of this agreement all metered on-street and off-street parking facilities of the "City" then or thereafter installed in the City of Elizabeth shall continue to be operated and maintained by or on behalf of the "Authority," and all moneys and receipts derived from the operation of the facilities shall be revenues of the "Authority" as herein provided. 
The "City" agrees that upon the issuance of any Parking Revenue Bonds and thereafter while any Parking Revenue Bonds, Additional Revenue Bonds, Refunding Revenue Bonds, of the "Authority" shall remain outstanding and unpaid, the "Authority" shall collect and use for any corporate purpose of the "Authority" the gross revenues derived from the metered on-street and off-street parking facilities; provided, however, that the "City" hereby preserves the right to deposit moneys with the "Authority" in the amount sufficient, together with the moneys of the "Authority" available for that purpose, to redeem all outstanding Parking Revenue Bonds, Additional Parking Revenue Bonds or Refunding Revenue Bonds of the "Authority" at any time on or after five years from the date of issue of such bonds. The "Authority" shall contain a reservation permitting the redemption thereof in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, and that it will call and redeem said bonds on the next date upon which the bonds can be redeemed when moneys are made available to it for that purpose by the "City," as herein provided. Upon the redemption of all such bonds of the "Authority", or upon irrevocable provision having been made for such redemption, this Agreement shall terminate and the operation of said metered off-street and on-street parking facilities, and the revenues therefrom, and all moneys of the "Authority" derived therefrom shall, at the option of the "City," revert to the "City." 
SECTION 3. The "Authority" agrees that it will not authorize the issuance of any Additional Parking Revenue Bonds or Refunding Parking Revenue Bonds, without the consent of the "City," except that the "Authority" reserves the right to issue Refunding Bonds to provide funds to pay maturing bonds for the payment of which the revenues of the "Authority" are insufficient. 
SECTION 4. The "Authority" agrees to pay operating and maintenance expenses of on-street parking meters and off-street parking meters, including the cost of collecting the moneys derived from the use of such meters. The "City" agrees to take all steps necessary to enforce the laws and ordinances of the "City" in respect to the use of the meters, and to pay the expense of enforcing same. All fines and forfeitures collected as a result of such enforcement shall be retained by the "City." 
SECTION 5. The "City" agrees to cooperate with the "Authority" in the "Authority's" installation of such meters as it may from time to time deem necessary or desirable in the off-street and on-street facilities; provided, however, that the "City" reserves full police power and control over the public streets and ways of the City, and the right to remove any of such on-street meters in the event such meters are not, in the "City's" judgment, necessary or convenient in the "City's" exercise of its jurisdiction over traffic, taxicabs, public transportation, city streets, parks, markets, etc. This reservation of rights shall be liberally construed in favor of the "City" so that it may properly exercise its lawful powers and authority as such "City" in the public interest. 
SECTION 6. The "City" agrees to make and maintain such traffic regulations as may be necessary to provide adequate access to, and egress from, the off-street parking project. 
SECTION 7. The "City" further agrees to provide and maintain such sidewalks as may be necessary to accommodate the public on the streets facing or bordering on off-street parking projects. 
SECTION 8. The "City" further agrees to pave the streets facing or bordering on the off-street parking project, where necessary, and to maintain such streets in safe condition. 
SECTION 9. It is the intention of the parties hereto that during the period this agreement is in effect, the "City" will not undertake to provide or assist in providing additional off-street parking projects which may be deemed competitive with any off-street parking project operated by the "Authority," and that the operation and all moneys derived from the operation of any off-street parking facilities established by the "City" will be turned over to the "Authority." 
SECTION 10. The parties hereto agree that the revenues of any parking meters now or hereafter installed in any off-street parking project or for on-street parking purposes may be pledged by the "Authority" to the payment of its Parking Revenue Bonds, Additional Parking Revenue Bonds or Refunding Revenue Bonds. 
SECTION 11. The parties hereto further agree that all local laws, resolutions, ordinances, rules and regulations of the "City" regulating traffic, parking, parking meters and the use of the public ways of the "City" shall be applicable to all facilities operated by the "Authority." 
SECTION 12. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto, and, except as to such successors and assigns, is not intended to, and shall not confer upon any other person, firm or corporation, public or private, other than the holders from time to time of the Parking Revenue Bonds, Additional Parking Revenue Bonds or Refunding Parking Revenue Bonds, issued by the "Authority," any rights hereunder. 
SECTION 13. This agreement shall take effect on the date of execution hereof, and shall continue in effect and be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their successors and assigns until the principal of, and interest on, the Parking Revenue Bonds, Additional Bonds or Refunding Bonds, issued by the "Authority," shall have been paid in full. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the parties hereto has caused this Agreement to be executed by its duly authorized officer. 
ATTEST:       CITY OF ELIZABETH 
_____
John J. Dwyer       Thomas G. Dunn 
City Clerk       Mayor 
ATTEST:       PARKING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF ELIZABETH, NEW JERSEY 
_____
Secretary       Chairman 
(Prior code § 18-6) 
Chapter 2.88 - ZONE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
Sections: 

2.88.010 - Established. 
A.  The city council authorizes the creation of a nonprofit corporation pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. to act as the zone development corporation for the city. The corporation shall be known as the "Elizabeth zone development corporation." 
(Prior code § 4-141(A)) 
2.88.020 - Members. 
A.  The zone development corporation shall consist of nine members, which shall be made up of the following: 
1.  One representative of the Elizabeth development company; 
2.  Four members to be appointed by the city council, who shall include the following: 
a.  One member of the city council; 
b.  Two members from the city's business community; 
c.  One member from a city community organization; 
3.  Four members to be appointed by the mayor, who shall include the following: 
a.  Two city officials; 
b.  One member from the city's business community; 
c.  One member from a city community organization. 
B.  All members of the board of directors of the zone development corporation shall serve on a nonsalaried basis. All must be residents of the city or have a bona fide business address in the city. 
(Prior code § 4-141(B)) 
2.88.030 - Zone development plan. 
    The zone development corporation, with the assistance of the department of community development and the Elizabeth development company, shall prepare a zone development plan for the purpose of having Elizabeth designated as an urban enterprise zone with such plan subject to the review and approval by the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-141(C)) 
2.88.040 - Compliance with Enterprise Zone Act. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the board of directors of the zone development corporation to ensure that all provisions of the Enterprise Zone Act (P.L. 1983. C.303) are adhered to during the life of its existence. 
(Prior code § 4-141(D)) 
Chapter 2.92 - CITY CONTRACTS 
Sections: 

2.92.010 - Affidavits required for contracts over $50,000.00. 
    The city and/or its officers will not enter into any contracts in which the consideration for contracting exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), unless and until the party that desires to contract with the city submits an affidavit to the city that contains the following statements and information: 
A.  If the contract is to be with an individual, the name, address, business background, a contact telephone number and e-mail address, if any, of the individual who is to be the principal party to the contract. If the contract is to be with a firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other similar business organization, the affidavit must be submitted by the principal officer of the firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other similar business organization, setting forth the office and capacity of the deponent and further setting forth the names, addresses and business backgrounds of all principals, principal stockholders, officers and directors of the firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other business organization. 
B.  In the case of a firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other similar business organization, the name, address, contact telephone number and e-mail address, if any, for the firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other similar business organization. 
C.  A statement by the deponent of any police record and records of infractions or violations of any federal or state stock regulation against any individual, officer, director, principal or principal stockholder named in the affidavit. 
D.  Any and all bankruptcy proceedings, including bankruptcy proceedings under state and federal acts, involving any individual, officer, director, principal or principal stockholder named in the affidavit. Any and all assignments for the benefit of creditors by any individual, officer, director, principal or principal stockholder named in the affidavit individually or as an officer of a corporation. The information required under this subsection shall cover a period of not less than fifteen (15) years preceding the date of the execution of the affidavit. 
(Ord. 3325 § 1, 2001: prior code § 65-1) 
2.92.020 - Affidavits part of contract. 
    All submitted affidavits shall become part of the terms of the contract. All statements made in the affidavits, including all information concerning allegations and finances, shall become part of the inducement and consideration of the contract. If any submitted affidavit contains a false material fact or statement, the city may consider the false material fact or statement as a breach of contract and the city has the option to terminate the contract for default. 
(Ord. 3325 § 2, 2001: prior code § 65-2) 
2.92.030 - Advertisement for bids. 
    Any and all bidders making advertisement bids for contracts in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) are required to comply with the terms of this chapter at the time they submit their bids. The city may consider the information contained in the submitted affidavits in its determinations of the responsibility of the lowest bidder. 
(Ord. 3325 § 3, 2001: prior code § 65-3) 
2.92.040 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any and all individuals, firms, partnerships or corporations desiring to enter into a contract with the city wherein public bidding is not required by statute, ordinance, resolution or otherwise. 
(Ord. 3325 § 4, 2001: prior code § 65-4) 
2.92.050 - False affidavit. 
    Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation furnishing a false affidavit to the city under the terms of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. However, the city shall not lose its rights under Section 2.92.020 by reason of the enforcement of any penalty under this section. 
(Ord. 3325 § 5, 2001: prior code § 65-5) 
2.92.060 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any corporation listed on the American Stock Exchange, the New York Stock Exchanges (NYSE) or on the NASDAQ Stock Market, except that this exemption shall not apply to provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:25-24.2. 
B.  Any contract entered into with the city that is covered by the provisions of the New Jersey Employer -Employee Relations Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented. 
C.  All professional service contracts as they are defined by the New Jersey Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40:11-11 et seq., as amended and supplemented. 
D.  All contracts entered into with the United States of America, state of New Jersey, county or municipality, or any board, body, officer, agency or authority thereof, and any other state or subdivision thereof. 
E.  All public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utilities Commission in accordance with tariffs and schedules of charges made, charged or exacted, filed with the above board. 
F.  All insurance companies admitted to do business in the state of New Jersey by the New Jersey Department of Insurance which has an acceptable rating by the Best Key Rating Guide. 
G.  Any contracts entered into covering purchases made through the state of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-12. 
(Ord. No. 4804 , § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. 3325 § 6, 2001: prior code § 65-6) 
Chapter 2.96 - EMERGENCIES 
Sections: 

2.96.010 - Declaration of emergency-Emergency measures. 
    The mayor is authorized, if he or she finds that the city or any part thereof is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering civil disturbance, disorder, riot or other occurrence which will seriously and substantially endanger the health, safety and property of the citizens, to declare a state of emergency and take the following specified measures throughout the city or any part thereof: 
A.  Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon the public highways or public sidewalks, or in any outdoor place, except persons who are awaiting transportation, engaging in recreational activities at a usual and customary place or peaceably entering or leaving buildings. 
B.  Halt access or egress upon public highways to or from the city or any part thereof. 
C.  Halt the movement of trains, boats or other vehicles into, within or from the city. 
D.  Establish a curfew limiting the hours when persons may go upon or travel the public streets. 
E.  Require the closing of taprooms and bars and prohibit the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in any hotel, restaurant, club or other establishment. 
F.  Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other inflammable liquids. 
G.  Prohibit the sale, carrying or possession on the public street or public sidewalks, or in any public park or square, of weapons, including but not limited to firearms, bows and arrows, air rifles, slingshots, knives, razors or missiles of any kind. 
(Prior code § 72-1) 
2.96.020 - Duration. 
    The state of emergency declared by the mayor shall exist for the period set forth in the proclamation, but not in excess of two weeks. However, the state of emergency may be extended for additional periods of two weeks. 
(Prior code § 72-2) 
Chapter 2.100 - FEES FOR MUNICIPAL RECORDS, PAMPHLETS AND CODES 
Sections: 

2.100.010 - Documents furnished to war veterans or dependents. 
    The city clerk is authorized and directed to furnish all necessary documents requiring certification, without charge, when requested by any veteran, his or her widow or widower or dependent, of any war, when the certified documents are desired for the purpose of establishing any proof required by such veteran, his or her widow or widower or dependent, in order to establish such veteran's rights and privileges under any federal, state or municipal enactment. 
(Prior code § 2-21) 
2.100.020 - Fees established. 
    The city is authorized to charge and collect fees for the sale of municipal records or other documents as follows: 
A.  Assessment searches: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
B.  City map: Ninety cents ($0.90) each. 
C.  Commissioners map: One dollar and thirty-one cents ($1.31) per sheet. 
D.  11" x 17" Ledger size copies: Thirteen cents ($0.13) per sheet. 
E.  Flood certificates: Five dollars ($5.00). 
F.  CD/DVD: Two dollars ($2.00). 
G.  Sewer map: Ninety cents ($0.90) per sheet. 
H.  Tax map: Sixty-six cents ($0.66) per sheet. 
I.  Ward map: Ninety cents ($0.90) each. 
J.  All other maps larger than 11" x 17": Fifteen cents ($0.15) per square foot. 
( Ord. No. 4607 , § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4566 , § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4235, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 4, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 72A-1) 
2.100.030 - Effect on fees set forth in other laws. 
    Nothing contained herein shall in any way alter, modify or repeal any other charge or fee set forth in any other law, ordinance or resolution not inconsistent herewith. 
(Prior code § 72A-2) 
Chapter 2.104 - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

2.104.010 - Adoption. 
    The classes of offices, positions and employments and duties assigned thereto, as set forth as part of this chapter by reference to the "City of Elizabeth Reclassification Survey" prepared by the New Jersey Civil Service Department, as amended by city council, now on file in the office of the department of administration of Elizabeth and the office of the city clerk, are created and adopted. 
(Prior code § 63-1) 
2.104.020 - Creation of additional positions. 
    The title, definition and requirements as set forth and made a part hereof by reference, "Standardized Classifications and Specifications for Public Health Nursing Positions," prepared by the New Jersey Department of Civil Service, approved by its Chief Examiner and Secretary July 30, 1963, now on file in the Department of Health, Welfare and Housing and in the office of the city clerk, for the positions of public health nurse trainee, public health nurse, senior public health nurse, public health nurse supervisor, are created and adopted in lieu of and in the place and stead of the classification public health nurse and public health nurse supervisor adopted under the terms of Ordinance No. 41. 
(Prior code § 63-2) 
2.104.030 - Residence in city required-Exception. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, all officers and employees of the city now in the employ of the city and residing therein, or hereafter to be employed by the city, are required as a condition of their continued employment to have their place of abode in the city and to be bona fide residents therein. The residency requirement will be waived for all employees after fifteen (15) years of permanent employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 4144, § 1, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 63-7) 
2.104.040 - Bona fide resident-Defined. 
    "Bona fide resident", for the purpose of this chapter, means a person having a permanent domicile within the city and one which has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside of the city limits. 
(Prior code § 63-8) 
2.104.050 - Compliance required. 
    Failure of any officer or employee, except as herein provided, to comply with this regulation shall be deemed, regardless of his or her tenure or civil service status, a sufficient cause for removal or discharge from the service of the city. 
(Prior code § 63-9) 
2.104.060 - Exceptions authorized. 
    The head of any department is authorized in his or her discretion, for good and sufficient cause being shown, to permit any officer or employee of the city in his or her department to remain in the employ of the city without complying with the provisions hereof, where: 
A.  The health of any officer or employee necessitates residence outside of the city limits. 
B.  The nature of the employment is such as to require residence outside of the city limits. 
C.  Specialized talents are required, such as professional services of engineers, attorneys and kindred talents as are occasionally required. 
(Prior code § 63-10) 
2.104.070 - Exceptions-Approval by city council required. 
    Where, under Section 2.104.060, the head of the department grants such exception, the city council shall be notified and the city council must then approve or disapprove of the action of the head of the department. 
(Prior code § 63-11) 
2.104.080 - Salaries and wages-When paid. 
    The salaries or wages of all officers and employees of the city shall be paid weekly on Thursday of each week, except, however, when Thursday falls on a holiday, then salaries or wages shall be paid on the preceding day. 
(Prior code § 63-16) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
  
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - CITY BUDGET 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Budget preparation-Form and content. 
A.  The city budget shall be prepared by the mayor with the assistance of the business administrator. During the month of November, the mayor shall require all department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the mayor or the business administrator at public hearings, which shall be held during that month, on the various requests. On or before the fifteenth day of January, the mayor shall submit to council his or her recommended budget, together with such explanatory comment or statement as he or she may deem desirable. 
B.  The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the charter. There shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of expenditure and revenue. Such analysis shall include a comparison of the total number of positions of each class and grade to be authorized by the budget with the actual number thereof employed at the beginning and ending of the preceding budget period. So far as practicable, such analysis shall include appropriate statements of the cost of performance of functional programs and activities stated in terms of quantitative, countable units of work for operating and capital expenditures. The business administrator, with the assistance of the budget and personnel officer, shall prepare all estimates of nonproperty tax revenues anticipated for the support of each annual budget. 
(Prior code § 4-34) 
3.04.020 - Budget operation and administration. 
A.  The business administrator shall supervise the administration of each annual budget. In consultation with department heads he or she shall establish quarterly or such other periodic allotments of appropriations as he or she may deem necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its expenditure program within the limits of such allotments. 
B.  If at any time during the budget year the business administrator shall ascertain that the city government is faced with the probability of incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he or she shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such reconsideration and with the approval of the mayor, he or she may revise budget allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized during the fiscal year. He or she shall file with the comptroller a copy of such revised allotment, and the comptroller shall control all expenditures within the limits thereof. 
(Prior code § 4-35) 
Chapter 3.08 - PURCHASING 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Division of purchase-Administration, powers and duties. 
    The head of the division of purchase shall be the city purchasing agent. He or she shall be appointed by the director to serve during the term of office of the director appointing him or her and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. He or she shall, prior to this appointment, have been qualified by at least five years' training or experience or a combination thereof in commercial or governmental purchasing. Under the direction and supervision of the business administrator, the purchasing agent shall: 
A.  Purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment, and contract for all services required by any department; except that the department of public works shall administer contracts for public works or improvements. 
B.  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to such services, supplies, materials and equipment. 
C.  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment and the rendition of contractual services and determine their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications. 
D.  Have charge of any and all central storehouses and warehouses which may be established. 
E.  Transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies, and from or to central stores, such supplies, materials and equipment as need appears and arrange for the sale of surplus or obsolete items thereof, subject to the charter and ordinances 
F.  Administer any ordinance the council may enact relating to purchasing. 
G.  Award contracts which do not exceed in the fiscal year the total sum of seventeen thousand five hundred dollars ($17,500.00), or the amount determined by the Governor, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, whichever is greater, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3b, except that the department of public works shall award contracts which do not exceed in the fiscal year the total sum of seventeen thousand five hundred dollars ($17,500.00), or the amount determined by the Governor, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, whichever is greater, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3b, for public works and improvements, except the qualified purchasing agent shall award contracts which do not exceed in the fiscal year the total sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), or the amount determined by the Governor, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, whichever is greater, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3b. 
(Ord. 3506 § 1, 2003; prior code § 4-36) 
3.08.020 - Purchase controls. 
    All purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials or equipment or contractual services shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the department whose appropriation will be charged and the certification of the comptroller that a sufficient unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor. All such contracts shall conform with applicable requirements of state statutes for competitive bidding. 
(Prior code § 4-37) 
3.08.030 - Award of contracts. 
    Upon contracts let by public competitive bidding, the council may, upon recommendation of the business administrator with respect to all contracts other than public works contracts and upon recommendation of the director of public works with respect to public works' contracts, let the contract in the manner prescribed by law. All such contracts shall be awarded in accordance with the provisions of the charter and ordinances. 
(Prior code § 4-38) 
3.08.040 - Purchasing standards committee-Composition-Power of review. 
    The business administrator shall establish an interdepartmental purchasing standards committee consisting of the purchasing agent, city engineer, comptroller and representatives of such line departments as may appear desirable, who shall review the various needs of the departments for goods and services. Upon such review, they shall, so far as practicable, establish uniform standards for requisitions and purchases. Such standards when approved by the mayor shall be binding upon all departments. 
(Prior code § 4-39) 
3.08.050 - Purchasing procedures. 
A.  Ordinary and Regular Purchasing Procedures. 
1.  Each department shall, upon request of the business administrator, submit a complete statement of the materials, supplies and equipment and work and labor under contract which will be required by the department during the ensuing year, half year or quarter year, as the administrator may determine, according to the best estimate of the department head. Such statement shall be such form and detail as the administrator may require. 
2.  Purchases shall be made upon requisition of a department head to the business administrator under such procedures and in such form as he or she may prescribe or approve. Except as the business administrator may authorize in case of emergency, no purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to this code have been followed. 
B.  Emergency Purchasing Procedures. 
1.  Basis for Authority. A department head or designee shall certify, in writing, to the purchasing agent that a legitimate emergency exists. The certification shall conform in all aspects to the statutory requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6, as amended and supplemented, and Rule II B4 of the Local Public Contract Guidelines and Local Public Contract Regulations, as promulgated by the Local Finance Board of the state of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services. 
2.  Irrespective of whether the cost of an emergency contract exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and the emergency, as contemplated in this section, affects the public health, safety or welfare, and the emergency is of such a nature that there is an imminent peril to human life and property requiring immediate action which necessitates the furnishing of labor or materials supplied, or services, as distinguished from ordinary and urgent situations which might wait until the city council can convene to act by resolution, then in such event, emergency contracts will be authorized in a manner provided in this section. 
3.  In determining whether an actual emergency exists, the purchasing agent, when reviewing the certification, as required in subsection (B)(1) of this section, must be satisfied that such certification contains sufficient facts to meet the criteria as outlined in subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
4.  In addition to all other requirements contained in this section, any agreement or contract for emergency labor, materials, supplies or services shall be limited to the immediate situations and needs of the emergency. 
5.  While certain expenditures required in emergent situations may exceed available budgetary appropriations, in order to comply with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6 and the guidelines referred to thereunder, the purchasing agent shall, as soon as practicable, notify the city council of the need to adopt an emergency appropriation to cover the cost of the emergency contract. The city council shall take immediate action to appropriate the necessary funds. It shall be the duty of the finance director to advise the purchasing agent, upon request, as to the availability or nonavailability of the funds in question. 
(Prior code § 4-40) 
Chapter 3.12 - TAX ABATEMENT FOR CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Statement of intention. 
    The city, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139, et seq., makes known its intention to utilize the tax abatement provision authorized by the state legislature to provide for a five-year tax abatement for the following: (1) new one and two-family residential structures, as defined in this chapter; (2) improvements to existing one, two, three, and four-family residential structures, as defined in this chapter; and (3) conversions to qualified residential property. 
(Prior code § 132-50) 
3.12.020 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated: 
    "Abatement" means an exemption from real property taxes provided for the purposes of encouraging residential construction, conversion, improvement and redevelopment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 et seq. 
    "Assessor" means the municipal tax assessor appointed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes. 
    "Closing date" means the date of the closing of title for consideration given, the transfer of title by operation of law, court order or through testamentary disposition. 
    "Completed," with respect to a parcel of qualified property, or the "completion" of that property, means substantially ready for the use for which it is intended and its occupancy as a principal residence. 
    "Conversion or conversion alteration" means the alteration or renovation of a nonresidential building or structure, or hotel, motel, motor hotel or guest house, in such manner as to convert the building or structure from its previous use to use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling of no more than four units. 
    "Cost," when used with respect to construction, or to an improvement or conversion alteration, means only the cost or fair market value of labor and materials used in constructing or improving qualified residential property, or in converting another building or structure to qualified residential property, including any architectural, engineering, and contractor's fees associated with the construction, improvement or conversion, as the owner of the property shall cause to be certified to the governing body and the tax assessor by an independent and qualified architect licensed in the state of New Jersey or a certified construction cost audit by an independent certified public accountant licensed in the state of New Jersey, following completion of the project. Certifications submitted must provide detailed breakdown of each cost component and a description of materials and method of construction employed. 
    "Improvement" means a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation, and which does not change its permitted use. In the case of a multiple dwelling, it includes only improvements which affect common areas or elements, or three or more dwelling units within the multiple dwelling. In no case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to property for which payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Qualified residential property" means any building, used or to be used or held for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on the same premises, and townhouse residential properties subject to the provisions of Section 3.12.031 of this chapter, but not including condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal property regimes. 
    Taxes Otherwise Due. For the purposes of this chapter, the amount of "taxes otherwise due" shall be determined by including the appropriate percentage of the assessed valuation of the abated structure, improvement or conversion alteration, as the case may be, on the assessment list of the city as taxable property, and levying taxes thereon in the same manner as other taxes are levied pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes; provided, however, that no value for a property subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be included in the calculation of the "net valuation on which county taxes are apportioned" until the sixth year. 
(Ord. No. 4028, § 1, 3-10-2009; Ord. 3754 § 1, 2005; prior code § 132-51) 
3.12.030 - Eligible residential property. 
    Owners of new residential properties, owners of improved residential structures and owners of a conversion alteration consisting of one, two, three, and four dwelling units located in Elizabeth are entitled to avail themselves of the opportunity to gain a five-year tax abatement as provided in this chapter when they meet the following qualifications: 
A.  New residential property must be residential property consisting of one or two dwelling units; 
B.  The newly constructed residential dwelling unit shall be occupied by the owner thereof; 
C.  In the case of residential dwellings consisting of more than one unit, the owner must occupy at least one unit; 
D.  Substantial improvements or substantial conversion alterations to residential property must have a minimum cost of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for residential property consisting of one and two dwelling units and a minimum cost of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for residential property consisting of three and four dwelling units; 
E.  All real estate taxes must be current; 
F.  Written application to the tax assessor filed within thirty (30) days, including Saturdays and Sundays following the closing date; 
G.  Submission of an architect's certification which sets forth the cost of construction, certified to the governing body and the tax assessor, or a certified construction cost audit by an independent certified public accountant; 
H.  Approval by ordinance of the municipal council; 
I.  The entry into a formal written agreement with the city; 
J.  Submission by applicant of a certificate of occupancy; 
K.  For residential dwellings, submission by applicant of two proofs of owner-occupancy. Such proofs can be a driver's license, utility bills, and/or car registration. Proofs submitted must be current and valid at the time of submission. Applicant must also submit a notarized affidavit stating that he or she presently resides in the property to receive an exemption and/or abatement. Proofs must be resubmitted annually no later than July 31st of each year to the tax assessor. 
(Ord. No. 4028, § 2, 3-10-2009; Prior code § 132-52) 
3.12.031 - Eligible townhouse residential properties. 
    Owners of new townhouse residential properties, consisting of one and two dwelling units, whether attached or unattached, and sharing common ownership of land and/or improvements are entitled to avail themselves of the opportunity to gain a five-year tax abatement, as provided in this chapter, when they meet all of the following qualifications: 
A.  New townhouse residential property must meet all of the qualifications under Section 3.12.030, except Section 3.12.030(D) of this chapter. 
B.  New residential townhouse dwelling units shall be part of a redevelopment project of not less than one acre. 
C.  New townhouse residential dwelling units shall be located within a designated redevelopment area under the criteria set forth in the Local Redevelopment and Housing Laws, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq. 
(Ord. 3754 §§ 2, 3, 2005) 
3.12.040 - Application procedures. 
    The following conditions shall apply to all applications for tax abatements at the time of the application: 
A.  The application shall be filed with the tax assessor within thirty (30) days following the completion of the new construction, improvement or conversion alteration; and 
B.  Every application for tax abatement shall contain such information as the governing body deems appropriate together with all information required by this chapter such other pertinent information as the city may require. 
(Prior code § 132-53) 
3.12.050 - Authorization for tax abatement. 
    All such abatement or projects shall be approved by the tax assessor and memorialized by an agreement for tax abatement for a particular property for a period of five years except as provided in this chapter, upon which such property is erected and which is necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof. 
(Prior code § 132-54) 
3.12.060 - Financial agreement. 
    Each approved abatement shall be evidenced by a financial agreement between the city and the applicant. The agreement shall be in a form prepared by the applicant and shall contain the representations that are required by this chapter together with such other information required by the tax collector. The agreement shall be approved by the tax collector as to terms and conditions and the agreement shall be approved by the law department as to form and shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 132-55) 
3.12.070 - Payment in lieu. 
    The governing body may grant tax abatement for a period of five years and provide for payment in lieu of real property taxes to be computed as two percent of the cost of the new construction, improvement or conversion, as appropriate: 
A.  For newly constructed one or two-family homes the two percent of cost is above and beyond the taxes paid on the empty lot as assessed prior to the new construction; and 
B.  For improvements of one to four-family dwelling units or conversions of existing buildings into one to four-family dwelling units, the two percent of cost is to be added to the taxes assessed on the structure immediately prior to the improvements or conversions. 
(Prior code § 132-56) 
3.12.080 - Real property taxes. 
    In addition to the payments required in lieu of taxes in Section 3.12.070, the owner of the parcel of the qualified property granted abatement pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for all real property taxes assessed and levied against the land on which the qualified residential property is situated. 
(Prior code § 132-57) 
3.12.090 - Inspection. 
    Any property which is granted a tax exemption abatement pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to an inspection by the city on an annual basis to ensure that such properties are in compliance with all ordinances, regulations, and safety codes of the city. Any property, which is determined to be in violation of any ordinance, regulation, and/or safety code of the city, shall be subject to revision by the tax assessor. 
(Prior code § 132-58) 
3.12.100 - Conformance with statutory and regulatory requirements. 
    All projects subject to tax agreements as provided in this chapter shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements. 
(Prior code § 132-59) 
3.12.110 - Tax delinquencies. 
    No abatement shall be granted pursuant to this chapter with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or remains unpaid or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due. 
(Prior code § 132-60) 
3.12.120 - Sale of residential property during period of tax abatement. 
    Upon the closing of title of residential property having been granted a tax abatement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the new owner may make application to continue the abatement for the remainder of the original abatement period. The new owner shall, within 30 calendar days of the closing date, make application with the tax assessor to continue the abatement for the remainder of the original abatement period. In order to be eligible to continue the abatement for the remainder of the original abatement period, the new owner shall be required to continue to use the property pursuant to the conditions which originally qualified the property for the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 4028, § 3, 3-10-2009; Ord. 3724 § 2, 2005: prior code § 132-61) 
3.12.130 - Payment in quarterly installment and termination. 
    The in-lieu payment shall be made in quarterly installments according to the same schedule as real property taxes due and payable. Failure to make these payments shall result in the termination of the abatement. In addition to the remedy set forth in this section, the payment authorized by Section 3.12.070 of this chapter shall be enforced in the same manner as is provided for in real property taxes. 
(Prior code § 132-62) 
3.12.140 - Administration of agreements. 
    The tax collector shall be responsible to administer the terms of the agreement throughout the period of abatement. 
(Prior code § 132-63) 
3.12.150 - Prohibition against added assessment. 
    The added assessment of Section 3 of P.L. 1941, c. 397 (C.54:4-63.3) and the omitted assessment provisions of Section 9 of P.L. 1947, c. 413 (C.54:4-63.20) and Section 132-50 of P.L. 1968, c. 184 (C.54:3-33) shall not be applicable to any property for which the owner-occupant has been granted a tax abatement under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 132-64) 
3.12.160 - Expiration. 
    This chapter shall expire June 14, 2020 and all tax abatements in effect at the date of expiration shall continue until they are terminated in accordance with the financial agreement entered into pursuant to Section 3.12.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4595 , § 1, 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 4245, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. 3724 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3202 § 1, 2000: prior code § 132-65) 
Chapter 3.16 - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Exemption of personal property and personal effects. 
    All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within the city shall not be assessed and taxed. 
(Prior code § 132-15) 
3.16.020 - Application of legislation. 
    This chapter shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962 and thereafter so long as this chapter shall be in effect, and shall not affect the obligation, lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962, nor shall this chapter affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions of law amended or repealed; nor shall this chapter invalidate any assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or upon January 1, 1962, or during the period between such dates. 
(Prior code § 132-16) 
3.16.030 - Filing with state and county agencies. 
    A certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be filed with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury of the state of New Jersey, and with the county board of taxation of Union County. 
(Prior code § 132-17) 
Chapter 3.20 - PERSONAL PROPERTY TRANSPORTATION TAX COMPLIANCE PERMITS 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Property" means and includes only tangible personal property. 
    "Truckman" means and includes all persons, firms, corporations and associations which shall transport or remove personal property, whether for hire or otherwise and whether or not regularly engaged in such business. 
(Prior code § 132-1) 
3.20.020 - Application to comptroller-Information required. 
    Every person owning or claiming to own any property located in or on any premises in the city, except in a warehouse of any person engaged in the business of storing goods for hire, and who desires to transport or remove the same or cause the same to be transported or removed so that the whole or a substantial part thereof shall be removed or transported from such premises in or on which it is located shall, in person or by an agent duly appointed for such purpose, first make written application to the comptroller of the city, which application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the truckman who is to transport or remove such property. 
B.  The name and address of the person owning or claiming to own such property. 
C.  The address of the premises from which, and the address of the premises to which, such property is to be transported or removed; and if either or both such premises are not designated by an address, then in lieu thereof such premises shall be clearly identified. 
(Prior code § 132-2) 
3.20.030 - Hours for application-Emergencies. 
    Such application shall be made between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on any day except holidays, Saturdays and Sundays; provided, however, that in case of bona fide emergency, such application may be made at any time. 
(Prior code § 132-3) 
3.20.040 - Assessment procedure-Provision for appeal. 
    Upon the filing of such application as aforesaid, the comptroller shall ascertain forthwith the total amount of taxes due that have been charged or assessed against the person owning or claiming to own such property and which have not been paid at the time of making such application (but excluding any taxes charged or assessed for real estate), together with the interest and other charges thereon, and notify the person making such application of the total amount due for such taxes, interest and other charges. When such application is made during or after the period provided by statute for the assessment of taxes for any year, the person owning or claiming to own such property shall be liable to pay not only the taxes priorly assessed and unpaid as aforesaid but shall also be liable to pay the taxes for the year for which assessment is being made at the time of such application; and should the tax rate for the taxing district for the year for which assessment is being made at the time of such application not then have been determined, then the tax rate used to determine the taxes for the year prior to that for which assessment is being made as aforesaid shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be the rate used to determine the taxes for which the assessment is then being made as aforesaid. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deprive any taxpayer of his or her right to appeal any assessment as provided for in Title 54 of the Revised Statutes. 
(Prior code § 132-4) 
3.20.050 - Issuance of permit-Provision for appeal-Bond required. 
    Upon the payment of taxes, interest and other charges specified in Section 3.20.040, the comptroller shall forthwith and without cost or charge therefor issue a permit for the transportation or removal of such property, and no such permit shall be issued unless and until such taxes, interest and other charges have been paid in full; provided, however, that if the person owning or claiming to own such property has a right to appeal the taxes for any year or years included in the amount owed as determined by the method provided in Section 3.20.040, and files with the comptroller a notice in writing, duly verified under oath, that he or she intends to appeal the same, then in lieu of paying the taxes, interest and other charges for the year or years to be appealed, the person owning or claiming to own such property shall furnish to the comptroller a bond entered into by a surety or fidelity company having a certificate of authority from the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance to do business in the state, which bond shall be in quintuple the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges determined as aforesaid for the year or years to be appealed, but in no case for less than the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and which bond shall be conditioned for the payment, within two years from the date of the bond, of the taxes, interest and other charges found to be due as of the date actual payment is made thereof; provided further, that taxes, interest and other charges as to which no such right of appeal as aforesaid exists must be paid forthwith. 
(Prior code § 132-5) 
3.20.060 - Disposition of permit copies. 
    The permit shall be made up in quadruplicate; the original shall be delivered to the applicant; the first copy shall be delivered to the police department of the city; the second copy shall be forwarded to the comptroller of the taxing district to which such property is to be transported or removed, if the same is within the state; and the third copy shall be retained by the comptroller and held by him or her in his or her office as a public record. 
(Prior code § 132-6) 
3.20.070 - Exceptions. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require any owner of property held for the purpose of manufacturing in the ordinary course of his or her business, or held for use in the ordinary course of his or her business, to obtain any such permit to transport or remove such property from any storehouse or warehouse or owner's usual place of business for the purpose of manufacturing, processing, selling or utilizing in the ordinary course of such business; and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require any transient guest temporarily residing at any hotel, hostelry, inn, lodging house or rooming house to obtain any such permit to transport or remove such property which he or she has brought with him or her to such hotel, hostelry, inn, lodging house or rooming house for his or her use while such transient guest; nor shall this chapter be construed to apply to the property of any public utility as defined in Section 48:2-13 of the Revised Statutes, to require a permit to transport or remove any such property from the premises in or on which it shall be located. 
(Prior code § 132-7) 
3.20.080 - Truckmen exempted from permit responsibility. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall in no case be construed to require the truckman to obtain such permit, nor to have the same in his or her possession, but the duty to obtain the permit shall in all cases be upon the person owning or claiming to own the property to be transported or removed; the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to make the truckman the agent of the person owning or claiming to own the property to be transported or removed. 
(Prior code § 132-8) 
Chapter 3.24 - TAX ON FEES FOR PARKING* 
Sections: 

3.24.010 - Tax imposed on fees for parking, garaging or storing motor vehicles. 
    There is imposed a fifteen (15) percent tax on any fees, whether paid directly or paid as part of the rent charged in a lease, for parking, garaging or storing motor vehicles. The tax is imposed on all fees, including, but not limited to, valet parking fees and any parking fees charged by a hospital and any nonprofit entity. 
(Ord. 3956 § 2, 2008) 
3.24.020 - Collection of taxes. 
    All taxes imposed by Section 3.24.010 shall be collected on behalf of the city by the person providing parking services to the customer. 
(Ord. 3956 § 3, 2008) 
3.24.030 - Remittance to chief financial officer-When due. 
    All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the city, on forms prescribed by him or her. The chief financial officer shall be responsible for the collection of the tax, in quarterly installments, on or before those dates when real property tax payments are due to the municipality under state law. In addition to the payment of said taxes, the person or entity providing parking services to the customer must also provide the relevant sales tax reports used to calculate, verify and support the taxes submitted. The chief financial officer of the city of Elizabeth shall have the authority to require and receive any additional documents in order to verify said submission of tax. 
(Ord. 3956 § 4, 2008) 
3.24.040 - Personal liability. 
    Every person required to collect any taxes imposed by this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from his or her customer as if the tax were a part of the service charge and payable at the same time; provided however, that the chief financial officer of the city of Elizabeth shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax. 
(Ord. 3956 § 5, 2008) 
3.24.050 - Methods for advertising tax restricted. 
    No person required to collect any tax hereunder shall advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax is not considered as an element in the charge payable by the customer, that he or she will pay the tax, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be refunded to the customer. 
(Ord. 3956 § 6, 2008) 
3.24.060 - Arrears/penalty. 
    If for any reason the tax is not paid on the date it is due, interest at a rate of twelve (12) percent per annum on the amount of the tax due and an additional penalty of one-half of one percent of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where action is brought for the recovery of any tax hereunder, the person liable shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection and the interest and penalties imposed. 
(Ord. 3956 § 7, 2008) 
3.24.070 - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall amend, supersede or override the necessity to obtain a license as set forth in Chapter 5.60 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3956 § 8, 2008) 
3.24.080 - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be imposed with respect to any parking, garaging or motor vehicle storage fees charged by: 
A.  Garages or parking areas which are part of premises: (1) occupied solely as a private one- or two-family dwelling, or (2) leased to residential tenants of multiple dwellings; 
B.  The city of Elizabeth parking authority; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to fees for the parking, garaging or storing of motor vehicles on property owned by the Elizabeth parking authority and leased to any nonexempt organization; 
C.  The Elizabeth Board of Education; 
D.  Bodies corporate or politic or instrumentalities of the state of New Jersey, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48C-42. 
(Ord. 3956 § 9, 2008) 
Chapter 3.28 - FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS 
Sections: 

3.28.010 - Limitation on payment of claims. 
    It is unlawful for any insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the state of New Jersey to pay to any claimant any claim in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for fire damages on any real property located within the city pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and after the filing of such ordinance with the State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid. 
(Prior code § 132-32) 
3.28.020 - Official certificate of search. 
    The official certificate of search shall be provided by the tax collector of the city upon proper application of the claimant, and such certificate may, from time to time, be altered by the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order to correct any errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate. 
(Prior code § 132-33) 
3.28.030 - Payment of liens prior to payment of claims. 
    All taxes and assessments and other municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall be paid by the owner of the property, or any insurance company, prior to the payment of any claims in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) on the property, is authorized and required to pay to the city the amount of the liens appearing on the official certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges which may be certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that if an appeal is taken to the amount of any lien or charge (other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21), the insurance company shall withhold seventy-five (75) percent of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan associations in the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court. 
(Prior code § 132-34) 
3.28.040 - Resolution of agreement from governing body. 
    The city council city may enter into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments, pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, if the governing body of the city is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the governing body of the city is authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured person. 
(Prior code § 132-35) 
3.28.050 - Priority of claims. 
    A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under this chapter only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract. 
(Prior code § 132-36) 
3.28.060 - Effect of chapter. 
    This chapter shall not affect the authority of the city to enforce a municipal lien under any other law of the state. 
(Prior code § 132-37) 
3.28.070 - Filing of copies. 
    The city clerk shall file a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance within fifteen (15) days of its enactment. 
(Prior code § 132-38) 
Chapter 3.32 - INSURANCE FUND 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Insurance Fund 

3.32.010 - Establishment. 
    There is established an insurance fund for the city for the following purposes: 
A.  To insure against any loss or damage, however caused, to any property, motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by it or owned by or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions. 
B.  To insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by it or owned by or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions. 
C.  To insure against liability for its negligence and that of its officers, employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an independent contractor within the limitations of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.). 
(Prior code § 4-180) 
3.32.020 - Appropriation of moneys authorized. 
    The city council is authorized to appropriate the moneys necessary in order to carry out the purposes recited in Section 3.32.010. 
(Prior code § 4-181) 
3.32.030 - Maximum and minimum amount of fund. 
    The city council may designate the maximum or minimum amount of the fund and from time to time provide for the disposition of any excess over and above the maximum amount fixed, or of the interest or profits arising therefrom when the fund shall have reached the maximum limit. 
(Prior code § 4-182) 
3.32.040 - Insurance fund commissioners. 
A.  The mayor shall appoint three officials of the city, with the advice and consent of the city council, who may be members of the city council, to serve as insurance fund commissioners and shall appoint a person to serve as secretary to the insurance fund commission. The commissioners shall hold office for two years or for the remainder of their term of office as officials, whichever shall be less, and until their successors shall have been duly appointed and qualified. The secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. The commissioners shall serve without compensation. The salary of the secretary shall be set by ordinance by city council. Vacancies in the office of insurance fund commissioners caused by any reason other than expiration of term as official shall be filled for the unexpired term. Vacancies in the position of secretary shall be filled in the manner of the original appointment. 
B.  The commissioners shall forthwith after their appointment, organize for the ensuing year by election from their membership of a chairperson, who shall serve for the year. 
(Prior code § 4-183) 
3.32.050 - Powers and authority of commissioners. 
A.  The commissioners shall have the following powers and authority. They shall: 
1.  Employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall be fixed and paid by the governing body of the local unit in the same manner as is that of other employees of the local unit. 
2.  Invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such securities as they shall deem best suited for the purposes of this article. 
3.  Adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the fund. 
4.  Keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the same invested in such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for the payment of losses to any buildings or property of the local unit or liability resulting from the operation of publicly owned motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus. 
5.  Fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the insurance fund and shall effect all insurance in the insurance fund or with any insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state. 
B.  Premiums for insurance, whether carried in the insurance fund or placed with insurance companies, shall be paid to the commissioners by the board, commission, department, committee or officer having charge or control of the property insured. 
C.  All insurance upon property owned or controlled by a local unit or any of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions shall be placed and effected by the commissioners. 
(Prior code § 4-184) 
Article II - Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund 

3.32.060 - Payment of compensation-Creation of fund. 
A.  Payment of workers' compensation is provided as constituted by Chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey (Labor and Workmen's Compensation, N.J.S.A. 34:15-1 et seq.) by: 
1.  The creation of a workers' compensation fund as hereinafter provided; 
2.  The placing of workers' compensation insurance with any insurance company authorized to do business in New Jersey; or 
3.  Paying workers' compensation in the same manner as provided by law. 
B.  Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund. There is created a fund to be designated and known as the "workers' compensation insurance fund." All money appropriated to the fund shall be deposited in the name of the city in a national or state bank or trust company and shall remain there as a trust fund for the purpose of paying obligations of the local unit under the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey (Labor and Workmens' Compensation, N.J.S.A. 34:15-1 et seq.). 
(Prior code § 4-185) 
3.32.070 - Annual appropriation. 
    The city council shall annually appropriate to the fund such money as it may determine to be necessary for the purpose set forth in Section 3.32.060. 
(Prior code § 4-186) 
3.32.080 - Discontinuance of fund. 
    The city council may determine to discontinue the fund, in which case the balance thereof shall become part of the surplus revenue of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-187) 
Chapter 3.36 - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY 
Sections: 

3.36.010 - Legislative purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide for the proper regulation and disposal of all obsolete and surplus goods and materials of every kind and description owned by the city. 
(Prior code § 64-1) 
3.36.020 - Establishment of efficient procedures intended. 
    It is the further intent of this chapter that by the proper regulation and disposal of obsolete and surplus goods and materials, waste shall be reduced or eliminated, and that the proper disposal of these goods may be made by the purchasing department in order that any use or income derived from the sale or other disposition of such goods and materials may inure to the benefit of the city. 
(Prior code § 64-2) 
3.36.030 - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Obsolete and surplus goods and materials" means all personal property belonging to the city which has no longer any reasonable municipal use. 
(Prior code § 64-3) 
3.36.040 - Administrative jurisdiction. 
    The division of purchasing, department of administration, shall have jurisdiction over the regulation and disposal of all items coming within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 64-4) 
3.36.050 - Reports of obsolete or surplus materials. 
    All city departments, boards and other municipal agencies shall report any surplus or obsolete goods within their department to the purchasing department, and it shall be the duty and responsibility of the city purchasing agent to administer this chapter with its provisions. He or she shall be authorized to require all departments, boards and other municipal agencies to list annually all such surplus and obsolete goods and materials in their possession. 
(Prior code § 64-5) 
3.36.060 - Powers of purchasing agent. 
    The purchasing agent is empowered to use the department as a clearing house for obsolete equipment and unused supplies, goods and materials and shall sell or exchange such goods to other departments or agencies within the municipality, or to purchasers of such goods and materials other than municipal departments, in accordance with the provisions of the statutes as may be provided by law, and for such purpose he or she shall be the substitute and agent of any person named by law in specific instances and shall exercise such powers, where necessary, as the deputy of the named authority, obtaining in each case, where necessary, his or her written order so to do. 
(Prior code § 64-6) 
3.36.070 - Master list required. 
    The purchasing agent is authorized and directed to keep a master list of all obsolete and surplus goods and materials, giving a brief description, date of sale or exchange and the value thereof. 
(Prior code § 64-7) 
3.36.080 - Sales requiring prior advertising-Bids and awards. 
    All sales of goods, supplies, materials or equipment of the reasonable value which is in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be to the highest responsible bidder, by public bidding after advertisement of the time and place of sale and items to be sold. Except as herein provided, property shall be sold to the highest bidder on the receipt of sealed bids opened not less than ten (10) days after advertisement. The city purchasing agent shall have the right to reject all bids received under this section and may solicit bids or sell the goods or materials at public auction. 
(Prior code § 64-8) 
3.36.090 - Sales not requiring prior advertising-Bids and awards. 
    If the estimated value of the personal property, as determined by the city purchasing agent, is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less, the city purchasing agent may, without advertising, sell such property for the highest responsible offer obtainable; provided, however, that a list of the material or equipment to be sold in this manner shall be posted in the office of the purchasing department and that invitations to bid be extended to at least three persons, firms or corporations separately engaged in the regular business of selling and buying materials of the class offered, and all bids shall be duly considered in making an award. In the event that any of the materials, equipment or supplies can be used by any other municipal agency, the purchasing agent is authorized to arrange for the transfer of such materials, equipment or supplies for use in that municipal agency. Personal property may be traded in to the vendor in part payment on purchase of new personal property. 
(Prior code § 64-9) 
3.36.100 - Final approval by business administrator required. 
    All sales of goods, supplies, materials or equipment, whether by public bid or private sale, shall be conditioned upon final approval by the business administrator of the city. 
(Prior code § 64-10) 
3.36.110 - Valueless property-Disposal authorized. 
    In the event that the purchasing agent is unable to dispose of the property under this chapter, then the property shall be deemed to have no value and may be discarded, without remuneration to the city, by whatever reasonable means the purchasing agent shall deem necessary under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 64-11) 
Chapter 3.40 - HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 

3.40.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed one percent on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1st, 2003, but before July 1st, 2004, and not to exceed three percent on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1st, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room. 
(Ord. 3537 § 1 (part), 2003: prior code § 132A-1) 
3.40.011 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms or words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Hotel" shall have the same definition as given to it by the legislature at N.J.S.A. 54:32B-2(j) and shall mean and include a building or portion of a building which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. "Hotel" includes an apartment hotel, a motel, inn, and rooming or boarding house or club, whether or not meals are served, but does not include a transient accommodation. 
    "Transient accommodation" shall have the same definition as given to it by the legislature at N.J.S.A. 54:32B-2(ggg) and shall mean a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space for the lodging of occupants, including but not limited to residences or buildings used as residences. "Transient accommodation" does not include: a hotel or hotel room; a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space used as a place of assembly; a dormitory or other similar residential facility of an elementary or secondary school or a college or university; a hospital, nursing home, or other similar residential facility of a provider of services for the care, support and treatment of individuals that is licensed by the State; a campsite, cabin, lean-to, or other similar residential facility of a campground or an adult or youth camp; or a furnished or unfurnished private residential property, including but not limited to condominiums, bungalows, single-family homes and similar living units, where no maid service, room service, linen changing service or other common hotel services are made available by the lessor and where the keys to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, whether a physical key, access to a keyless locking mechanism, or other means of physical ingress to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, are provided to the lessee at the location of an offsite real estate broker licensed by the New Jersey Real Estate Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A.45:15-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5049 , § 1, 9-11-2018) 
3.40.020 - Established. 
    There is established a tax in the City of Elizabeth which shall be fixed at three (3) percent on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or transient accommodation room or rooms in the City of Elizabeth subject to taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3. 
(Ord. No. 5049 , § 2, 9-11-2018; Ord. 3537 § 1 (part), 2003: prior code § 132A-1) 
3.40.030 - Other taxes. 
    The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room. 
(Ord. 3537 § 1 (part), 2003: prior code § 132A-1) 
3.40.040 - Requirements. 
    In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114: 
A.  All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser; 
B.  A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter; 
C.  A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the customer; 
D.  Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 3537 § 1 (part), 2003: prior code § 132A-1) 
3.40.050 - Collecting tax. 
    The person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter on behalf of the city of Elizabeth. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the chief financial officer of the city shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax. 
(Ord. 3537 § 1 (part), 2003: prior code § 132A-1) 
3.40.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    The penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 2, Section 7 of the code of the city of Elizabeth, which reads in part: 
Imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by the city of Elizabeth for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00); or by a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service. Each day or part thereof any violation of the code of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 3537 § 2, 2003: prior code § 132A-2) 
Chapter 3.41 - HOTEL USE AND OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 

3.41.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Elizabeth Hotel Use and Occupancy Tax." 
(Ord. 3899 § 1, 2007) 
3.41.011 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms or words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Hotel" shall have the same definition as given to it by the legislature at N.J.S.A. 40:48E-2 and shall mean and include a building or portion of a building which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. "Hotel" includes an apartment hotel, a motel, inn, and rooming or boarding house or club, whether or not meals are served, but does not include a transient accommodation. 
    "Transient accommodation" shall have the same definition as given to it by the legislature at N.J.S.A. 40:48E-2 and shall mean a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space for the lodging of occupants, including but not limited to residences or buildings used as residences. "Transient accommodation" does not include: a hotel or hotel room; a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space used as a place of assembly; a dormitory or other similar residential facility of an elementary or secondary school or a college or university; a hospital, nursing home, or other similar residential facility of a provider of services for the care, support and treatment of individuals that is licensed by the State; a campsite, cabin, lean-to, or other similar residential facility of a campground or an adult or youth camp; or a furnished or unfurnished private residential property, including but not limited to condominiums, bungalows, single-family homes and similar living units, where no maid service, room service, linen changing service or other common hotel services are made available by the lessor and where the keys to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, whether a physical key, access to a keyless locking mechanism, or other means of physical ingress to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, are provided to the lessee at the location of an offsite real estate broker licensed by the New Jersey Real Estate Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A.45:15-1 et seq.; or leases of real property with a term of at least ninety (90) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 5049 , § 3, 9-11-2018) 
3.41.020 - Tax imposed. 
    There is imposed a six (6) percent tax on charges for the use or occupation of a room or rooms in a hotel or transient accommodation as authorized by the "Hotel Occupancy Tax Act" N.J.S.A. 40:48E-1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5049 , § 4, 9-11-2018; Ord. 3899 § 2, 2007) 
3.41.021 - Other taxes. 
    The tax imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to any federal law, state statute, local ordinance including, but not limited to, any and all real estate (ad valorem) taxes, service charges, sales taxes, and the taxes established in Chapter 3.40 of the Code of the City of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. No. 5049 , § 5, 9-11-2018) 
3.41.030 - Payment of tax. 
    All revenue collected under the Hotel Occupancy Tax Act shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the city who shall be responsible for the collection of the tax, in quarterly installments, on or before those dates when real property tax payments are due to the municipality under state law. In addition to the payment of such taxes, the hotel must also provide the relevant sales tax reports used to calculate, verify and support the revenues submitted. The chief financial officer of the city of Elizabeth shall have the authority to require and receive any additional documents in order to verify such submission of tax. The hotel will not receive any credit or refund against any other taxes due. It is the express intention of the city to collect in full both real estate taxes, service charges, and hotel and motel tax. 
(Ord. 3899 § 3, 2007) 
Chapter 3.50 - LOCAL MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL TAX 
Sections: 

3.50.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Elizabeth Local Motor Vehicle Rental Tax." 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Industrial zone" specifically designated in section 3.50.030 herein, means such portion or portions of the municipality, which may be identified by reference to zoning districts, census tracks, or both, not exceeding in the aggregate 50 percent of the territory of the municipality, as is determined by the city to be an area having, or intended to have, predominantly industrial, port, airport, and related uses. 
    "Motor vehicle" means any automobile, truck, van, bus, or similar conveyance that is intended primarily for passenger (as distinct from cargo) use, and meeting the requirements of the state for operation on public roads. 
    "Person" shall mean any individual, company, corporation or legal entity who: 
A.  Takes possession of a motor vehicle in a rental transaction; and/or 
B.  Engages in the business of renting motor vehicles and/or conducts the rental transaction and/or collects the tax set forth herein. 
    "Rental of motor vehicle" means any contract or agreement by which a person, corporation, or other legal entity is permitted the use of a motor vehicle that it does not own for a period of time that is less than one year in exchange for the payment of a fee. A rental transaction is deemed to occur at the location at which such person, corporation, or other legal entity takes possession of the motor vehicle. 
    "Rental tax account" means the dedicated trust account established by the city pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90. 
    "Tax proceeds" means amounts collected pursuant to any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2009, c. 90. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.030 - Designated industrial zone. 
    Pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90, the city hereby designates an industrial zone, in order to implement a local motor vehicle rental tax. A copy of said map shall be on file in the offices of the city clerk and city engineer during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 3, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.040 - Imposition of tax. 
    Pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90, the city does hereby impose a five percent tax on the rental of motor vehicles on such rental transactions that occur within a designated industrial zone within the city. This tax shall be in addition to any other taxes or surcharges. 
    This tax shall be imposed on the person, corporation, or other legal entity that is permitted the use of a motor vehicle that it does not own for a period of time that is less than one year, in exchange for the payment of a fee, and shall be collected on behalf of the city by the person collecting such rental fee, in accordance with such procedures as shall be established in the ordinance imposing the tax. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 4, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.050 - Duties and authority of chief financial officer. 
    All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the city, on forms prescribed by him. The chief financial officer shall be responsible for the collection of the tax, in quarterly installments. In addition to the payment of said taxes, the person or entity providing the rental service(s) to the customer must also provide the relevant sales tax reports used to calculate, verify and support the taxes submitted. The chief financial officer of the city shall have the authority to require and receive any additional documents in order to verify said submission of tax. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 5, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.060 - Person required to collect tax shall be personally liable. 
    Every person required to collect any taxes imposed by this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from his customer as if the tax were a part of the service charge and payable at the same time; provided however, that the chief financial officer of the city shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 6, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.070 - Prohibitions. 
    No person required to collect any tax hereunder shall advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax is not considered as an element in the charge payable by the customer, that he will pay the tax, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be refunded to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 7, 9-8-2009) 
3.50.080 - Interest and penalties. 
    If for any reason the tax is not paid on the date it is due, interest at a rate of 12 percent per annum on the amount of the tax due and an additional penalty of one-half of one percent of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where action is brought for the recovery of any tax hereunder, the person liable shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection, attorneys fees and the interest and penalties imposed. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 8, 9-8-2009) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - ADVERTISING 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Prohibited posting-Exception-Penalty. 
    Any person who shall post, or cause to be posted, any handbill or placard or other matter, or paint or mark, or cause to be painted or marked, any advertisement or other matter upon any bridge, curb, flagging, lamppost, tree or box enclosing the same, building, erection or fence (except only such building, erection or fence as shall belong to such person), without permission of the owner of such building, erection or fence, in any street, shall be subject to Section 1.12.010 of this code, and in addition shall also be liable for all damages or injury done. 
(Prior code § 45-1) 
5.04.020 - Indecent advertisements prohibited-Penalty. 
    Any person who shall display or exhibit, or cause or allow to be displayed or exhibited, any obscene, indecent or immoral picture or design, in any store or other window, or who, shall display or cause or allow to be displayed, post or cause or allow to be posted, either upon any billboard, building, fence or other structure or erection, or in any window or other place where the same is visible to the public, any obscene, indecent or immoral advertisement or picture of any kind intending to advertise any show, theatrical or other exhibition, shall be subject to Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 45-4) 
5.04.030 - Removal authorized. 
    The mayor may, whenever in his or her opinion the provisions of Section 5.04.020 have been violated, order the chief of police to remove from any place where the same may be displayed or posted, any obscene, indecent or immoral advertisement or picture intended to advertise any show, theatrical or other exhibition. 
(Prior code § 45-5) 
Chapter 5.08 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Municipal board of alcoholic beverage control. 
    The municipal board of alcoholic beverage control of the city shall be under the control of the city council as a whole, and any and all resolutions heretofore creating a three-member municipal board shall be null and void. The secretary of the board shall attend all meetings of the board, prepare all minutes thereof, maintain records and files in the office of the board, receive all applications with respect to alcoholic beverage licenses, and perform all duties appurtenant to the administration of the office and such additional duties in connection therewith as may be prescribed by the board. The treasurer of the city shall carry out all duties relating to the collection of fees incidental to all applications, and the city treasurer, after the collection of fees, shall issue receipts to all applicants for such payments and make all necessary deposits of the fees in the proper bank account. 
(Prior code § 48-1) 
5.08.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Board" or "municipal board of alcoholic beverage control" means the city council. 
(Prior code § 48-2) 
5.08.030 - Annual license fees. 
A.  Annual license fees shall be as follows: 
1. Plenary retail consumption $1,380.00 2. Plenary retail distribution 618.00 3. Club 188.00 4. Transfer 15.00  
B.  All revenue derived from the additional annual license fee authorized by subsection A of this section, in an amount to two hundred dollars ($200.00), shall be applied to the payment and retirement of any indebtedness incurred for the acquisition of any plenary retail consumption license. 
C.  Contracts with licensees are authorized, as may from time to time be approved, and paid for out of funds appropriated within, as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.40 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 4039, § 1, 4-28-2009; Amended during 2004 codification; Ord. 3494 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3410 § 1, 2002; prior code § 48-3) 
5.08.040 - Fee for change in corporate structure of retail licenses. 
    There shall be a fee of ten (10) percent of the annual license fee upon applications for changes in the corporate structure of retail consumption licenses and retail distribution licenses. 
(Prior code § 48-3.1) 
5.08.050 - Plenary retail consumption-Plenary retail distribution licenses-Number-Renewal-Transfer. 
A.  The total number of plenary retail consumption licenses issued and outstanding in the city at the same time shall not exceed the number limited by the laws of the state of New Jersey, and the total number of plenary retail distribution licenses issued and outstanding in the city at the same time shall not exceed thirty (30) in number; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the issuance of renewals of licenses to persons holding such licenses at the time this amendment is adopted, and further provided this limitation shall not prevent the transfer of licenses according to existing ordinances and laws. 
B.  The total number of club licenses issued and outstanding in the city at the same time shall not exceed more than one such license to every ten thousand (10,000) persons resident within the city as determined by the last preceding federal census; provided however, that this limitation shall not prevent the issuance of renewals of licenses to persons holding such licenses at the time this amendment is adopted. 
(Prior code § 48-4) 
5.08.060 - Nonissuable licenses. 
    No limited retail distribution or seasonal retail consumption licenses shall be issued in the city. 
(Prior code § 48-5) 
5.08.070 - Issuance restriction. 
    No more than one alcoholic beverage license of any kind or class whatsoever shall be issued to any individual, copartnership or corporation in the city. 
(Prior code § 48-6) 
5.08.080 - Retirement of licenses-Negotiations authorized. 
A.  In any case in which the city acquires by purchase or condemnation any real estate within the city which includes any licensed premises for the retail sales of alcoholic beverages, the city council, whenever it finds that a transfer of the license to, and the retirement of the license by, the city, is in the public interest, may contract with the licensee for such transfer upon such terms and for such consideration as shall be mutually agreeable and as the city council shall deem to be reasonable. Upon the transfer of any retail alcoholic beverage license as herein provided, such license shall thereupon be retired by the city and shall not thereafter be reissued to any applicant. 
B.  Nothing in subsection A of this section shall be deemed to prevent or prohibit the city council from engaging in negotiations with the holder of any license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the city where the city council deems such action to be in the public interest, for the transfer of the license to, and the retirement of the license by, the city; provided, however, that a contract for such transfer, upon such terms and for such consideration as shall be mutually agreeable and as the city council shall deem to be reasonable, shall be executed between the city and the holder of any such license, and provided further that upon such transfer of any retail alcoholic beverage license as herein provided, such license shall thereupon be retired by the city and shall not thereafter be reissued to any applicant. 
C.  In any case where the number of existing alcoholic beverage retail consumption licenses exceeds one for each three thousand (3,000) in population in the city, the city council, whenever it determines that it is in the public interest to reduce the number of such licenses may contract with the licensees for the acquisition of such license upon such terms and for such consideration as shall be mutually agreeable and as the city council shall deem to be reasonable, the consideration not to exceed the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per license. Upon the acquisition of any retail alcoholic beverage license as herein provided, such license shall thereupon be retired by the city and shall not thereafter be reissued to any applicant. 
D.  Every applicant and/or prospective transferee of any type of alcoholic beverage license issued by the city council shall first be required to submit to the taking by the Elizabeth police department, at the applicant's or prospective transferee's expense, of the fingerprinting of both hands for the purpose of identification. In the construction of this subsection, "applicants and/or prospective transferees" shall include all individuals, principals of firms and officials of corporations. 
(Prior code § 48-7) 
5.08.090 - Plenary distribution license-Sale of additional merchandise restricted. 
    No plenary distribution license shall be issued to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which any other mercantile business is carried on; provided, however, that the holder of any such license shall be permitted to sell nonalcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off the licensed premises, and provided further that the holder of any such license shall be permitted to sell, in original containers for consumption off the licensed premises, the following items of merchandise, namely: popcorn, pretzels, nut products, potato chips, rice chips, wheat chips, corn chips, cocktail olives, cherries and onions, mixes, cigars, cigarettes and ice cubes in their natural state, provided that such sales are in conformance with Chapter 7.32 of this Code; and no other items of merchandise. 
(Prior code § 48-8) 
5.08.100 - License transfers-Proximity to existing licensed premises-Exceptions. 
A.  No licenses, except club licenses and licenses for hotels or motels containing one hundred (100) guest sleeping rooms and except renewals and person-to-person transfers of other licenses now outstanding, shall be granted for or transferred to premises within a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of then existing licensed premises. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall prevent transfer of a license to premises located within a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the premises for which the license sought to be transferred is issued and outstanding at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted. 
C.  The municipal board of alcoholic beverage control may, in its discretion, upon application for place-to-place transfer, consider any previous transfer or transfers of the particular license. 
D.  In measuring under subsection A of this section, the nearest entrance of existing licensed premises shall be the central point of a circle having a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, and from there to the nearest entrance of the premises to which transfer is sought. In measuring under subsection B of this section, the nearest entrance of the premises from which transfer is sought shall be central point of a circle having a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, and from there to the nearest entrance of the premises to which transfer is sought. 
E.  This section shall not apply in situations covered by supplemental Section 7a in the ordinance adopted June 29, 1954, concerning transfer from premises destroyed by fire, earthquake, hurricane or other disaster. The supplemental section reads as follows: 
Whenever any licensed premises are totally destroyed by fire, earthquake, hurricane or other disaster beyond the control of the licensee of such premises and the owner of the same does not rebuild or refuses to renew the lease or rental agreement to the licensee, the Municipal Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control may in its discretion permit an exception to the provisions of this section. 
    In addition, whenever a licensed premises is owned by a sole proprietor who has died, the municipal board of alcoholic beverage control may, in its discretion, permit an exemption to the provisions of this section. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply with respect to a place-to-place transfer of a license: 
1.  The premises of which are taken for turnpike, highway or road purposes; 
2.  The premises of which are taken for any federal, state, county or municipal project; 
3.  The premises of which are taken for hospital purposes; 
4.  For transfers to, within, or from airport terminal installations; 
5.  for transfers to, within, or from Kapkowski Road Redevelopment area; 
6.  For transfers to, within, or from tax accounts 1-1204A, 1-1371, 1-437, 1-438, and 1-1430; 
7.  For transfers to, within, or from banquet facilities, used only for privately held events, with a minimum seating capacity of one thousand (1,000) guests. Banquet facility uses shall not include nightclub, cabaret, disco, dance hall, tavern, or video screening uses, or any other use opened to the general public; 
8.  For transfers from zones R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 to zones C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3; or 
9.  For transfers within zones C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3. 
G.  Any application for a new license or transfer of a license from person to person or place to place, once having been considered and such application having been denied, there shall be no consideration of a new application for such new license or license transfer for a period of one year from the date of such decision, unless the reasons upon which such application was based and the situation and circumstances relative thereto are substantially changed. An application for a person-to-person and place-to-place transfer of a license of any kind shall not be considered until after the expiration of two (2) years following any previously approved person-to-person and place-to-place transfer of the same license, unless the reasons upon which such application is made is based on one of the exceptions set forth in this section. 
H.  Public notice of a hearing on any application for a transfer of an existing license from place to place or person to person shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the current tax map of the city, within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the establishment which is the subject of such hearing. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the current tax map, or his or her agent in charge of the property, by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail return receipt requested and regular mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown on the current tax map. 
(Ord. No. 4343, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 1-27-2009; Ord. 3164 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3160 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3155 §§ 1, 2, 1999; prior code § 48-9) 
5.08.110 - Hours of legal sale-Closing of premises-Exceptions. 
A.  No plenary retail consumption or club licensee shall serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises on New Year's Day when it is a Sunday between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, the sale, service delivery and consumption upon the licensed premises being permissible at any time on New Year's Day when it is a weekday. No sale, service, delivery or consumption upon the licensed premises shall be permitted on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of each week between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. No sale, service, delivery or consumption upon the licensed premises shall be permitted on Saturday of each week between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and on other Sundays of each week between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. The above notwithstanding, the owners of retail plenary consumption licenses within the city shall be permitted to remain open on Thursday evenings until 3:00 a.m. Friday morning and shall also be permitted to remain open from the evening prior to the following holidays until 3:00 a.m. thereof: 
    Martin Luther King's Birthday; 
    Abraham Lincoln's Birthday (observed); 
    George Washington's Birthday (observed); 
    Memorial Day; 
    Independence Day; 
    Labor Day; 
    Columbus Day; 
    General Election Day; 
    Veterans/Armistice Day; 
    Thanksgiving Day; and 
    Christmas Day. 
B.  During the hours sales are hereinabove prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person other than the licensee and bona fide employees of the licensee permitted to enter or remain thereon, but this closing-of-premises requirement shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Restaurants and bona fide hotels (including hotel restaurants) as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t. 
2.  Clubs that qualify for club licenses under N.J.S.A. 33:1-12, Paragraph 5. 
3.  All other establishments where the principal business or activity is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
C.  Sale or Delivery for Off-Premises Consumption. 
1.  No plenary retail consumption licensee or distribution licensee shall deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any packaged distilled spirits (liquor) for off-premises consumption between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 12:00 noon Sunday of each and every week. 
2.  In addition to the above, no plenary retail consumption licensee or distribution licensee shall deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any beer or wine for off-premises consumption between the hours of 3:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:00 noon Sunday of each and every week. 
3.  The sale or delivery of any beer, wine, or distilled spirits (liquor) for off-premises consumption shall be permitted on Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve when those days fall on a Sunday, and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 3877 § 1, 2007; amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 48-10) 
5.08.120 - Unobstructed view of interior required-Exceptions. 
    Plenary retail consumption licensed premises, except public and private dining rooms and clubs, shall be so arranged as to permit an unobstructed view of the interior thereof from the street, and no window blind, screen, curtain or other article shall be so left or placed as to prevent an unobstructed view of the interior of the premises so licensed. 
(Prior code § 48-11) 
5.08.130 - Conduct of business limited to ground floor-Exceptions. 
    No license shall be granted to establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages where the premises designated in the application are located upon any floor above the ground floor of the premises unless the applicant conducts a bona fide restaurant complying with all the requirements of the department of health, welfare and housing of the city and such other departments as may be necessary, and maintains a dining room equipped with a minimum of twelve (12) tables capable of seating an aggregate minimum of forty-eight (48) people, and whose dining room is open for the public service of meals from hours commencing not later than 11:00 a.m. and continuing until at least 9:00 p.m. and whose service of alcoholic beverages is only incidental to the service of food. 
(Prior code § 48-12) 
5.08.140 - Compliance with zoning regulations required. 
    Licensees must conform in all respects to the zoning ordinance in effect in the city, codified in Title 17 of this code. (Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 48-13) 
5.08.150 - Obstructed booths and areas prohibited. 
    No booths or other segregated areas or obstructions will be permitted which in the judgment of the licensing authorities prevent a clear view of all occupants within the enclosure or segregated area. 
(Prior code § 48-14) 
5.08.160 - Qualifications for interest or employment-Exception. 
    No person who would fail to qualify as a licensee shall have any interest in a licensed business, nor shall such a person be employed to work upon a licensed premises, except pursuant to a permit issued by the director of Alcoholic Beverage Control and pursuant to State Rules and Regulations of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the state of New Jersey and the laws of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 48-15) 
5.08.170 - Regulations governing music-Control of noise. 
A.  No orchestras shall be permitted within any licensed establishment unless separate application is made to the licensing authority for permission therefor. 
B.  No single musical instruments, mechanical or otherwise, shall be permitted within the licensed premises if accompanied by any unreasonable volume of sound, din or noise. 
C.  If, in the judgment of the licensing authority, the maintenance of an orchestra or musical equipment, as aforesaid, is inimical to the health, welfare and comfort of the neighborhood, it shall either deny the applicant's petition thereof or direct the correction of the licensee s objectionable practices. 
(Prior code § 48-16) 
5.08.180 - Sales to or consumption by certain persons prohibited. 
    No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, to any person actually or apparently intoxicated, or to any mental defective or habitual drunkard, or allow, permit or suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-17) 
5.08.190 - Purchase or possession by minor prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for a minor to purchase, attempt to purchase or have purchased for him or her, or have in his or her possession, any alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior code § 48-18) 
5.08.200 - Purchase for minors prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to purchase for or attempt to purchase for, furnish to or attempt to furnish to, a minor any alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior code § 48-19) 
5.08.210 - Prohibition of teen night in establishments possessing an alcoholic beverage license. 
A.  Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be allowed to frequent, loiter or remain in any room or rooms used or devoted to the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverage upon a licensed premises, unless accompanied by their parent, guardian or adult husband or wife. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to restaurants, guest rooms and private and public dining rooms in hotels, social clubs, fraternal, religious or veterans organizations and catering facilities. 
(Prior code § 48-20) 
5.08.220 - Solicitations for sale prohibited. 
    No licensee shall directly or indirectly solicit from house to house, personally or by telephone, the purchase of alcoholic beverages, nor allow, permit or suffer such solicitation. 
(Prior code § 48-21) 
5.08.230 - Disorderly persons prohibited from premises. 
    No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises any known criminals, gangsters, racketeers, pickpockets, swindlers, confidence men, prostitutes, female impersonators or other persons of ill repute; nor shall any licensee allow, permit or suffer the licensed premises or the licensed business to be used in furtherance or aid of, or in connection with, any illegal activity or enterprise. 
(Prior code § 48-22) 
5.08.240 - Maintenance of orderly premises required. 
    No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises any disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities, brawls or unnecessary noises or allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be conducted in such manner as to become a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 48-23) 
5.08.250 - Lotteries prohibited. 
    No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any lottery to be conducted or any ticket or participation right in any lottery to he or she sold or offered for sale on or about the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-24) 
5.08.260 - Gambling and coin-operated amusement devices prohibited. 
    No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any pool-selling, bookmaking or any playing for money at faro, roulette, rouge et noir or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind or any device or apparatus designed for any such purpose on or about the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-25) 
5.08.270 - Slot machines prohibited. 
    No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed premises any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing. 
(Prior code § 48-26) 
5.08.280 - Sale of contraceptive devices prohibited-Exception. 
    No licensee, except bona fide pharmacies, to the extent that they may be duly authorized by law to handle such merchandise, shall possess, allow, permit or suffer the sale or distribution of any contraceptive or contraceptive device, either chemical or mechanical, or possess, allow, permit or suffer any mechanical device designed or used for such sale or distribution upon or about the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-27) 
5.08.290 - Prohibited deliveries. 
    No licensee shall deliver within the state, to any person not holding a license under the Alcoholic Beverage Law, alcoholic beverages intended by such person for delivery, by gift or otherwise, to customers or prospective customers in the course of his or her business. 
(Prior code § 48-28) 
5.08.300 - Possession or sale of illegally transported beverages prohibited. 
    No licensee shall receive, possess or sell any alcoholic beverages transported into this state in violation of State Regulation No. 18. 
(Prior code § 48-29) 
5.08.310 - Retail distribution licensees-Opening or consumption on premises prohibited. 
    No retail distribution licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages sold by him or her to be consumed on the licensed premises, nor shall he or she permit their containers to be opened on the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-30) 
5.08.320 - Retail licensees-Means of procurement specified. 
    No retail licensee shall purchase or obtain alcoholic beverages except from the holder of a New Jersey manufacturer's or wholesaler's license or pursuant to a special permit. Purchases of alcoholic beverages by one retailer from another and sales of alcoholic beverages by one retailer to another are prohibited. 
(Prior code § 48-31) 
5.08.330 - Possession or distribution of pornography prohibited. 
    No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed premises, or have in his or her possession or distribute or cause to be distributed, any matter containing any obscene, indecent, filthy, lewd, lascivious or disgusting printing, writing, picture or other such representation. 
(Prior code § 48-32) 
5.08.340 - Apparel regulations. 
A.  No person shall be permitted to appear on the premises of any establishment licensed by the alcoholic beverage control board to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city, in any act, scene, sketch or other form of entertainment, including dancing, for the benefit of patrons, with breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or draped so as to appear uncovered. 
B.  No waitress, barmaid or any other person who comes in contact with or is likely to come in contact with the patrons of an establishment licensed, by the alcoholic beverage control board to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted to appear in the presence of such patrons with breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or draped as to appear uncovered. 
(Prior code § 48-33) 
5.08.350 - Possession or sale of certain substances prohibited. 
    No licensee shall sell or possess, or allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed premises, any malt, hops, oak shavings or chips, flavoring or coloring agents, cordial or liquor extracts, essences or syrups, or any ingredient, compound or preparation of similar nature. 
(Prior code § 48-34) 
5.08.360 - Special sales prohibited. 
    No retail licensee shall directly or indirectly sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption off the licensed premises except at a specified price per bottle or specified price per case thereof, or both; "combination sales" of any kind, consisting of more than one article, whether it be an alcoholic beverage or something else, at a single aggregate price, are prohibited. 
(Prior code § 48-35) 
5.08.370 - Inducements for sales prohibited-Exception. 
    No retail licensee shall directly or indirectly offer or furnish any gifts, prizes, coupons, premiums, rebates, discounts or similar inducements with the sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption off the licensed premises, provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit retail licensees from furnishing advertising novelties of nominal value. 
(Prior code § 48-36) 
5.08.380 - Familiarity with statutory requirements presumed. 
    Licensees shall be presumed to be cognizant of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Law, of state rules and regulations and of this chapter applicable to them. 
(Prior code § 48-37) 
5.08.390 - Display of license required-Specifications. 
    Each holder of a retail alcoholic beverage license in the city shall display the current license in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises, which place shall be no lower than four and one-half (41/2) feet nor higher than six (6) feet from the main floor level of the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 48-38) 
Chapter 5.12 - AMUSEMENT GAMES AND DEVICES 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Amusement game" or "entertainment machine or device" means any machine, contrivance or device, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or release mechanism into a slot, crevice, connector or other opening or by the payment of any price, fee or donation, operates or may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve no score, a high or a low score, which by comparison to the nonscore or score of other players, whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill, competence or length of time played or operated or indicates in any other way or manner competitive advantage of one player or operator or one team over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include, without limitation, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skillball, bagatelle, mack tables, Ballyho devices, high score tables, mechanical games, operations or transactions similar thereto by whatever name they may be called, and it shall include any device or game which utilizes a video tube, cathode ray tube, fluorescent screen, luminous spots produced by the propulsion of a strong electric field or electrons or by any variant of laser oscillations of atoms or molecules in optic or nonoptic modes to reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be representative of real games or imagined activities. It also means any pool or billiard table or any bowling alley. 
    "Amusement machine complex" means a group of more than six amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices in the same place, location or premises, excluding those machines or devices as defined as "amusement machines, other." 
    Amusement Machines, Other. "Other amusement machines" means a coin-operated machine or device, not including amusement games or entertainment machines or devices, which provides a ride, sensation, electronic reading or weight, photograph, lamination, photo duplication, spray or item of merchandise provided at random among other items of merchandise for use by and to the amusement of the public. 
    "Distributor" means any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or any other business entity which leases, rents out or places under any kind of arrangement, within the city, one or more music machines or devices or one or more amusement game or entertainment machines or devices in a premises or in a location owned or controlled by another. 
    "Licensed premises" means the entire premises, including, without limitation, all buildings, auxiliary buildings, structures, appurtenant structures, walks, alleys, drives and parking facilities owned or controlled by the operator and/or owner-operator of any amusement game or entertainment machine or device. 
    "Music machine or device" means any music-vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into a slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated by the public generally for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement and shall include, without limitation, what is commonly called a "jukebox." 
    "Net floor area" means the gross floor area of the licensed premises, less deductions for counter space areas, storage areas, shelving areas, bathrooms, areas of ingress and egress, office space and other areas which are not intended or held out for public use. The maximum number of square feet shall be determined by the division of inspections of the department of health, welfare and housing. 
    "Operator" means any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls a premises or a location within the city in which any music machine or device or any amusement game or entertainment machine or device is displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public. 
    "Owner-operator" means any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls a premises or a location within the city in which any music machine or device or any amusement game or entertainment machine or device which is owned by the natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or any other business entity is displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public. 
    "Person" means any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other business entity who owns any mechanical amusement device; the person in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; the person having control over such machine. 
(Prior code § 49-1) 
5.12.020 - Distributor license required-Application procedure-Fee. 
A.  No distributor of amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices shall distribute to any person or to the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee of any premises in the city, for the purpose of operation thereof, any music machine or device or any amusement game or entertainment machine or device without first having obtained from the license inspector, central license bureau, department of health, welfare and housing, a license to so distribute. 
B.  Application for such license shall be made in duplicate and shall state the following: 
1.  The name, date and place of birth, home address and business address and home telephone number and business telephone number of the applicant; and if the applicant is a partnership, firm, association, corporation or other business entity, the same information shall be supplied for each of the stockholders, officers and directors of the corporation or the partners, members or principals, except that if the corporation has on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission a registration statement in connection with the listing of any class of its stock on any stock exchange or the sale thereof to the general public, it shall supply such information for each of its officers and directors and each of the owners of five percent or more of any class of its stock. 
2.  The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant or person upon whom service of process is authorized to be made. 
3.  The name, date and place of birth, home address and home telephone number of the manager or other authorized agent of the applicant who shall be in charge of or conduct the business of the applicant within the city. 
4.  With respect to each person whose name is listed on the license application under subsection (B)(l), (2) and (3) of this section, the fact of arrest or conviction, whether by or without jury or by plea, in any jurisdiction of an offense which, under the laws of the state of New Jersey or any other state or of the federal government, constitutes a crime or disorderly person's offense or of an offense involving moral turpitude, with a full disclosure of the nature of the offense, arrest, time and place of commission, legal proceedings in connection therewith and punishment. When any person whose name is listed on the license application under any section hereof because of the ownership of stock did not himself or herself furnish the consideration for which the stock was purchased or issued, the same information required above as to such arrest or conviction for any such offense shall be disclosed with respect to the person actually furnishing such consideration. 
5.  With respect to any person whose name is listed on the license application under any section hereof because of the ownership of stock of any class, there shall be filed with the application an affidavit, under oath of the owner of the stock, setting forth the name and address of the person or persons who actually furnished the consideration for which the stock was purchased or issued and stating that the affiant has read the license application and that the information contained therein is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his or her knowledge and belief. 
6.  The type, manufacturer, serial number and location of each music machine or device or amusement game or entertainment machine or device to be distributed under the license applied for. 
7.  The terms, conditions and arrangements, including, without limitation, all financial arrangements under which the applicant is to distribute amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices within the city. There shall be included a copy of all agreements and arrangements between the applicant and each operator with whom he or she proposes to do business. The application shall fully disclose all loans, pledges, mortgages, debts, demands, claims or other obligations between the applicant and each operator with whom he or she proposes to do business. Such disclosure shall be full and complete and shall not be limited to the distribution or operation of machines under this chapter. The license inspector shall require such additional information as may be necessary to fully and accurately advise him or her of the nature of the proposed business to be conducted under this chapter. 
8.  If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be included a corporate resolution in proper form authorizing the execution of the license application on behalf of the corporation. 
9.  The application shall contain a certification, under oath, made by the applicant that the information contained in the application and all attachments thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his or her knowledge and belief. 
C.  The applicant shall file with his or her application an agreement to maintain for the term of any license issued and for five years thereafter financial records prepared in accordance with a generally accepted accounting method and in sufficient detail to fully and accurately reflect each and every item of gross receipts, operating expenses and net profits. The applicant shall also file with his or her application a consent to produce and make available to any law enforcement agency on demand all his or her financial records. 
D.  The license inspector shall promptly forward a copy of the application and accompanying materials to the director of the department of police for investigation, review and report. The director of police shall ascertain if a criminal and arrest record exists for the applicant or person and if the person is of good moral character, and fingerprints of the applicant or person shall be taken, and he or she shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate amusement games, entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices to determine if the proposed location is adequately separated from pedestrian circulation for the other uses of the premises or adjacent premises and to make a report of his or her findings. Such report shall be sent to the license inspector, who, in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth herein, may grant or refuse the license or may grant the license as to one or more but not all of the music machines or devices or amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and refuse the license as to the rest. If the license is granted, the license inspector shall forthwith issue the license upon payment of the licensing fees. The license inspector shall ensure that: 
1.  The license application and all attachments thereto are complete, accurate and truthful. 
2.  Those persons whose names are required to be disclosed on the license application are all persons capable of owning, controlling and conducting the proposed business of distributing music machines or devices or amusement games or entertainment machines or devices within the city in a manner consistent with the public safety, good morals and general welfare of the community. 
3.  All those persons whose names are required to be disclosed on the license application can reasonably be expected to own, control, manage or operate the proposed business in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and free from any gambling, immoral or illegal conduct or activity and free of unnecessary and unwanted noise and commotion. 
4.  No criminal element is in direct or indirect control or management of the business of the applicant. 
5.  The granting of the application and issuance of the license thereunder will promote a fair competitive market for the distribution of music machines or devices or amusement games or entertainment machines or devices within the city. 
6.  The granting of the application and issuance of the license thereunder will not create an unwarranted burden on any law enforcement officer or agency. 
7.  The applicant has properly executed all agreements and consents required by this chapter and has agreed to conduct his or her business in accordance with all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
8.  The applicant for a distributor's license, at the time of the application, shall pay a license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), together with a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each amusement games, entertainment machine or device operated for the first three (3) at any one location, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional such amusement game, entertainment machine or device operated at any one location, whether leased or distributed to an operator or to an owner-operator. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 5, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 49-2) 
5.12.030 - Owner-operator license required-Application procedure. 
A.  No owner-operator of amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices shall operate any such games, machines or devices within the city without first having obtained from the license inspector, central license bureau, department of health, welfare and housing, a license so to operate. 
B.  Application for such license shall be made in quadruplicate and shall state the following: 
1.  The name, date and place of birth, home address and business address, home telephone number and business telephone number of the applicant and each of its stockholders, officers and directors and each partner, member or principal. 
2.  The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant or person upon whom service of process is authorized to be made. 
3.  The name, date and place of birth, home address and home telephone number of the manager or other authorized agent of the applicant who shall be in charge of or conduct the business of the applicant within the city. 
4.  With respect to each person whose name is listed on the license application under subsections (B)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, the fact of arrest or conviction, whether by or without jury or by plea, in any jurisdiction of an offense which, under the laws of the state of New Jersey or any other state or of the federal government, constitutes a crime or disorderly person's offense or of an offense involving moral turpitude, with a full disclosure of the nature of the arrest or offense, time and place of commission, legal proceedings in connection therewith and punishment. 
5.  The type, manufacturer, serial number and precise location of each music machine or device or amusement game or entertainment machine or device to be operated under the license applied for. 
6.  If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be included a corporate resolution in proper form authorizing the execution of the license application on behalf of the corporation. 
7.  The application shall contain a certification under oath, made by the applicant, that the information contained in the application and all attachments thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his or her knowledge and belief. 
C.  The provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section, with the exception of the disclosure of the home telephone number and business telephone number, subsections (B)(2) and (3) of this section do not apply to any person who is licensed for any purpose by the municipal board of alcoholic beverage control, as defined in Section 5.08.020 of this title. 
D.  The license inspector shall promptly forward a copy of the application and accompanying materials to the directors of the departments of police, fire and health, welfare and housing for investigation, review and report. The director of police shall ascertain if a criminal and arrest record exists for the applicant or person and if the person is of good moral character, and fingerprints of the applicant or person shall be taken, and he or she shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate amusement games, entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices to determine if the proposed location is adequately separated from pedestrian circulation for the other uses of the premises or adjacent premises and to make a report of his or her findings. The department of health, welfare and housing, division of inspections, shall determine if the application is in conformity with the housing and building code of the city and the state Uniform Construction Code. The fire department shall determine if the application is in conformity with the fire code of the city. Such reports shall be sent to the license inspector, who, in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth herein, may grant or refuse the license or may grant the license as to one or more but not all of the music machines or devices or amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and refuse the license as to the rest. If the license is granted, the license inspector shall forthwith issue the license upon payment of the licensing fee. The license inspector shall ensure that: 
1.  The license application and all attachments thereto are complete, accurate and truthful. 
2.  Those persons whose names are required to be disclosed on the license application are all persons capable of owning, controlling and conducting the proposed business of owning and/or operating music machines or devices and amusement games or entertainment machines or devices within the city in a manner consistent with the public safety, good morals and general welfare of the community. 
3.  All those persons whose names are required to be disclosed on the license application can reasonably be expected to own, control, manage or operate the proposed business in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and free from any gambling or immoral or illegal conduct or activity and free from unnecessary and unwanted noise and commotion. 
4.  No criminal element is in direct or indirect control or management of the business of the applicant. 
5.  The granting of the application and issuance of the license thereunder will promote a fair competitive market for the operation of music machines or devices or amusement games or entertainment machines or devices within the city. 
6.  The granting of the application and issuance of the license thereunder will not create an unwarranted burden on any law enforcement officer or agency. 
7.  The applicant has properly executed all agreements and consents required by this chapter and has agreed to conduct his or her business in accordance with all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
8.  No operator's license shall be granted hereunder unless the licensed premises shall meet all requirements of all fire regulations and the housing, building, sanitary, electrical and plumbing codes of the city. 
9.  It shall be the duty of the operator and the owner-operator to submit the application for the license, accompanied by a detailed floor plan showing the location of each amusement game or entertainment machine or device in relation to exit or exits of the proposed licensed premises. 
10.  It shall be the duty of the operator and the owner-operator to submit with the application for the license a map in compliance with the conditions set forth in Section 5.12.040(A). 
(Prior code § 49-3) 
5.12.040 - Conditions on operation of premises. 
A.  No amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device shall be permitted on any premises located within a two hundred (200) foot radius from any church, school, park, day-care center, child-care center or playground. No amusement machine complex can be operated within a one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot radius from any church, school, park, day-care center, child-care center or playground, nor can one amusement machine complex be operated within two thousand (2,000) feet from another operating amusement machine complex. All distances shall be measured from the property line perimeters. The measurements shall be determined by the city engineer and furnished at the cost and expense of the operator and/or owner-operator. 
B.  The operator and/or owner-operator shall not permit, suffer or allow any person to bet or gamble in any form or manner on the licensed premises and shall prevent any immoral or illegal conduct or activity from occurring. 
C.  No person on the licensed premises shall have illegally in his or her possession or under his or her control or offer to another any prescription legend drug, controlled dangerous substance or device to administer any such prescription legend drug, controlled dangerous substance of any habit-forming drug, liquid or substance; nor shall the operator and/or owner-operator permit, suffer or allow such person on the licensed premises. 
D.  No operator and/or owner-operator shall permit, suffer or allow the unlawful sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises. 
E.  No operator and/or owner-operator shall permit the operation of any amusement game or entertainment machine or device during the hours in which statute, ordinance or regulation by either federal, state or local authorities regulates or prescribes that the licensed premises are not open to the general public. 
F.  No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall be permitted to operate any amusement game or entertainment machine or device where the premises are not licensed primarily for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    Where premises are licensed primarily for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, no amusement game or entertainment machine or device shall be operated by any person not permitted by law to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages. 
G.  The operator and/or owner-operator shall at all times maintain good order on or about the licensed premises and shall not permit, suffer or allow any disturbance, congestion, truancy, loitering or overcrowding so as to exceed a stated and posted occupancy rating as determined by the fire department and department of health, welfare and housing, division of inspections, using the standards listed in the latest edition and amendments to the state of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code on or about the licensed premises. 
H.  No amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device shall be operated in such a manner as to be heard out-of-doors and to the interior of any adjoining premises or property, nor shall such operation be in a manner that violates Chapter 8.48 of this code and amendments thereto or the zoning noise controls of the land development code of the city. 
I.  No song shall be played or word spoken on any music machines or device which violates the obscenity law of New Jersey or the city. 
J.  No amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device shall be permitted to cause unnecessary and unwanted noise or commotion or otherwise to interfere with the public health, welfare and morals so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
K.  No operator and/or owner-operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prize or other regard to any person playing any amusement game or entertainment machine or device which is distributed or operated under this chapter, except for contests or tournaments, the benefits or proceeds of which are used exclusively for bona fide charitable purposes in conformity with state of New Jersey laws governing games of chance. 
L.  No amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device shall be permitted or located in a so-called backroom nor in any part of the licensed premises which is not open to the general public. 
M.  All licensed premises shall provide sanitary facilities consistent with the provisions of Title 7 of this code, the Sanitary Code of the state of New Jersey and the state of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code; and meet or exceed any fire, safety or health regulations, codes or laws in effect and enforceable by the city. 
N.  No distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator nor any of his or her officers, directors, agents, servants or employees shall, by threats, promises or intimidation, seek to control or direct the placement or removal of any amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device from any premises or location within the city; and any such threats, promises or intimidation shall be reported immediately to the police department and the license inspector. 
O.  No distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator shall neglect or fail to report promptly to the police department and to the license inspector any violation of any law or ordinance occurring on or about the licensed premises, nor shall any distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator neglect or fail to report promptly to the license inspector any conduct or activity prohibited by this chapter. 
P.  Each distributor shall maintain the financial records in the form, time and manner set forth in the consent and agreement filed with the license application in the central license bureau. 
Q.  Each distributor and/or owner-operator shall promptly report in writing to the license inspector any change by addition or deletion of the information furnished on the license application and all material attached thereto, and this obligation shall be fully met during the term of any license or the renewal thereof. 
R.  No distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator shall refuse to cooperate fully with the license inspector and any law enforcement officer or agency, nor shall such distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator refuse to produce and make available all its financial records in accordance with the terms of the consent attached to the license application. No distributor and/or operator and/or owner-operator shall refuse access to its premises to the license inspector nor to any member of the departments of police, fire, finance and health, welfare and housing, nor to any law enforcement officer or agency. 
S.  Amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and music machines or devices may be placed or maintained by distributors, operators and owner-operators in any licensed premises according to the following schedule: 
1.  One amusement game or entertainment machine or device and one music machine or device or a total of two amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or two music machines or devices are permitted wherein there is a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in the area or room in which such machines are located. 
2.  Two amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and two music machines or devices or a total of four amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or four music machines or devices are permitted wherein there is a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet in the area or room in which such machines are located. 
3.  Five amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and five music machines or devices are permitted wherein there is a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet in the area or room in which such machines are located. 
4.  For six or more amusement games or entertainment machines or devices and music machines or devices, a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of floor space per such machine shall be required in addition to a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet in the area or room in which the machines are located, and further the area or room shall have a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of clear and unobstructed window space at street or ground level only. 
T.  No officer or employee of the city, whether elected or appointed, shall be employed by any distributor, owner and/or owner-operator of a licensed amusement machine complex. 
(Prior code § 49-4) 
5.12.050 - License fees-Identification of machines-Expiration of licenses. 
    The following annual licensing fees shall be paid to the city: 
A.  Distributors. 
1.  Music machines or devices: A fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the license, together with a fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each such machine or device distributed. 
2.  Amusement games or entertainment machines or devices (except pool or billiard tables not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or release mechanism and except for all bowling alleys): A fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the license, together with a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per amusement game, entertainment machine or device for the first three (3) at any one location, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each additional game, machine or device distributed to the same location. 
3.  Pool or billiard tables not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or release mechanism and all bowling alleys: A fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the license, together with a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such machine or device distributed. 
B.  Owner-Operator. 
1.  Music machines or devices owned by the owner-operator: A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such machine or device operated. 
2.  Amusement games or entertainment machines or devices (except pool or billiard tables not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, disc, key or release mechanism and except for all bowling alleys) owned by the owner-operator: A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each amusement game, entertainment machine or device operated for the first three (3) at any one location and four hundred twenty-five dollars ($425.00) for each additional such amusement game, entertainment machine or device operated at the same location. 
3.  Pool or billiard tables not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or release mechanism: A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such table operated. 
4.  Bowling alleys: A fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such alley operated. 
C.  A distributor's license and an owner-operator's license, when issued, shall designate the number, type, manufacturer and serial numbers of amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices distributed or operated thereunder. 
D.  Each such license shall bear a number, and the number of that license shall be placed permanently and visibly upon each amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device distributed or operated under this chapter. 
E.  All license fees shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of the license, and all licenses shall expire on June 30th next succeeding the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 6, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 49-5) 
5.12.060 - Display of licenses-Transfers. 
A.  Each distributor's and/or owner-operator's license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously in the licensed premises. 
B.  Any distributor's and/or owner-operator's license may be amended to evidence the transfer from one amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device to another similar machine or device upon application to the license inspector giving a description by type, manufacturer and serial number of such other machine or device. 
C.  No distributor's and/or owner-operator's license shall be transferred from distributor to distributor or from owner-operator to owner-operator or from place to place within the city without the same application, investigation and reports as required on a new application. 
D.  Any distributor's and/or owner-operator's license may be amended to evidence the transfer or replacement of an amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device for another similar machine or device upon application to the license inspector giving a description by type, manufacturer and serial number of such other machine or device. 
E.  No distributor's license and/or owner-operator's license shall be transferred from person to person without the same application, investigations and reports as required on a new application. Any transfer singly or in the aggregate within any calendar year of five percent or more of any class of stock of a corporate distributor shall constitute such person-to-person transfer. 
(Prior code § 49-6) 
5.12.070 - Existing licenses. 
    All licenses duly issued and in force on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue in force until the expiration date of each such license, after which application for renewal shall be made under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 49-7) 
5.12.080 - Revocation of licenses. 
    Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the license inspector should the licensed distributor and/or owner-operator distribute or operate any amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device contrary to the provisions of this chapter or of any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation or fail to cooperate fully with any enforcement officer or agency. Any material misstatement or omission in the license application or in any information submitted therewith or the failure to notify in writing the license inspector of any changes by addition or deletion or amendment to the application or information during the term of any license or renewal shall constitute sufficient ground for revocation of the license. Such revocation shall be by the license inspector after a hearing. The licensee shall be given ten (10) days' notice of the hearing, and such notice shall state the ground therefor. At such hearing the licensee may submit relevant information in his or her own behalf and cross-examine witnesses. 
(Prior code § 49-8) 
5.12.090 - Seizure of machines and devices. 
    If the director of the police department shall have probable cause to believe any amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device is used for gambling, such machine or device may be seized by the police department and impounded and may be considered as contraband by law. 
(Prior code § 49-9) 
5.12.100 - Exemptions from operator's license fee. 
    The provisions of this chapter requiring an operator's license fee shall not apply to any church, fraternal or veterans' organization or other bona fide religious, charitable or nonprofit organization which operates any amusement game or entertainment machine or device or music machine or device exclusively for the use of its members and the guests of such members and on premises owned or controlled by it. 
(Prior code § 49-10) 
5.12.110 - Conditions for issuance of licenses. 
    No license shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant has complied with all applicable provisions of Title 17 of this code. 
(Prior code § 49-11) 
5.12.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Anyone violating any section of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation of this chapter, in the discretion of the judge imposing the same. 
(Prior code § 49-12) 
5.12.130 - Amusement games permitted. 
A.  Declarations. It is hereby determined, decided and declared that there exists within the city two (2) recognized amusement parks identified as follows: 
1.  REXPLEX; it's successors and assigns, located at Block 1, Lot 1438. 
2.  JEEPERS; it's successors and assigns, at Jersey Gardens Mall. 
B.  License Required for Amusement Games. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or operate within this municipality any amusement game or games as said terms are defined by the Amusement Games Licensing Law (P.L. 1959, c. 109, as amended and supplemented), whether said game or games are of skill or chance, or both, and whether said game or games are played and operated with or without numbers or figures, without first having obtained a license from the city council. Said license shall be issued pursuant to and subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law. 
C.  Application for License. Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Central License Bureau a written application in such form as prescribed by and in accordance with the Amusement Games Licensing Law, as amended and supplemented, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission of the state. 
D.  License Fees. The annual fees for each type of license to be issued hereunder shall be as follows, and said fee shall accompany the application for the license: 
1.  Games permitted under Category and Certification Number 2 as listed in N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9, promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission, New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety. 
a.  (1)  Arcade games (each fifty (50) units or any lesser number thereof) two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If any machine has more than one (1) player position, each player position shall be considered a separate machine or unit in calculating the license fee. 
(2)  Additional units, each ten dollars ($10.00). 
2.  Games permitted under Category and Certification No. 3 as listed in N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9, fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit. 
3.  Games permitted under Category and Certification No. 4 is listed in N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9. 
(1)  Competitive games: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
4.  Games permitted under Category and Certification No. 5 as listed in N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9. 
(1)  Games of chance: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
5.  Any game not specifically mentioned in this chapter but permissible under the Amusement Games Licensing Law: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
E.  Control of Amusement Games. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-106 the city council shall have and exercise control over all amusement games held, operated or conducted under such license with all the power authorized or granted under the Amusement Games Licensing Law and the rules and regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission. The city council shall have the power and authority to suspend any license issued by the city council and to revoke the license, after hearing, for any violation of any such provision. The city council shall have the right of entry, by its officer's and agents, at all times, into any premises where any such amusement game is being held, operated and conducted or which it is intended that any such amusement game shall be held, operated and conducted, or where any equipment being used or intended to be used is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. 
(Ord. No. 3291, 2-13-2001) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3291, adopted February 13, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as Chapter 50, Sections 50-1-50-5, of the prior Code. At the direction of the city, Ord. No. 3291 has been included in Chapter 5.12. 
Chapter 5.16 - AUTOBUSES 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Autobus" as used in this chapter, means an autobus as defined in R.S. 48:4-1, amended from time to time, and shall mean and include, except as hereinafter noted, any motor vehicle or motorbus operated over public highways or public places in this state for the transportation of passengers for hire in intrastate business, whether used in regular route, casino, charter or special bus operations, notwithstanding such motor vehicle or motorbus may be used in interstate commerce. 
    "Charter bus operation" as used in this chapter means and includes the operation of an autobus or autobuses, not on a regular schedule, by the person owning or leasing such bus or buses pursuant to a contract, agreement or arrangement to furnish an autobus or autobuses and a driver or drivers thereof to a person, group of persons or organization (corporate or otherwise) for a trip designated by such person, group of persons or organization for a fixed charge per trip, per autobus, per period of time or per mile. 
    "Person" as used in this chapter means and includes any individual, co-partnership, association, corporation or joint stock company, their lessees, trustees, or receivers appointed by any court. 
    "Regular route bus operation" as used in this chapter means and includes the operation of an autobus between fixed termini, on a regular schedule. 
    "Ridesharing" as used in this chapter means the transportation of persons in a motor vehicle, with a maximum carrying capacity of not more than fifteen (15) passengers, including the driver, where such transportation is incidental to the purpose of the driver. The term shall include such ridesharing arrangements known as carpools and vanpools. 
    "Special bus operation" as used in this chapter means and includes the operation by the owner or lessee of an autobus or autobuses for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, not on a regular schedule, each passenger paying a fixed charge for his carriage, on a special trip arranged and designated by such owner or lessee, which fixed charge may or may not include special premiums. 
    "Street" as used in this chapter means and includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, road or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 1, 2-9-2010; Prior code § 52-1) 
5.16.020 - Consent to operate required; license. 
A.  No autobus shall be operated wholly or partly upon any street until the owner thereof shall have obtained the consent of the city council as hereinafter provided. Such consent shall be issued to the owner of such autobus for the operation thereof by the owner thereof or by servants or agents duly accredited for that purpose by the owner, and such consent shall not be deemed to authorize the operation of any autobus by any lessee or person other than the owner or his or her duly accredited agents or servants. 
B.  No person shall engage in, keep, conduct, carry on, or operate an autobus in whole or in part on the streets of the city without first obtaining the consent of the governing body and second, obtaining a license as provided for in this chapter. 
C.  An autobus engaged in regular route bus service, charter route bus service and/or special bus operation must comply with the consent and licensure provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 2, 2-9-2010; Prior code § 52-2) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4105, § 2, adopted February 9, 2010, changed the title of section 5.16.020 from "Consent to operate required" to "Consent to operate required; license." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
5.16.030 - Conditions for consent-Application for license-Qualifications. 
    The consent shall not be granted except upon compliance by the owner of any autobus with the following conditions: 
A.  There shall be filed with the bureau of central license an application which shall contain: 
1.  The name of the owner; 
2.  His or her age; 
3.  Residence and business address; 
4.  Number of autobuses in operation; 
5.  Certificate of incorporation (if applicable); 
6.  Disclosure of ownership structure; 
7.  The streets and complete routes over which it is desired to operate; 
8.  The character and estimated capacity of the autobus, together with a statement of the basis of such estimate; 
9.  And such application shall definitely state whether the autobus is to be driven by the owner personally or by agents or servants duly accredited by such owner; 
10.  Complete original insurance policy; 
11.  Whether or not any person listed in the application has, within ten (10) years of the date of the application, ever been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or disorderly persons offense, the number of convictions and the date, place and nature of the offense for which convicted; 
12.  Location where vehicles will be stored and statement of compliance with applicable zoning laws; 
13.  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments and liens against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments and liens; 
14.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
B.  Every applicant for license to operate an autobus in the city shall be a citizen of the United States and over the age of twenty-one (21) years, or a corporation duly incorporated under the laws of New Jersey or any other legal entity authorized by law to operate autobuses. 
(Ord. No. 4331, § 1, 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 4105, § 3, 2-9-2010; Prior code § 52-3) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4105, § 3, adopted February 9, 2010, changed the title of section 5.16.030 from "Conditions for consent-Application-Qualifications" to "Conditions for consent-Application for license-Qualifications." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
5.16.035 - Disqualification of applicant. 
    No license or consent to operate shall be issued or held by any person, firm or corporation where the applicant, any partner, any officer, any person in management or any entity having a financial or beneficial interest in the business of the applicant shall have been convicted of any crime. Any determination made by the chief license inspector under this section shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2.1. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 4, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.036 - Issuance of licenses. 
    Upon approval of the application and consent of the city council, the chief license inspector shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 5, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.037 - License fee, term of license, renewal of license. 
A.  All licenses issued, and renewals thereof, under this chapter shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance. The chief license inspector may establish administrative rules and/or regulations pertaining to scheduling for the issuance of autobus owner and driver licenses as appropriate. 
B.  The annual fee for the owner license issued under this chapter shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable when the application is filed. 
C.  The annual fee for the autobus driver's license under this chapter shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) payable when the application is filed. 
D.  Application for renewal of a license shall be made on a form provided by the chief license inspector at least one month prior to the expiration of the current license. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 7, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 4105, § 6, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.038 - Transfers. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to another or from place to place. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 7, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.039 - Investigation of licensee's conduct. 
    The chief license inspector may, upon his own initiative or upon the filing of a written verified complaint of any person, investigate the action of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 8, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.040 - Granting of consent-Information required. 
    If the city council shall consider such application favorably, the city council shall, by resolution, authorize the applicant to operate such autobus. In such resolution there shall be incorporated the name and address of the owner, the streets over which consent to operate is granted. 
(Prior code § 52-4) 
5.16.041 - Suspension, revocation and non-renewal of license; hearing. 
    The chief license inspector a hearing shall be conducted by the chief license inspector to determine whether any license issued under this chapter, owner or driver, may be suspended, revoked or not renewed for the following reasons: 
A.  For cause; 
B.  For any violation of any local, state or federal laws; 
C.  Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or other provision of city ordinance or state statute, after reasonable notice shall have been given to the licensee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such chapter on the licensed premises; 
D.  Licensee furnishes incorrect or incomplete information on its application for license or application for renewal of license; 
E.  Licensee shall submit a report to the chief license inspector within twenty-four (24) hours of vehicles being added to the fleet; 
    Prior to any action taken pursuant to this section, the chief license inspector shall notify the licensee in writing of the proposed action taken and shall afford the licensee a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 9, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.050 - Compliance with regulations for operation required. 
    No consent to operate an autobus shall be issued until the applicant agrees that the autobus will be operated as an auto-bus, as herein defined, only upon streets for which consent is given, and he or she will not carry at any time passengers in excess of the number mentioned in his or her application and will not permit the autobus to be driven except by a person satisfactory to the bureau of central licensing as provided in Section 5.16.030, and that the owner or his or her servants or agents operating such autobus will comply with the regulations now in force or hereafter to be adopted concerning the operation of such autobuses in the streets of the city. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-5) 
5.16.051 - Conduct of the holders of licenses. 
A.  The holder of any license under this chapter shall at all times abide by the statues, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the federal, state and city governments and their agencies. 
B.  The holder of any license under this chapter shall at all times allow the city's duly authorized representatives to make inspections for compliance with this chapter and the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 10, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.053 - Exceptions. 
    Nothing contained herein shall be construed to include: 
A.  Vehicles engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire in the manner and form commonly called taxicab service unless such service becomes or is held out to be regular service between stated termini; 
B.  Hotel buses used exclusively for the transportation of hotel patrons to or from local railroad or other common carrier stations including local airports; 
C.  Buses operated for the transportation of enrolled children and adults only when serving as chaperones to or from a school, school connected activity, day camp, summer day camp, nursery school, child care center, pre-school center or other similar places of education, including "School Vehicle Type I" and "School Vehicle Type II" as defined in R.S. 39:1-1; 
D.  Autocabs or limousines as defined in R.S. 48:16-13, unless such service becomes or is held out to be regular service between stated termini; 
E.  Any vehicle used in a "ridesharing" arrangement, as defined by the "New Jersey Ridesharing Act of 1981," P.L. 1981, c. 413 (C. 27:26-1 et al.); 
F.  Any "Special paratransit vehicle" as used in this chapter means any motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the transportation of persons who are at least sixty (60) years of age or who have disabilities or who are the clients of social service agencies, provided, that the motor vehicle is used in a service provided by a county either directly or by contract, or provided by a nonprofit organization, and the service is included by a county as part of its county plan required by section 6 of P.L. 1983, c. 578 (C. 27:25-30), regardless of whether a fare is charged or donations are accepted. 
G.  Any bus or vehicle regulated by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 11, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.060 - Suspension or revocation of consent authorized. 
    Every consent heretofore or hereafter granted to operate an autobus shall be revocable, as provided by R.S. 48:4-7, for failure on the part of the owner to comply with the consent and the terms contained in the application therefor, signed by the person, or with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 52-6) 
5.16.070 - Driver's license and ability required. 
    Every person driving an autobus shall be duly licensed to drive a motor vehicle by the State Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall submit before driving the autobus evidence satisfactory to the bureau of central licensing of his or her responsibility and of his or her ability to drive such autobus at points of congested traffic in the city. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-7) 
5.16.075 - Autobus driver's license required. 
    No person shall operate an autobus upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls an autobus shall permit it to be driven, and no autobus licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time, unless the driver of such autobus shall have first obtained and shall have then in force an autobus driver's license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 12, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.076 - Application procedure-Information and credentials required-Filing fee. 
A.  An application for an autobus driver's license shall be filed with the central license bureau on forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the applicant's name and address and the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of three (3) residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of one year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
2.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers and that he or she has driven a motor vehicle for at least one year. 
3.  The educational background of the applicant. 
4.  A concise history of his or her employment. 
5.  The age of the applicant, which must be at least eighteen (18) years, and a representation that the applicant is able to read and write the English language, a representation that he or she is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs and an agreement that he or she shall not partake of intoxicating liquors during his or her regular tour of duty. 
6.  Length of time he or she has resided in the city; marital status; and prior criminal record, if any. 
7.  Information as to whether his or her New Jersey state driver's license has ever been revoked or suspended and for what reason. 
8.  Fingerprints. 
B.  An applicant for an autobus driver's license, must submit, during the application process to a criminal background check, a motor vehicle records check and a medical checkup and drug test. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 13, 2-9-2010) 
5.16.080 - Conditions for operation-Insurance required-Franchise tax. 
    No consent to operate an autobus shall he or she issued by the city inspector until the owner shall have filed an insurance policy or complied with the provisions of R.S. 48:4-12, 48:4-13, and also a power of attorney nominating and constituting the comptroller of the city his or her true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance filed, in the form provided for in RS. 48:4-36, with the comptroller of the city. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-8) 
5.16.090 - Renewal of insurance-Information required. 
    Every person licensed as aforesaid shall from time to time renew the insurance policies as required under R.S. 48:4-1 et seq., before the expiration thereof, and all policies of renewal shall accurately describe the autobus intended to be covered and shall also contain the name and the manufacturer's number of the autobus. No autobus licensed as aforesaid shall be operated after the termination of such insurance, until the licensee has furnished insurance policy satisfactory to the bureau of central licensing. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-9) 
5.16.100 - Registration of make and license number required. 
    Every person to whom a consent has been or may hereafter be granted by the bureau of central licensing to operate an autobus over the streets of the city, before such consent becomes operative, shall register with the bureau of central licensing of the city the make and license number of the vehicle. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-10) 
5.16.110 - Display of information required. 
    Every autobus for the operation of which consent shall have been given as hereinbefore provided shall bear prominently displayed upon it the number of such consent, and shall likewise bear prominently displayed upon it the route for which consent has been granted, together with the fare to be charged in all cases where such fare exceeds five cents ($0.05). 
(Prior code § 52-11) 
5.16.120 - Operation schedule required-Procedure for change. 
    Every person permitted as aforesaid to operate an autobus in the city, within one week after receiving the consent and before operation thereunder, shall file with the bureau of central licensing a schedule showing the time upon which such autobus is to be operated, which schedule shall be strictly adhered to, and no changes shall be made in such schedule filed until such changes have been submitted to the bureau of central licensing and have received approval. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-12) 
5.16.130 - Autobus stops located. 
    All autobus stops to take on or let off passengers at street intersections or crossings shall be made at locations duly designated by the city council. 
(Prior code § 52-13) 
5.16.140 - Refusal to carry passengers prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to refuse to carry any persons who properly apply for transportation. 
(Prior code § 52-14) 
5.16.150 - Fare collection while autobus in motion prohibited. 
    No fare shall be collected on any such autobus by the driver thereof while such autobus is in motion. 
(Prior code § 52-15) 
5.16.160 - Driver-Diligence required-Conversation prohibited. 
    It shall be the duty of every person licensed as aforesaid to see that the driver employed by him or her to operate the autobus shall use diligent care in the operation thereof, and that no driver shall hold conversation or discourse with any person riding in an autobus operated by him or her, while the same is in motion. 
(Prior code § 52-16) 
5.16.170 - Safe operation required-Safety of passengers protected. 
    It is unlawful to drive any autobus when any passenger is standing upon the running board, fender, mudguard or back thereof, or while any passenger is riding in the autobus outside the body thereof or in such a manner to obstruct the driver's view or his or her control of the vehicle, or with a greater number of passengers than the number stated in the application. 
(Prior code § 52-17) 
5.16.180 - Excessive speed or racing prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to drive recklessly or to drive rapidly to pass any autobus, trolley car or vehicle in order to obtain prospective passengers, or to race with any other vehicles. 
(Prior code § 52-18) 
5.16.190 - Cleanliness and lighting required-Smoking prohibited. 
    Every person to whom consent has been or may hereafter be granted by the city council to operate an autobus shall keep such autobus in a clean condition and properly lighted. Smoking shall be strictly prohibited at all times in any autobus while operating under such consent. 
(Prior code § 52-19) 
5.16.200 - Location of bus stops authorized. 
    The city council may from time to time, by ordinance, resolution or regulation, change or regulate all terminal or starting and stopping points, for the purpose of improving the efficiency of handling the traffic, as may seem to be for the best interest of the traveling public. 
(Prior code § 52-20) 
5.16.210 - Registration of fares-Inspection of registration device required. 
    Every fare paid by any passenger riding on such autobus shall be registered by the driver or the person having charge of the collection thereof, and no owner or the servant or agent of such owner shall receive any fares except such as are registered, and such registering device shall be produced monthly to the city inspector and also to the city treasurer for their inspection, and shall be so kept by the owner of such autobus as to show the correct gross receipts received, from the operation of the same as provided for in R.S. 48:4-14. 
(Prior code § 52-21) 
5.16.220 - Monthly statement of gross receipts required. 
    It shall be the duty of every person licensed as aforesaid to file with the bureau of central licensing on or before the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month (in addition to the statement required to be filed with the city treasurer), a report showing the gross receipts for the previous month. 
(Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 52-22) 
5.16.230 - Existing autobus owners and drivers. 
    As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, existing and operating autobus owners and drivers shall have six (6) months from the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which section derives to make application for a license under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4105, § 14, 2-9-2010) 
Chapter 5.20 - AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINE SERVICES 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Autocabs" means and includes any automobile or motor car with a carrying capacity of not more than nine passengers, not including the driver, used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the streets or public highways of the state, and which is hired by charter or for a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed period, or to transport passengers to a specified place or places, or which charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses, or buses employed solely in transporting school children or teachers or autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the board of public utilities or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or rules of the board of public utilities to carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death. 
    "Certificate of compliance" means a certificate issued by the city clerk pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-17. 
    "Certificate of public convenience and necessity" means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the license division authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a limousine or livery service business in the city. 
    "Chief license inspector" means the supervisor of the license division. 
    "Cruising" means the driving of a private livery on the streets, alleys or public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    "Designated taxi stands" means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city, which has been designated by the city as reserved exclusively for the use of certain taxicabs. 
    "Dispatch" means an instruction to a driver from the principal place of business to provide transportation to a passenger, who has prearranged such transportation with the principal place of business. 
    "Limousine or livery service" means the business of carrying passengers for hire by autocabs. 
    "Person" means any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever. 
    "Prearranged" means having been arranged in advance of pickup by telephone, fax, letter, contract or in person communication with the principal place of business. 
    "Principal place of business" means the place or location where the limo or livery service files its power of attorney, certificate of compliance, required insurance policy or bond pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, N.J.S.A. 48:16-16, N.J.S.A. 48:16-17 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-18. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, park parkway, highway or other public place. 
(Ord. 3156 § 1, 1999) 
5.20.020 - Licensing and enforcement. 
    The licensing and inspections of autocabs, and licenses as hereinafter provided for in this chapter, shall be under the control of the license division and the enforcing of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the license division and the police department of the city. 
(Ord. 3156 § 2, 1999) 
5.20.030 - License required-Expiration date-Fee. 
A.  No limousine or livery service having its principal place of business in the city shall operate hereafter upon the streets of the city without first complying with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, N.J.S.A. 48:16-16, N.J.S.A. 48:16-17 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-18 and receiving an autocab license, certificate of compliance and livery plates from the Division of Motor Vehicles, and certificate of public convenience and necessity, which shall expire on the 31st of March of each year. 
B.  Annual Fees. 
Certificate of public convenience and necessity $1,000.00 Permits per vehicle  100.00 (first 10)  75.00 (11 or more)  
(Ord. No. 4149, § 8, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3156 § 3, 1999) 
5.20.040 - Licensing of livery/limousine drivers. 
    No person shall drive a limousine/livery whose principal place of business is in Elizabeth without first obtaining a license from chief license inspector of the city. Such license should be renewed annually. The annual fee for the license should be ninety dollars ($90.00). 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 9, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3383 § 1, 2002) 
5.20.050 - Insurance required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit a livery to be operated or shall any livery license or certificate of compliance be issued until an insurance policy has been approved and accepted by the chief license inspector, which policy shall be in compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 to N.J.S.A. 48:16-22. 
B.  Upon the issuance of such license, the original insurance policy shall thereupon be filed forthwith with the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 3156 § 4, 1999) 
5.20.060 - Maintenance of valid insurance policy required. 
A.  Any license issued hereunder shall only be effective for as long as the insurance policy remains in force and in accordance with the statutory amounts. In the event that the insurance is canceled, the private livery license shall terminate on the effective date of the cancellation unless the insurance has been reinstated and a withdrawal of the cancellation or new policy of insurance has been submitted to the city clerk prior thereto for the remainder of the license terms. 
B.  Insurance policy must provide therein, that it shall not be canceled except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the license division. 
(Ord. 3156 § 5, 1999) 
5.20.070 - Autocabs prohibited to operate as taxicabs. 
A.  No owner or operator of an autocab shall park or cause to be parked upon the streets of the city an autocab for the purpose of waiting to be dispatched to a new location or waiting to pick-up a passenger or passengers at a new location after it has completed its original dispatched assignment. 
B.  No owner or operator of an autocab shall drive or cruise such autocab upon the streets of the city in search of prospective passengers for hire or for the purpose of soliciting or accepting unscheduled passengers for hire. 
C.  No owner or operator shall park or cause to be parked an autocab upon the streets of the city displaying any sign, soliciting or accepting passengers for hire, utilize any on street or off street parking area as a taxi stand or place to solicit such business. 
D.  No owner, operator, dispatcher or any agent or representative thereof shall dispatch an autocab when the passenger requests a taxicab. 
E.  An autocab shall immediately return to its principal place of business after discharging a passenger unless it is in route to a scheduled pickup. Autocabs will be dispatched from the principal place of business for prearranged scheduling. 
F.  All autocabs shall be garaged and shall not be stored and/or parked on the streets of the city. 
G.  The penalty for a violation of subsection 5.20.070(B) shall be a minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense and one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for each and every subsequent offense of subsection 5.20.070(B). 
(Ord. No. 4727 , § 1, 6-14-2016; Ord. No. 4657 , § 1, 1-12-2016; Ord. 3156 § 6, 1999) 
5.20.080 - Application procedure-Information required. 
A.  Application for license for operation of private livery automobiles shall be made by the owner, lessee or bailee thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by the license division. 
B.  The application shall contain the full name and address of the owner, lessee or bailee, the year, type, VIN number and model of the livery, place and telephone number of the owner, location where vehicles are stored (properly zoned by Elizabeth, must be off-street parking) for which the license is desired and any other pertinent information or documentation requested by the chief license inspector. 
C.  Name and address of principal place of business. 
D.  If application is corporation, a list of shareholders/officers and percentage of ownership must be submitted. 
(Ord. 3156 § 7, 1999) 
5.20.090 - Power to issue or refuse license. 
A.  The chief license inspector shall have the power to issue or refuse to issue or suspend or revoke a license under this chapter and clarify a license or permit under this chapter. 
B.  Any revocation or suspension must be in writing to the owner of record by the chief license inspector by regular mail and certified mail returned receipt requested. 
C.  Any denial, suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed by the applicant or owner within ten (10) days of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation as the case may be in writing to the mayor or designee, who shall set the date, time and place for the hearing with respect to such matter. 
(Ord. 3156 § 8, 1999) 
5.20.100 - Autocab equipment and maintenance-Inspections. 
A.  The license division is authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of private livery automobiles. 
B.  Any vehicle licensed under this chapter found in unclean or unsanitary condition or whose appearance, construction, or condition is found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers, will be removed from service and suspended, until the vehicle is repaired and reinspected and found to be in compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as an autocab under this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the license division and shall be found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the division. 
    The inspectors of the division of license shall maintain due vigilance over all autocabs to ensure that they are maintained in a condition that is safe and sanitary for the transportation of passengers, and to this end, they shall have the right, at any and all times, to inspect any and all licensed autocabs. The inspectors shall maintain a written record of all such inspections together with the name of the person owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles under this chapter, a description and make of the vehicle or vehicles, the license number and the VIN number of the vehicle. 
D.  When the license division finds that a vehicle has met the standards established by the division it shall issue a license to that effect. The license shall be conspicuously displayed in each autocab, so as to be readily seen by the passenger and contain the following information: 
1.  Name of applicant/owner; 
2.  License plate number; 
3.  VIN number of vehicle; 
4.  Make/color of car and year; and 
5.  Card should be conspicuously displayed. 
E.  Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the license division. 
F.  All seat belts and shoulder harnesses shall be maintained and/or replaced as required to keep them in a safe working order. The number of such seat belts and harnesses maintained and/or replaced shall be the same number originally installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle. 
G.  All vehicles covered under this chapter must be inspected by both the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and the city bureau of central license. No vehicle shall be presented to the bureau of central license for inspection without first having passed inspection by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, proof of which is required to be submitted to the bureau of central license at the time of inspection. No vehicle covered under this chapter shall be allowed to service passengers in the city without first having passed inspection by both the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and the city bureau of central license. 
H.  Security locks, which permit operation of both rear door locks by the operator of the autocab, may be installed in any vehicle; however, the passenger shall never be prevented from manually unlocking his or her door. 
I.  No lettering, domes, emblems or advertising may be placed on a licensed limousine except for medical liveries which produce proper state licenses; however, displaying the name of the owner on license plates shall be permitted. 
J.  Reserved. 
K.  No vehicle licensed under this chapter shall have a transparent taxi partition protective plate. 
L.  The restrictions imposed in Section 5.20.100(I) shall not apply to any license emblems or decals created, issued, affixed and/or mandated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4836 , § 1, 5-9-2017; Ord. 3503 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3356 § 1, 2001; Ord. 3156 § 9, 1999) 
5.20.110 - Records required of licensee-Inspections-Authorized-Exceptions. 
    Each and every licensed owner shall record in a book, kept solely for this purpose, the time of departure from the principal place of business or every licensed vehicle, giving the name and address of the driver thereof, the license number of the vehicle and the time of the return to the place of business of each such vehicle, which book shall be kept open for inspection at all times to a duly authorized representative of the division of license or of the traffic bureau of the police department, provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply when the vehicle is used for funeral purposes. 
(Ord. 3156 § 10, 1999) 
5.20.120 - Applicants for license-Requirements. 
    An individual, partners of a partnership or the officers of a corporation applying for a licensed limousine or its renewal must be: 
A.  At least eighteen (18) years of age; and 
B.  Citizens or permanent residents of the United States of America; 
C.  Of good moral character. 
(Ord. 3156 § 11, 1999) 
Chapter 5.24 - BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SALONS/SHOPS, AND NAIL SALONS/PARLORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4781 , §§ 1-7, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed and reenacted chapter 5.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 5.24, sections 5.24.010-5.24.050 pertained to barbershops and beauty shops/salons, and derived from Ord. No. 3264, §§ 1-3, adopted October 10, 2000; Ord. No. 4188, § 1, adopted February 2, 2011, and Ord. No. 4149, § 10, adopted August 24, 2010. 

5.24.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Barber" shall mean any person who is licensed by the New Jersey Board of Cosmetology, to or engages in any of the practices encompassed in barbering. 
B.  "Beautician" shall mean any person who is licensed by the New Jersey Board of Cosmetology, to or engages in any of the practices encompassed in beauty culture. 
C.  "Barbering" and "beauty culture" mean any one or combination of the following practices when done on the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease or physical or mental ailments and when done for payment either directly or indirectly or when done without payment for the general public: 
1.  Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair; 
2.  Shampooing, cutting, braiding, coloring, buzzing, razoring, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair; 
3.  Singeing or dying of the hair; 
4.  Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams to the hair; 
5.  Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp, with or without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical appliances; 
6.  Manicuring the fingernails, nail-sculpturing or pedicuring the toenails; or 
7.  Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by the person. 
D.  "Barbershop" and "beauty salon/shop" shall mean a place of business where the following practices take place: 
1.  Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache, or other facial hair; 
2.  Shampooing, cutting, braiding, coloring, buzzing, razoring, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair; 
3.  Singeing or dying of the hair; 
4.  Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams to the hair; 
5.  Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp, with or without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical appliances; or 
6.  Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by the person. 
E.  "Designee" is any person designated by the health officer to act for him/her in the performance of his/her duties. 
F.  "Health officer" is one who holds a valid license as a health officer issued by the New Jersey Department of Health. 
G.  "Manicurist/nail technician" shall mean any licensed person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes, polishes or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands or feet, including, but not limited to the application and removal of sculptured or artificial nails. 
H.  "Nail salon/parlor" shall mean a place of business engaged in the practice of manicuring the fingernails, nail-sculpturing or pedicuring the toenails; or cutting, shaping, polishing, or enhancing the appearance of nails of the hands or feet, including, but not limited to, the application and removal of sculptured or artificial nails. 
I.  "Sanitary conditions" mean safe and clean salon/shop conditions that prevent the spread of communicable diseases and protect the public health and welfare in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:28, et seq. 
J.  "Working area" a separate room with more than one work station, or a private room set aside to serve one customer at a time. 
K.  "Work station" a chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to stand while serving the customer. 
L.  "Chief license inspector" is the head of the central license bureau. 
(Ord. No. 4897 , §§ 1, 2, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4781 , § 1, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.020 - License requirements/fees. 
A.  No person shall maintain or operate any barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/parlor without having a valid license issued by the health department/central license bureau of Elizabeth. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. No person shall be granted a license to operate a barbershop or beauty salon/shop by the central license bureau of the City of Elizabeth, and no person shall be granted a license to operate a nail salon/parlor by the department of health of the City of Elizabeth, without first obtaining the requisite license from the New Jersey Board of Cosmetology. 
B.  Every barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/parlor must comply with local planning and zoning ordinances and all other applicable ordinances before being issued a license. 
C.  Application for a nail salon license shall be made on forms furnished by the health officer. Application for a barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon license shall be made on forms furnished by the chief license inspector. All licenses are valid for one year beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year and/or a portion thereof and must be renewed before October 1st. 
D.  Every applicant for a license to operate a barbershop, beauty salon/shop and/or nail salon/shop shall pay an annual license fee due before October 1st of every year. The annual fee for licenses of the establishments regulated herein are fixed as follows: 
1.  Beauty salons/parlors and barbershops shall be assessed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per licensing year paid to the central license bureau of the City of Elizabeth. 
2.  Nail salons/parlors shall be assessed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per licensing year paid to the department of health of the City of Elizabeth. 
3.  Establishments that provide multiple barbering and/or beauty culturing services shall be assessed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for the first license and fifty dollars ($50.00) per additional license per licensing year, paid to the central license bureau of the City of Elizabeth if the services provided are that of a barbershop and/or beauty salon/shop, as defined in subsection 5.24.010 D., or paid to the department of health of the City of Elizabeth if the services provided are that of a nail salon/parlor, as defined in subsection 5.24.010 H. 
4.  Where an applicant holds a valid massage license issued pursuant to chapter 5.56 of this Code, all licenses issues pursuant to this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per licensing year paid to the central license bureau of the City of Elizabeth if the services provided are that of a barbershop and/or beauty salon/shop, as defined in subsection 5.24.010 D., or paid to the department of health of the City of Elizabeth if the services provided are that of a nail salon/parlor, as defined in subsection 5.24.010 H. 
5.  No license fee shall be prorated. 
E.  No license shall be issued or renewed until a completed application has been submitted, the license fee has been paid and the applicant's barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/parlor meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and all other applicable state and local regulations. 
F.  Licenses shall be valid until September 30th of each year as noted on the city license unless the license issued by the New Jersey Board of Cosmetology and Hairstyling is suspended by the state. 
G.  Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from location to location. Any planned change in ownership of a facility for nail salons/parlor must be reported promptly to the health department and such changes must be approved by the health department prior to the issuance of an operating license. 
H.  Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from location to location. Any planned change in ownership of a facility for barbershops/beauty salons must be reported promptly to the central license bureau and such changes must be approved by the central license bureau prior to the issuance of an operating license. 
I.  Licenses must be displayed in a prominent location within the establishment where patrons can observe it. 
J.  It is unlawful for any person to open or keep open prior to 8:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. any barbershop, beauty shop/salon and/or nail salon/parlor where barbering and/or beauty culturing take(s) place with the exception of Saturdays and Sundays, where opening time may be 6:00 a.m. 
K.  A special hours of operation permit can be obtained to operate from 10:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per licensing year. The permit shall be valid for one year, beginning October 1st and ending September 30th the following year, and must be renewed before October 1st of the following year. Conditions for a special hours of operations permit shall be as follows: 
1.  No alcoholic beverages on the premise. 
2.  No gambling on the premise. 
3.  No loitering on the premise. Only clients that are receiving services may be on the premise during special hours of operation. 
4.  No playing of music or TV that would interfere with the public during special hours of operation. 
5.  No selling of food. 
6.  No illegal drugs or illegal drug paraphernalia. 
7.  No smoking. 
L.  Violations of any law/condition for special hours of operation permit will result in revocation of the special hours of operation permit. 
(Ord. No. 4897 , §§ 3-6, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4781 , § 2, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.030 - Nail salon/parlor requirements. 
A.  Standards and Requirements for Nail Salons/Parlors. 
1.  Each nail salon/parlor must contain: 
a.  At least one sink in the work area with hot and cold running water; 
b.  An area for disinfecting implements and tools; 
c.  An ultrasonic unit for cleaning metal implements and tools; 
d.  A clean, closed receptacle for storage of sanitized implements and tools at each work station; 
e.  A closed container for clean linens; 
f.  A closed container for soiled linens; 
g.  A closed waste container for each work station; and 
h.  Dispensary or place where supplies are prepared and dispensed. 
2.  Each nail salon/parlor must be properly lit and ventilated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:28-3.1. 
3.  Every cosmetology and/or nail salon/parlor and all equipment therein shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:28-3.2. 
B.  Requirements of Nail Salon/Parlor Attendants. 
1.  All employees in nail salons/parlors are required to wear gloves when 
a.  Cleaning and disinfecting work stations; 
b.  Transferring chemicals from different containers; and 
c.  When performing any nail service that has a risk of breaking the customer's skin. 
2.  A sufficient number of gloves must be supplied so that each nail technician has access to and must use a new pair of gloves for each customer. 
3.  All technicians shall be required to wash hands when finished with each customer. 
(Ord. No. 4781 , § 3, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.040 - Regulatory requirements/compliance. 
A.  The health department and/or central license bureau of the city shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The health officer, chief license inspector, or any of their designees shall inspect every barbershop, beauty salon/parlor, nail salon/parlor, and any other place of business governed by this ordinance at least once a year, and shall make as many additional inspections as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
C.  The health officer or his/her designee, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, during normal operating hours, any portion of any barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/parlor for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. 
D.  In the event that the health officer/chief license inspector or his/her designee finds conditions inconsistent with this chapter in the operation of cosmetology salon/shop, hair salon, barber shop, or nail salon/parlor, or if a violation or multiple violations occur, the health officer may immediately issue a written notice to the license holder, or person in charge, citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken and time frame within which such action shall be taken. If corrective action is not made in the allotted time, the licensee may be fined and the establishment will be reported to the New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology and Hairstyling for further investigation and possible license suspension. 
(Ord. No. 4897 , § 7, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4781 , § 4, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.050 - Reinspection fees. 
A.  An inspection fee, in addition to the annual license fee, shall be imposed upon any barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/parlor as follows: 
1.  For each reinspection carried out pursuant to a complaint when such inspection results in a determination that said barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/parlor is in violation of any of the provision of this chapter. 
2.  For each reinspection carried out after either a failure of the regular inspection. 
3.  There shall be a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each reinspection as set forth in subsection 1. and/or 2. 
(Ord. No. 4781 , § 5, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.060 - Suspension/revocation. 
A.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state regulations shall be grounds for suspension of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The health officer/chief license inspector may suspend/revoke, without warning, prior notice or hearing, any license to operate a barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/parlor if the operation constitutes an imminent hazard to public health including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
1.  There is an outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent capable of being transmitted to consumers. 
2.  There is an absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a quantity which, in the opinion of the health officer, is capable of meeting the needs of the facility. 
3.  There is a sewage backup into the facility. 
4.  An unlicensed individual is performing procedures requiring licensure by the New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology. 
5.  Unsanitary conditions. 
C.  Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of the written order to the license holder or person in charge of the facility by the health officer/chief license inspector or his/her designee. When a license is suspended, all barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop or nail salon/parlor operations shall cease immediately and shall not resume until written approval to resume has been issued by the health officer/chief license inspector. The health officer/chief license inspector or his/her designee shall remove a suspended license from the premises. 
D.  When a license is to be suspended for a reason other than set forth in subsection B., the holder of a license, or the person in charge, shall be notified in writing of the suspension, and an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the health officer/chief license inspector by the holder of the license within two (2) business days. If no written request for a hearing is filed within two (2) business days, the suspension is sustained. The health officer/chief license inspector may end the suspension at any time by giving written notice to the license holder if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
E.  Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the health officer/chief license inspector shall schedule a hearing not later than ten (10) business days from the date of actual receipt of the request to afford the owner the opportunity to present evidence and argument on all facts or issues involved and to examine the merits of such suspension. 
F.  The health officer/chief license inspector shall examine the merits of such suspension and render a decision in writing to vacate, modify, or affirm such suspension within ten (10) business days of the date of the hearing held under this section. 
G.  Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the suspended license may make written request for license reinstatement. Within ten (10) business days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that, in his or her opinion, the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected, the health officer/chief license inspector or his or her designee shall make a re-inspection. If the health officer/chief license inspector or his or her designee determines that the applicant has corrected the violations, the license shall be reinstated and returned to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 4781 , § 6, 12-3-2016) 
5.24.070 - Violation penalties. 
A.  Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any provision of any rule, or regulation or order promulgated by the health officer/chief license inspector pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter shall, upon conviction, in the municipal court of Elizabeth or other court of competent jurisdiction be punished by a fine of not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or community service for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, and each day's failure to comply with any provision, rule or order shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 4781 , § 7, 12-3-2016) 
Chapter 5.28 - CANVASSING AND SOLICITING 
Sections: 

5.28.010 - Canvassing, soliciting or distribution of circulars-Permit required. 
    No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall canvass, solicit, distribute circulars or other matter, or call from house to house, in the city, without first having reported to and received a written permit from the license inspector, central license bureau, division of revenue, department of finance. 
(Prior code § 60-1) 
5.28.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Canvasser or solicitor" means a person selling goods, wares, merchandise and/or services with or without accepting an advance payment for the goods; and regardless of whether the solicitation is made by mail, telephone or personal contact, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the person who comes in personal contact with the buyer through the delivery of the goods or the acceptance of any money in payment thereof. For purposes of this chapter, a canvasser or solicitor shall also be deemed to be anyone who is not in the business of selling goods, but rather makes surveys, researches, analyses, opinion polls rating data and any such similar work which by its nature involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity. 
(Prior code § 60-2) 
5.28.030 - Candidates for public office exempted. 
    This chapter shall not apply to anyone who solicits any votes of support for a bona fide political candidate running for public office and exempts bona fide political candidates from the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 60-3) 
5.28.040 - Permit terms-Issuance and revocation. 
    The license inspector shall have power to grant permits to canvass, which permits shall specify the number of hours or days the permit will be in effect, and such inspector shall refuse to issue a permit in all cases where the application of the canvasser or further investigation to be made at the discretion of such inspector shows that the canvasser is not of good character or that he or she is canvassing for a project not free from fraud. The license inspector, the chief of police, the director of the department of police or the officer in charge at police headquarters shall revoke the permit for failure or refusal on the part of the permittee to observe the rules and regulations herein set forth. 
(Prior code § 60-4) 
5.28.050 - Application procedure-Information and fingerprinting required. 
    Before the permit may be issued, the canvasser shall make an application to canvass, giving his or her full name and address, age, height, weight, place of birth, whether married or single, length and place of residence, whether or not previously arrested or convicted of crime, by whom employed, address of employer and a description of the project for which he or she is canvassing. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted before a permit shall be issued. 
(Prior code § 60-5) 
5.28.060 - Fees-Exemption for trainees. 
A.  The fee for such permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) in order to cover the cost of processing the application. Renewals of permits for the same applicant shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), and all permits shall be nontransferable. 
B.  This chapter shall not require an application or fee from a person who is a bona fide trainee, provided that the person is accompanied by a licensed canvasser. In no event shall a person be designated a trainee if employed more than thirty (30) days with his or her employer. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 11, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3390 § 1, 2002; prior code § 60-6) 
5.28.070 - Hours. 
    No person shall canvass within the city except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Prior code § 60-7) 
5.28.080 - Permit photograph required-Exhibition. 
    A copy of the permittee's photograph (two by two inches) shall be carried on his or her permit; the photograph shall be furnished by the applicant. The permittee shall exhibit his or her permit to the license inspector, to any police officer or other person, including those being solicited, upon request. 
(Prior code § 60-8) 
5.28.090 - Courteous behavior and lawful conduct required. 
    The permittee shall be courteous to all persons in canvassing, shall not importune or annoy any of the inhabitants of the city and shall conduct himself or herself in a lawful manner. 
(Prior code § 60-9) 
5.28.100 - Permit expiration and surrender. 
    The permit shall expire December 31st of each year. On expiration of the permit, the holder thereof shall surrender the same to the license inspector. 
(Prior code § 60-10) 
5.28.110 - Exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or other article or thing in the regular course of business, to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive same. 
B.  This chapter shall not affect any person engaged exclusively in any political, religious, charitable or philanthropic endeavor. 
C.  This chapter shall not affect any person who is covered by Chapter 5.116 of this code. 
(Prior code § 60-11) 
5.28.120 - Identification of exempt persons. 
    Any person desiring to canvass, solicit, call door-to-door or place-to-place in the city and who is expected by the provisions of Section 5.28.110(B) shall be required to notify the director of police of the city or designee, in writing, for identification purposes only, of the name and address of each canvasser or solicitor as well as the hours and the locations where such canvassers or solicitors shall be operating. 
(Prior code § 60-12) 
5.28.130 - Solicitors and canvassers prohibited in the special improvement district. 
A.  Solicitors and canvassers are prohibited in the special improvement district. 
B.  Those engaged in activities noted in Sections 5.28.110(A) and (B) may solicit, canvass or distribute circulars within the city special improvement district as defined and regulated in Ordinance No. 1896 as same is amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 60-13) 
Chapter 5.32 - CLOSING OUT SALES, FIRE SALES, BANKRUPTCY SALES, AUCTION SALES AND SALES BY TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Legislative Purpose-Authority-Definitions 

5.32.010 - Intent. 
    In order to regulate and license the sale of goods, wares and merchandise in the city which are held forth to the public to be the sale of goods belonging to a bankrupt, assignee, receiver or other person in a representative capacity, or of a person about to retire from business, or goods damaged by fire or water, or goods of transient merchants and itinerant vendors, and to provide a penalty for a violation thereof, the following chapter shall be enacted to control the sales to the public in the city. 
(Prior code § 123-1) 
5.32.020 - Citation of statutory authority. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the businesses and occupations herein licensed, for the safety, welfare and prosperity of the inhabitants of the city, in accordance with the provisions of Section 2, Article 14, of an Act entitled: "An Act Concerning Municipalities," being Chapter 152 of the Laws of 1917, and also for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(Prior code § 123-49) 
5.32.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "He, she, his, him or her," or the plural thereof, shall be held to apply to and include any person, male or female, and a partnership, firm or corporation, and any other natural, artificial or legal entity. 
    "Building" means any permanent structure or edifice presently established and presently enrolled upon the tax books of the city, and shall be held to mean, further, any future structure or edifice which may be established in the municipality pursuant to plans regularly filed and approved by the building inspector of the city. 
    "Concession" means a portion of a store in which the business or intended type of business is not a generally accepted part of the principal business conducted therein. 
    "Goods" means any goods, wares, works of art, commodities, compounds or things, chattels or merchandise which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale, and/or services to be exerted upon or applied to goods for the improvement of same or enhancement of the value thereof. 
    "Store" means any place within the interior of a building, as previously defined, where goods, wares and merchandise of any kind, nature and description whatsoever are sold or offered for sale, specifically excluding, however, unenclosed porches from the category of "stores." 
    "Transient merchants and itinerant vendors," in addition to any other generally and properly accepted meanings of the phrases, all persons, male or female, firms, partnerships or corporations and any other natural, artificial or legal entities who, individually or by their agents, servants or other employees or representatives, appear within the boundaries of the city and display for sale within the city, solicit orders for, offer for sale or exchange, sell outright or conditionally, any kind or species of tangible personal property at retail, or whomsoever may, for a consideration, offer for rent, let or hire out to any person in the city goods and/or offers to sell or sells services to be exerted upon or applied to goods for the improvement of same or enhancement of the value thereof; whether or not the contract or other agreement for the sale or exchange is approved or accepted by the vendor, his or her agent or servant in the city; whether or not the tangible personal property is to be delivered in the city; and whether the consideration to be paid therefor is paid or payable in the city; with the ostensible intent of closing out or discontinuing such business within one year from the date of commencement thereof. Any person, as defined above, individually or through his or her agent, servant, other employee or representative, who shall fail to conduct his or her business as aforesaid in a building or store, or concession thereof, as hereinafter defined, shall be deemed to be an "itinerant vendor" or "transient merchant;" provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the sale of fruits, vegetables and kindred farm products when offered for sale or sold or exchanged by the grower thereof; provided, however, that a person shall be deemed to be a "grower" of all merchandise when sixty (60) percent of the merchandise is grown by him or her. Exempted from this definition are all flea markets sponsored by bona fide religious, charitable and eleemosynary organizations, and the vendors who participate in such flea markets which are sponsored by such religious, charitable and eleemosynary organizations. 
(Prior code § 123-2) 
Article II - Auctioneers 

5.32.040 - License required for conduct of auction-Exceptions. 
    No person, except persons, firms or corporations acting in a representative capacity under authority issued by any court or judicial authority in the state or by the federal government, shall conduct or engage in, either in his or her own behalf or in behalf of another, the business of or occupation of conducting an auction sale in the city, public or private, without first having obtained a license for the conduct of such sale. 
(Prior code § 123-3) 
5.32.050 - License required for advertisement of auction. 
    No person shall represent or circulate or place before the public any announcement, or insert or cause to be inserted any notice, that such person shall conduct an auction sale, or shall engage in the business of auctioning or conduct any kind of an auction sale whatsoever, public or private, without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Prior code § 123-4) 
Article III - Sales of Bankrupt and Damaged Goods 

5.32.060 - Licenses required for conduct of sales-Exceptions. 
    No person, firm or corporation, except persons, firms or corporations acting in a representative capacity under authority issued by any court or judicial authority in the state or by the federal government, shall sell or offer for sale in the city, either at wholesale or at retail, any of the following goods, wares and merchandise, without obtaining a license therefor: 
A.  Goods then or formerly of a bankrupt, assignee, receiver or other person in a representative capacity; and 
B.  Goods damaged by fire, smoke or water. 
(Prior code § 123-7) 
5.32.070 - License required for advertisement of sale-Exceptions. 
    No person, firm or corporation, except persons, firms or corporations acting in a representative capacity under authority issued by any court or judicial authority in the state or the federal government, shall announce or cause to be announced, or publish or cause to be published, or insert, any notice that he or she will conduct a sale of any of the aforementioned goods, without having first procured a license to conduct such sale, provided, however, that such merchandise as is damaged by fire, smoke or water, when sold by the same owner as was in possession thereof immediately before the damage, and upon the same premises as were occupied at the time of the damage, may be sold without the necessity of procuring a license therefor. 
(Prior code § 123-8) 
5.32.080 - Damaged goods-Sign required. 
    No goods other than goods damaged by fire, smoke or water shall be sold by such licensee in the same premises during the time such goods damaged by fire, smoke or water are sold, unless clearly segregated from the goods damaged by fire, smoke or water, and identified by a sign not less than thirty-six (36) by thirty-six (36) inches, indicating the fact that such "goods" are fresh stock or undamaged merchandise. 
(Prior code § 123-9) 
5.32.090 - Application of provisions restricted. 
    When goods damaged by fire, smoke or water are sold in the same premises or place where the goods were damaged, the provisions of Section 5.32.080 shall apply, but this chapter shall otherwise be inapplicable. 
(Prior code § 123-10) 
5.32.100 - Bankrupt goods-Sign required. 
    No goods other than bankrupt stock or goods of an assignee or receiver shall be sold by the licensee during the time such bankrupt stock or goods of an assignee or receiver shall be sold, unless clearly segregated from the goods of the bankrupt, assignee or receiver and identified by a sign not less than thirty-six (36) by thirty-six (36) inches, indicating the fact that the goods are not the goods of the bankrupt, assignee or receiver. 
(Prior code § 123-11) 
5.32.110 - Displays regulated. 
    No goods other than factory cancellations, factory outlet or mill outlet, by whatever name the goods may be designated, shall be displayed on the same counters as the alleged factory cancellations, factory outlet, mill outlet or otherwise similar but differently designated goods are displayed. 
(Prior code § 123-12) 
5.32.120 - Restocking of original inventory prohibited. 
    No goods will be permitted to be sold under this chapter other than those represented pursuant to Section 5.32.220(G). Replenishing and restocking under the license is prohibited, the purpose of this chapter being that the license expires with the disposition of the merchandise described in Section 5.32.220(G). Nothing herein contained, however, shall preclude the making of a new application for a new license and the issuance of same upon payment of a new fee. 
(Prior code § 123-13) 
Article IV - Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors 

5.32.130 - Licenses required. 
    All transient merchants and itinerant vendors, as hereinabove defined, before offering for sale any goods, shall procure a license therefor, which shall continue in favor of the person to whom it is issued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, subject to the compliance of the following conditions: 
A.  No transient merchant or itinerant vendor license or permit shall be issued covering a location within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another transient merchant or itinerant vendor. 
B.  No transient merchant or itinerant vendor license or permit shall be issued covering a location within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an established business selling a similar product. 
C.  Written permission of the property owner must be obtained by the transient merchant or itinerant vendor for the use of property and such written permission must be furnished to the chief license inspector at the time of the filing of the application for the license. The written permission of the property owner must include the use of a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet of contiguous open space of the owner's property for use by the transient merchant or itinerant vendor. 
D.  All transient merchants or itinerant vendors shall keep an accurate book of accounts of sales made, shall present the state Sales Tax Certificate at the time of the application and shall maintain same at all times while operating under such license and to be made available on demand to appropriate city officials. 
(Prior code § 123-16) 
5.32.140 - Criterion for designation. 
    In addition to the foregoing contained in this chapter, a person shall be deemed to be a transient merchant and/or an itinerant vendor who shall not appear to be listed upon the tax records of the city as having been assessed for personal property tax for the same or substantially similar merchandise contained in his or her store at the last preceding date for the assessment of such taxes. 
(Prior code § 123-17) 
Article V - General Regulations 

5.32.150 - Separate licenses required-Exception. 
    A separate license must be obtained under the provisions of this chapter, for each branch, establishment or separate place of business in which the trade, following, profession or occupation of such licensee shall be conducted; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall require a person other than a licensed itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to obtain a separate license for each branch, establishment or separate place of business. 
(Prior code § 123-21) 
5.32.160 - Possession and display required-Duplicate licenses-Fee. 
    Every person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the same upon demand of any person, and the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein the licensee shall conduct the business licensed; provided, however, in the event a licensee, his or her agent, servant or other employee solicits orders for, offers for sale or exchange, sells or otherwise disposes of, for a consideration, any goods as herein defined at more than one place within the city, the licensee, his or her agent, servant or other employee shall have with him or her and exhibit same upon demand of any person, a duplicate license card bearing the signature of the license inspector of the city, and for each of which duplicate license cards the licensee shall pay the sum of fifty cents ($0.50) in addition to the fees for charges otherwise required. 
(Prior code § 123-22) 
5.32.170 - Licenses nontransferable. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferred. 
(Prior code § 123-23) 
5.32.180 - Sales of jewelry established. 
    No licensee shall sell any jewelry, precious stones, silverware or any thing or article made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or precious stones, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Prior code § 123-24) 
5.32.190 - Accurate accounts and records required-Inspections authorized. 
    All licensees shall keep an accurate book of accounts of all sales made. The books shall be open to inspection by the director of the department of health, welfare and housing and/or designee, and/or his or her respective agents authorized in writing. The book of accounts shall also include sales tax collected for each transaction. 
(Prior code § 123-25) 
5.32.200 - Duration of validity. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall continue in favor of the applicant for the length of tine set forth in the application, as required by Article VI of this chapter, except licenses for itinerant vendors, who shall be limited to a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, but in no event shall any other license continue for more than one year, at the expiration of which time application for the renewal of the same must be made in the manner hereinafter set forth. 
(Prior code § 123-27) 
5.32.210 - Schedule of fees-Renewals. 
A.  The fees to be charged for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows: 
1.  For auction sales (per sale, not exceeding fifteen (15) days): Five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  For the sale of bankrupt stock or goods of a receiver, assignee or other person in a representative capacity: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
3.  For the sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water: Five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
4.  For the sale of goods represented as factory cancellations, mill outlets and such goods as may be termed as liquidation sales of goods (excluding those of regular merchant conducting business outside of the itinerant vendor's provisions and who is liquidating in the normal course of business), and for the sale of such other goods as may be similarly related but otherwise designated: Five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
5.  For itinerant vendors or transient merchants: Eleven hundred dollars ($1,100.00). 
6.  One "automatic renewal" or itinerant vendor's or transient merchant's license shall be allowed without fee for each original license granted, with the same privileges and subject to all the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The aforesaid fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 12, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3395 § 1, 2002: prior code § 123-28) 
Article VI - License Applications 

5.32.220 - Application procedure-Information required. 
    The application for a license by this chapter shall be made to the license inspector upon forms to be supplied by him or her for that purpose, and shall contain a statement subscribed to under oath or affirmation by the person, member of the firm or officer of the corporation applying for such license, which statement shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. 
B.  Length of time the applicant proposes to engage in the business or sale to be licensed. 
C.  Location by street and number of goods, and whether on premises from which goods are to be sold or in warehouse or storage. 
D.  Name and residence of person in whose interest the business or sale to be licensed is to be conducted. 
E.  Average quantity and kind, and value, of the goods intended to be sold or exposed for sale. 
F.  Names and addresses of the persons from whom such goods were or are to be purchased. 
G.  An inventory of the goods which are to be offered for sale under the license. 
H.  Name of the person from whom the applicant is leasing the premises, and the length of time for which the premises are leased. 
(Prior code § 123-31) 
5.32.230 - Posting of fee-Bond required. 
    There shall be deposited with the license inspector, together with the application and the license fee, the bond as provided for in Section 5.32.260, the amount of which bond shall be returned by him or her to the applicant in the event that the application is denied. 
(Prior code § 123-32) 
5.32.240 - Approval-Issuance-Disposition of revenue. 
    Application for licenses under the provisions of this chapter shall be approved by the license inspector, who shall, upon issuance of the license, pay over the amount so received by him or her to the city treasurer. 
(Prior code § 123-33) 
5.32.250 - Examination under oath. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the license inspector may examine the applicant under oath or affirmation, to ascertain the truth of the statement contained in such application, and if it shall appear, after hearing, that any statement therein contained shall be untrue, he or she may refuse to approve the same. 
(Prior code § 123-34) 
5.32.260 - Regulations governing bonding of licensees. 
    Before a license as herein provided shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the licensing official a five hundred dollar ($500.00) bond, such bond to remain in force for a period of sixty (60) days beyond the expiration date of the license issued, and to be conditioned to indemnify and pay the city any penalties, fees or costs incurred in the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, and which shall also by its terms be so conditioned as to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, in the sum equal to at least the amounts of any payment or payments such purchaser may have been induced to make through the misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, whether the misrepresentations were made by the owners or their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated, with reference to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise, bankrupt stock or goods damaged by fire or water, when the purchaser's claim shall have been first established in a court of competent jurisdiction. The bond shall be conditioned upon the verity of the representations, upon the strength of which for the purpose of this chapter it is assumed the license was issued. If at any time, the transient merchant or itinerant vendor should cease to actually be such, and should establish a residence in the city and comply with all the requirements exacted of those exempted from the classification transient merchants or itinerant vendors, then upon due petition made to the license inspector, the license inspector shall cause a refund of the fee deposited with him or her to be made, after passage of a resolution so to do by city council. 
(Prior code § 123-35) 
5.32.270 - City official designated as agent of licensee. 
    Before a license as herein provided for shall issue, the applicant shall file with the licensing official of the city, an instrument in writing, nominating and appointing the licensing official to be the license inspector, his or her true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the license and the bond given as required by the provisions of Section 5.32.260, or for the performance of the conditions of the bond, or for any breach thereof, which instrument in writing so nominating and appointing the licensing official as such agent shall contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon the agent, and when so made, shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the license under this chapter, according to the laws of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. 
(Prior code § 123-36) 
Article VII - Exceptions 

5.32.280 - Charitable or religious societies or eleemosynary institutions. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license by any charitable or religious society or other eleemosynary institution or organization that shall conduct sales of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, or goods damaged by fire or water, when the net proceeds thereof shall be applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or religious objects for which such charitable or religious society or eleemosynary organization exists; provided, however., that such charitable or religious society or other eleemosynary institution or organization has maintained an office or other headquarters for the transaction of its business, in the city, for at least one year prior to the time of such a proposed sale. 
(Prior code § 123-39) 
5.32.290 - Court representatives. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license by any person acting in a representing capacity under authority issued by any court or judicial authority in this state or nation. 
(Prior code § 123-40) 
5.32.300 - Wholesale dealers. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license by any person who is engaged solely in business as a wholesale dealer, or any other person who solely deals with others who buy to sell again. 
(Prior code § 123-41) 
5.32.310 - Statutory exceptions applicable. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license by any person engaged in making sale of goods in compliance with provisions of any statute of the state of New Jersey or of the federal government, which statute substantially outlines the procedure to be followed in making sale of any goods. 
(Prior code § 123-43) 
5.32.320 - Certain persons excepted by permit-Provisions may apply. 
    Any person who, by virtue of any law or regulation, receives a permit to make sale of goods within the city without the necessity of complying with the terms of this chapter, such permit being issued by reason of the fact that he or she is a veteran of one of the wars in which this nation has been involved, an exempt firefighter or otherwise, will be bound by the terms of this chapter in the event he or she engages assistance in such sale of goods of other than individuals of the same veteran, firefighter or other such class of which he or she is a member. 
(Prior code § 123-44) 
Article VIII - Closing-Out Sales 

5.32.330 - License required-Inventory-Fees for periods of operation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail that is represented as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignees', adjusters', trustees', executors', administrators', receivers', wholesalers', jobbers', manufacturers', closing-out, liquidation, closing-stock, fire- or water-damage sale, or any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or closing out the goods, wares or merchandise of any business for less than the current or going retail price thereof, in the city, without first filing with the chief license inspector the inventory hereinafter provided for and obtaining from him or her a license to do so, to be known as a "closing-out sale license." The fee for such license shall be, and the same is fixed, as follows: for a period not exceeding ten (10) consecutive days excluding Sundays and holidays: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); for a period not exceeding twenty (20) consecutive days, excluding Sundays and holidays: two hundred dollars ($200.00); and for a period not exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days, excluding Sundays and holidays: three hundred dollars ($300.00); provided that only one such license shall be issued to any one person within a twelve (12) month period and that no such license shall be issued for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, excluding Sundays and holidays, the fees to be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
(Prior code § 123-55) 
5.32.340 - True inventory and records of stock required. 
A.  The inventory required by Section 5.32.330 shall contain a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at any sale for which a license is required, together with the wholesale price thereof, which inventory or list shall be signed by the person seeking the license or by a resident agent thereunder authorized; and by affidavit at the foot thereof, he or she or such agent shall swear or affirm that the information therein given is full and true and known by him or her or such agent to be so. 
B.  It is unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale or to list on such inventory any goods, wares or merchandise which are not the regular stock of the store or other place, the business of which is to be closed out by such sale, or to make any replenishments or additions to such stock for the purpose of such sale or during the time thereof, or to fail, neglect or refuse to keep accurate records of the articles or things sold, from which records the license inspector may ascertain the kind and quantity or number sold. 
(Prior code § 123-56) 
5.32.350 - Verification of inventory authorized. 
    The license inspector may at his or her discretion verify the details of an inventory filed for the purpose of obtaining a closing-out sale license, or he or she may make a check and verify the items of merchandise sold during the sale. It is unlawful for any person to whom a closing-out-sale license has been issued to fail or refuse to give the license inspector, or any person designated by him or her for that purpose, all the facts connected with the stock on hand or the proper information of goods sold, or any other information that he or she may require in order to make a thorough investigation of all phases connected with the sale. 
(Prior code § 123-57) 
5.32.360 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of Sections 5.32.330 through 5.32.350 shall not be applicable to trustees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers or public officers acting under judicial process. 
(Prior code § 123-58) 
5.32.370 - Supplemental nature of legislation. 
    The provisions of this article are in addition to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 123-59) 
5.32.380 - Display of license required. 
    All licenses issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed in the establishment for the purpose of advising the public that the sale has been licensed. 
(Prior code § 123-60) 
Article IX - License Revocations 

5.32.390 - License revocation for cause-Hearing. 
    The license inspector shall have the power to revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, without rebate of fee paid, for the violation of any statute of the state of New Jersey or any ordinance of the city, after hearing, two days' notice of which hearing shall be given to the licensee in writing. This licensee, whose license is thus revoked, may address an appeal to the action of the license inspector in the manner previously defined in Section 5.32.260. 
(Prior code § 123-46) 
Chapter 5.36 - ELECTRICIANS 
Sections: 

5.36.010 - Definition. 
    "Electric" and "electrical work," when used in this chapter, means anything having to do with the electrical wiring, appliances, fixtures, motors, electrical appurtenances and currents for the furnishing of light, heat and power, with the exception, however, that any person, firm or corporation supplying electrical current for light, heat and power purposes shall not be required to secure a license or certificate for the installation of service wires, service-device appliances and the repair thereof up to and including the meter board, when such service wires and service-device appliances are the property of the person, firm or corporation supplying the electrical energy. 
(Prior code § 71-1) 
5.36.020 - Master electricians-Examination and certification required-Fees. 
    Every person engaging, or who shall hereafter engage, in the business of a master electrician in the city shall appear at the office of the chief electrical inspector, and after satisfying the chief electrical inspector and the board of electrical examiners as hereinafter provided for as to the applicant's qualifications, he or she shall be registered by the chief electrical inspector or the board of electrical examiners, and receive a certificate which entitles him or her to practice as a master electrician in the city. For this certificate the master electrician shall pay the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and ten dollars ($10.00) for renewal and ten dollars ($10.00) for each examination, which fees for the registry, certificate and renewal thereof, and for each examination, shall be paid to the city treasurer. No licensed master electrician shall allow his or her or its name to be used by any person or party, directly or indirectly, either for the purpose of obtaining an electrical permit or to do any work under his or her or its license. No license or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Prior code § 71-2) 
5.36.030 - Journeymen electricians-Examination and certification required-Fees. 
    Those engaged as journeymen electricians shall also be required to qualify by presenting themselves for examination before the board of electrical examiners, and shall pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each examination and, when successful, shall receive a journeyman electrician's certificate upon the payment of ten dollars ($10.00) for same and for each yearly renewal thereof. 
(Prior code § 71-3) 
5.36.040 - Maintenance electricians-Examination and certification required-Fees. 
    In manufacturing plants and other establishments, maintenance electricians may be qualified for the care, supervision and limited installation of the electrical work after examination by the board of electrical examiners. For such examination, each applicant shall pay the fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and if successful, the applicant shall pay the further sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for the certificate and for each yearly renewal thereof. 
(Prior code § 71-4) 
5.36.050 - Helpers-Registration and certification required-Fee-Issuance conditions. 
    Those engaged as helpers shall not be required to submit to an examination, but shall be required to register with the chief electrical inspector, who, upon the payment of a yearly fee of five dollars ($5.00), shall issue a helper's certificate to such applicant, provided such applicant presents a written recommendation for such certificate from a duly licensed master electrician, and he or she shall retain his or her status as a helper only while he or she is employed by a duly licensed master electrician. It is further provided that such helper shall be permitted to work only in the presence of, or as an assistant to, a duly licensed person, and that at no time shall the number of such helpers exceed the number of licensed persons on any job. 
(Prior code § 71-5) 
5.36.060 - Reexaminations-Content of examinations-Citizenship requirement. 
    Any applicant who should fail in his or her first examination shall not be eligible for another examination for a period of three months, and a period of six months shall elapse after each successive failure before such applicant will be admitted to another examination. Applications must be made on forms provided for that purpose by the chief electrical inspector and must be filed not later than two weeks prior to the meeting of the board of electrical examiners, and must be accompanied by the examination fee. The examination shall consist of the rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code, rules and regulations pertaining to electrical installations in the city, rules of the utility supplying electrical current in the city, and questions pertaining to the electrical profession. No person shall be eligible for examination unless he or she is a citizen of the United States of America. 
(Prior code § 71-6) 
5.36.070 - Board of electrical examiners-Composition and qualifications-Appointment. 
A.  The board of electrical examiners shall be composed of five members, two of whom shall be experienced electricians, who have continuously and actually engaged as master electricians for a period of not less than ten (10) years, two journeymen electricians who have held journeymen electricians' certificates for a period of not less than ten (10) years, and the chief electrical inspector actually holding such office, all to be residents of the city. The four offices first above mentioned shall be appointive and shall be filled in the following manner. 
B.  The mayor shall appoint, within one month after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, four suitable persons qualified in the manner hereinabove mentioned, to be known as the board of electrical examiners, not more than two of whom shall be members of the same political party, one a licensed master electrician, the other a licensed journeyman electrician, who shall be appointed to serve until the first day of January next following such appointment; one licensed master electrician and one licensed journeyman electrician shall be appointed to serve until the first day of January secondly following such appointment. On the first day of January next following such appointment, and on each succeeding first day of January thereafter, the mayor shall appoint one licensed master electrician and one licensed journeyman electrician, residents of this city, for the term of two years, to take the place of the members whose terms shall then expire, so that the term of all members of such board of electrical examiners shall be two years. The appointment of any member of such board shall not become effective until confirmed by the city council. The board of electrical examiners, including the chief electrical inspector member and a secretary to be selected by the board of electrical examiners, shall receive such compensation as may be fixed and determined by city council. Three of the members of the board of electrical examiners shall constitute a quorum of the board. 
(Prior code § 71-7) 
5.36.080 - Master electricians-Registration and display of license-Bonds required. 
    All master electricians to whom a certificate is granted shall be registered with their names, residence and place of business in a book furnished for the purpose; such place of business to face a public street or highway, with the certificate of master electrician so granted conspicuously displayed so as to be seen by the public; in case of removal, the certificate holder shall notify the chief electrical inspector at once. Before doing any electrical work in this city, under the terms and provisions of this chapter, the master electrician to whom a certificate has been granted shall enter into bond in favor of the city, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of New Jersey, approved by the bureau of central licensing and the city attorney, and to be conditioned for the faithful performance of the requirements of this chapter and of all work in connection with restoration of the sidewalk and street excavation in connection with the installation of wires or wiring, laying conduits for wiring, and for all electrical installations in which the workmanship is not up to standard, and shall be accepted from no one but a registered master electrician, and the bond shall be for the term of not less than one year and must be renewed during the first week of each year and shall be filed with the chief electrical inspector and examiner. All certificates and bonds expire December 31st of each year. 
(Prior code § 71-8) 
5.36.090 - License renewals-Minimum qualification for issuance. 
    No reexamination shall be necessary for registration or renewal of any license unless a licensee of any of the above classifications shall fail to renew his or her license, registration and bond, if any, on or before the 31st day of March of each year. It shall be a primary and basic requirement that any applicant for examination for a license in any group is to have had a minimum of five years' experience in electrical wiring installations. Any certificate expiring while the holder thereof is in the military or naval service of the United States of America shall be renewed without further examination, upon payment of the prescribed fee, at any time within four months after such person's discharge from service. 
(Prior code § 71-9) 
5.36.100 - Disposition of revenue. 
    In case a registration shall have been issued to an incompetent person, or in case a duly registered person has been convicted twice of the same offense or violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or refuses to comply with the rules and requirements adopted by the board of electrical examiners, such registration shall be forthwith revoked and such person thereafter be prohibited from engaging in the electrical profession in the city until he or she shall have again been duly registered so to act. All fines collected under this chapter shall be turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Prior code § 71-10) 
5.36.110 - Reciprocity-Conditions-Fee. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, any person holding a current registration certificate or license issued by another municipality of the state under the provisions of an ordinance imposing the same or similar conditions for the issuance thereof and for reciprocity as are provided by this chapter shall, upon proof thereof to the examining board, be entitled, without examination, to apply for and receive a registration certificate issued under this chapter, after paying the board the first annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), as required under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 71-11) 
Chapter 5.40 - FLORISTS 
Sections: 

5.40.010 - Definition. 
    The term "florist" as used in this chapter means a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail or wholesale, to the public, in any quantity, cut or rooted flowers, funeral sprays, wreaths, designs, corsages, potted plants or cuttings or bedding plants of natural growth. This chapter shall not apply to the sale of Christmas trees. 
(Prior code § 147-1) 
5.40.020 - License required. 
    No person shall engage either directly or indirectly in business as a florist within the city without having first obtained a license from the chief license inspector. 
(Prior code § 147-2) 
5.40.030 - License qualifications. 
    In addition to general requirements, no license shall be granted or issued to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or not a permanently established merchant. 
(Prior code § 147-3) 
5.40.040 - License. 
    The license fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) annually from January 1st through December 31st of any given year. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 13, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 147-4) 
5.40.050 - Facilities. 
    No florist shall do business except from a regularly established store, shop or greenhouse. In the event cut flowers are sold, the premises shall be equipped with proper refrigeration which shall consist of a regular florist display mechanical refrigeration of a minimum size of eight feet by ten (10) feet by five feet to properly house cut flowers and plants. 
(Prior code § 147-5) 
5.40.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall sell at retail or wholesale to the public, in any quantity, cut or rooted flowers, funeral sprays, wreaths, designs, corsages, potted plants or cuttings or bedding plants of natural growth without a license, or who does not conduct a business for the sale of flowers in at least one location in the city for fifty-two (52) weeks a year, is in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 147-6) 
5.40.070 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any bona fide local religious organization or any bona fide local charitable organization, selling products under this chapter for purposes of fundraising for its own use. 
(Prior code § 147-7) 
Chapter 5.44 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 

5.44.010 - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply: 
    "Garage sale" means and includes, but shall not be limited to, lawn sales, attic sales, rummage sales and any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
(Prior code § 123-42) 
5.44.020 - Requirements. 
    Any person may conduct a garage sale as herein defined under the following terms and conditions: 
A.  An application shall be filed with the supervisor of central license bureau at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the commencement of such garage sale. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
1.  Name of person applying for permit; 
2.  Name and address of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted; 
3.  Written consent of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted if applicant is not the owner; 
4.  Location at which sale is to be conducted, giving street address or tax atlas reference; 
5.  Date of sale; 
6.  Date of any past sale within a three-year period preceding the date of the proposed sale; 
7.  General description of the type of goods to be sold, including a written statement as to whether or not any of the merchandise to be sold was purchased by the applicant for the purpose of resale: resale of such purchased goods being prohibited; and 
8.  Whether or not the sale will be held indoors or outdoors. 
B.  Upon the filing of the application and the same being reviewed by the supervisor of licenses and found to be complete and accompanied by a permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), the supervisor of licenses is authorized to issue a permit for the garage sale applied for, which permit shall be subject to compliance with the following restrictions: 
1.  Hours of sale shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. only; 
2.  Sale shall be authorized only for the day applied for on the application with the following day being authorized as a rain date; 
3.  No items of merchandise may be displayed on the street, front sidewalk and between the front sidewalk and curb of the street. Merchandise may be displayed in the front yard, driveway or rear yard, but not beyond ten (10) feet from the face of the dwelling house; 
4.  The permit authorized under this chapter must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the sale is being conducted; 
5.  Only two permits per calendar year may be issued to any one applicant or for any one location; 
6.  Signs advertising the sale are authorized to be displayed the day of the sale during the hours permitted by the ordinance on the premises for which the permit is issued. The signs shall be removed immediately upon conclusion of sale; 
7.  Any sale of any item of merchandise at any garage sale must comply with all appropriate provisions of the law with reference to any such sales, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 26:10-1, et seq.; 
8.  All signs must be removed from the premises or poles on the streets immediately upon conclusion of the sale; and 
9.  The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the central license bureau and the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 14, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 123-42.1) 
5.44.030 - Duty to clean premises. 
    Immediately upon conclusion of any sale authorized by this chapter, the permittee shall be obliged within twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of the sale to clean the outside of the premises and remove all unsold merchandise therefrom and restore same to the condition in which it existed prior to the sale. 
(Prior code § 123-42.2) 
5.44.040 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply and/or affect the following: 
A.  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
B.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; and 
C.  The selling or advertising for sale of an item or items of personal property which are specifically described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number and which are not displayed outside the premises. 
(Prior code § 123-42.3) 
Chapter 5.48 - HOTEL REGISTRATION 
Sections: 

5.48.010 - Unaccompanied minors-Registration required. 
    Every hotel keeper, rooming house proprietor and any owner renting rooms for hire in the city shall keep a register and record therein the name, address, age, place of birth and the name and address of the parent or guardian or every occupant of a room who is of minor age and unaccompanied by such parent or guardian. 
(Prior code § 94-1) 
5.48.020 - Information and notification required. 
    Such hotel keeper, rooming house proprietor or person renting rooms for hire shall immediately forward written notice to the police, together with a copy of the record, immediately upon renting any room to such unaccompanied minor. 
(Prior code § 94-2) 
5.48.030 - Inspection of register authorized. 
    Such register shall be available at all times and shall be produced for inspection on demand of any police officer. 
(Prior code § 94-3) 
Chapter 5.51 - TOWING OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 

5.51.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Tower(s)" means any towing firm, individual or company who is in the business of towing vehicles from private property in an agreement or contract with the owner or operator of a private lot, facility or property. This definition does not include towers who tow vehicles at the request of the vehicle's owner, such as a service station, garage or other like tower. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.020 - Storage facilities. 
A.  All private towers shall be required to maintain a storage lot or facility for all vehicles towed, which shall be located with [within] one (1) mile of the boundaries of the city. 
B.  Each tower shall maintain at the storage facility: 
1.  A log or entry book for recording each vehicle being towed. 
2.  A copy of each contract authorizing towing services. 
3.  A copy of the towed vehicle report. 
C.  Each storage facility shall be staffed by a responsible person twenty-four (24) hours every day while vehicles are being stored or have a responsible person on call. 
D.  Each tower shall be responsible for towing damages while providing towing services. 
E.  It shall be the responsibility of the tower, after at least forty-eight (48) hours from the time that a vehicle has been impounded, to send a written request to the division of motor vehicles in the state where the vehicle is registered for a certified copy of the registration for the motor vehicle which has been towed. 
F.  Within forty-eight (48) hours after this information has been received from the division of motor vehicles, it is the responsibility of the tower to notify the vehicle owner of the circumstances surrounding the towing and the charges and fees incurred. The fee for the inquiry to the division of motor vehicles may be added to the fees and charges already outstanding for the initial towing and storage. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 2, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 3863, § 1, 11-28-2006) 
5.51.030 - Licensing. 
A.  Each tower shall apply for and maintain a valid mercantile license annually, from division of licenses, which shall be prominently displayed at the storage lot or facility. Said mercantile license shall be issued for a year period from May 1 to April 30 of the next succeeding year. 
B.  A copy of the mercantile license shall be kept in the tow vehicle at all times and must be presented upon demand. 
C.  No mercantile license shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: Certificates of insurance showing public liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and property damage insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 3, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.040 - Warning signs. 
A.  The owner or operator of a private lot, facility, or property, shall be required to post the signs in accordance with the following. Warning signs shall be sized in accordance with the following: The size of warning signs shall be a minimum two by three (2 ×3) feet and six (6) square feet in area and a maximum three by five (3 × 5) feet and fifteen (15) square feet in area. 
B.  Warning signs shall be conspicuously located to be visible to any entrance to any parking lot and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the tower or towing firm. 
2.  The 24-hour monitored telephone number. 
3.  The address or location of the storage lot or facility. 
4.  The words "UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED." 
5.  The towing fee which will be charged to the owner of the towed vehicle. 
C.  A minimum of two (2) signs as herein described shall be provided in each private parking lot from which towing will be done. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 4, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.050 - Towed vehicle report; removal of vehicle. 
A.  Each vehicle to be towed must be inspected by the tower prior to towing for existing damage and a towed vehicle report filled out before the vehicle is removed from its place. The report shall describe the existing damage to the vehicle and shall be kept at the towing storage facility for inspection by any interested party. 
B.  Before a vehicle has been hooked and lifted and before it has been removed from its original place, a report shall be made with the city police department by the tower. The report shall contain the following information: 
1.  The make, year and color of the vehicle. 
2.  The registration number. 
3.  The exact address of the facility to which the vehicle is being towed. 
4.  A statement as to why the vehicle is being towed. 
5.  The name of the tow truck operator and the tower. 
C.  No vehicle shall be removed from its original place by any tower until it has been established by the police department that said vehicle is not a stolen vehicle or one which has been used in the commission of a crime. 
1.  Should a vehicle be found to be stolen or wanted in connection with the commission of any crime, the city police department shall be dispatched to the location and shall maintain control and custody of the vehicle and the location to ensure the preservation of evidence. 
2.  Should the NCIC/SCIC computers be down, the police department shall authorize the towing of the vehicle and again check with NCIC/SCIC within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is found to be stolen or otherwise wanted, the tower shall surrender the vehicle to the care, custody, and control of the city police department at no charge. 
D.  No vehicle shall be hooked, lifted or moved by a tower without the authorization of the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 5, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.060 - Fees and charges. 
A.  If the vehicle has not been lifted prior to the owner's return to the lot, whether it is hooked up or not, it is to be released by the tower at no charge. 
B.  If the vehicle has been lifted but not removed from the lot prior to the owner's return to the lot, a fee of not more than twenty (20) percent of the authorized towing service fee, as indicated on the warning signs for the lot, may be imposed for the release of said vehicle. 
C.  Any vehicle which has been towed from the parking lot, regardless of how far, before the owner's arrival may be assessed the full amount of the authorized towing fee. 
D.  The maximum fee which can be charged for the towing of any vehicle from private property by a tower shall be as follows: 
1.  For cars, vans, other passenger vehicles, including pickup trucks, and other light-weight trucks having a gross vehicle weight up to six thousand (6,000) pounds, the maximum allowable shall be eighty dollars ($80.00). 
2.  For trucks, mobile homes and other vehicles greater than six thousand (6,000) pounds, the maximum allowable shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
E.  Storage Charges. There shall be a maximum charge for the storage of towed vehicles after the first twenty-four (24) hours of fifteen dollars (15.00) per day. 
F.  Payment of fees and charges in accordance with this section may be made in cash or by major credit card. 
(Ord. No. 4556 , §§ 1, 2, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2660, § 6, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.070 - Release of vehicle. 
A.  No vehicle shall be released from the storage facility without the tower first obtaining proper identification from the person claiming the towed vehicle. 
B.  A receipt for the towing service shall be provided, which shall show the following: 
1.  The towing service's name, address and telephone number. 
2.  The signature of the person releasing the vehicle. 
3.  The signature of the person claiming the vehicle. 
4.  All fees and charges. 
C.  If a vehicle is towed in violation of any section of this article, the vehicle is to be released at no cost for towing or storage. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 7, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.080 - Tow truck markings and equipment. 
A.  All tow trucks shall have the name of the registered owner, address and telephone number painted or permanently attached to both sides of the vehicle. 
B.  All tow trucks shall be equipped with a rotary or flashing amber light, approved-type fire extinguishers and road flares. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 8, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.090 - Mercantile license fees. 
    Mercantile license fees shall be as follows: 
A.  Licensed towing company/operator, three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually. 
B.  Licensed storage facility in city, three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually. 
C.  Licensed tow truck, sixty dollars ($60.00) annually. 
(Ord. No. 4556 , § 3, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2660, § 9, 4-12-1994) 
5.51.100 - Violations and penalties. 
    When a violation of this article occurs, the violator may be fined and/or have his mercantile/license suspended or revoked, according to the penalties set forth in this article. 
A.  For the purpose of determining suspension or revocation of the mercantile license of any tower, the chief license inspector shall hear all such cases. The chief license inspector shall be responsible for the notification of the tower of such recommendation and notice of charges against him. The tower shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the chief license inspector and to respond to all charges before the decision of the chief license inspector is made. 
B.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by the city for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such imprisonment and such fine, and each day or part thereof any violation of the Code of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 10, 4-12-1994) 
Chapter 5.52 - JUNK SHOPS AND JUNKYARDS 
Sections: 

5.52.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep a junk shop or junkyard or to deal in junk any place within the limits of the city, without first having obtained a license for such purpose as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 84-1) 
5.52.020 - Compliance required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep a junk shop or a junkyard or to deal in junk at any place within the limits of the city in any manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 84-2) 
5.52.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are established: 
    "Junk" means any waste material or discarded material or old iron or other metal or substance, glass, paper, machine parts, accessories, discarded machines, in all or in part, and any material commonly and generally known as "junk," in the ordinary meaning of the word, acquired and/or collected commercially, including specifically parts and portions of every description of automobiles, whether used or new. 
    "Junk dealer" means any person who buys or otherwise acquires junk for commercial purposes within the limits of the city, and/or who collects and stores junk therein. 
    "Junk shop" any building within the city in which junk is stored. 
    "Junkyard" means any lot of land within the city on which junk is placed, collected, stored or kept. 
(Prior code § 84-3) 
5.52.040 - Application procedure-Information-Fee required. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license as required by this chapter shall: 
A.  Make application in writing to the license inspector at the central license bureau, setting forth names of owner and applicant, address and the location of the premises at which it is proposed to establish a junk shop or junkyard, or setting forth the premises where a junk shop or junkyard business is presently being conducted, including a full description of such premises and whether the applicant owns the premises or leases them, together with the deed or lease thereon, together with a description of the building and the classes of materials which it is proposed to store thereon. 
B.  Such application shall be accompanied by cash in the sum equaling the whole annual license fee, which shall be returned by the license inspector in the event that the license is refused. 
C.  Such application shall state the number of years a junk shop or junkyard business has been conducted on the premises, and also whether the applicant has been convicted of the crime of larceny or removing stolen goods or any other crime involving moral turpitude. 
D.  The applicant shall file a copy of the application with the building inspector and shall file a copy thereof with the chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department of the city. 
(Prior code § 84-4) 
5.52.050 - Investigation by license inspector. 
    Upon receiving an application, the license inspector shall investigate and determine whether the statements contained in the application are true and whether all city taxes, both real and personal, have been fully paid. 
(Prior code § 84-5) 
5.52.060 - Investigation by building inspector-Report required. 
    Upon receiving a copy of an application, where a business exists or where it is proposed to establish a junk shop or junkyard not conducted on the premises before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the building inspector shall determine whether the proposed junk business would constitute a violation of any zoning ordinance of the city, and shall within ten (10) days make a written report to the license inspector of his or her findings in the matter. 
(Prior code § 84-6) 
5.52.070 - Investigation by chief of fire department-Report required. 
    Upon receiving a copy of an application, where it is proposed to establish a junk shop or junkyard not conducted on the premises before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the chief of the fire department shall make an inspection of the premises to determine whether or not a junk shop or junkyard conducted at the proposed location would constitute a fire hazard to the surrounding neighborhood. The chief of the fire department's report shall be filed with the license inspector not later than ten (10) days after receipt of the application and shall state, among other things, whether or not the type of junk business proposed to be conducted on the premises would require the burning of waste material, and if it would, what safety measures, in his or her opinion, would be necessary to protect the adjoining buildings from the danger of fire. 
(Prior code § 84-7) 
5.52.080 - License issuance-Conditions and requirements-Hearing. 
    If the building inspector shall notify the license inspector that a junk shop or junkyard on existing premises or at the proposed premises where the business had not been conducted prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter would constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance of the city, the license inspector shall find the application irregular and shall not issue a license. If the chief of the fire department shall determine that a junk shop or junkyard at existing businesses or at the proposed premises would constitute a fire hazard to the adjoining buildings, the license inspector shall find the application irregular and shall not issue a license but shall report his or her refusal to do so to the city council and shall notify the applicant, who, upon notification, may apply for a hearing on the fire chief's findings before the city council. If there is no objection to the issuance of a license, the license inspector shall issue it as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 84-8) 
5.52.090 - Conduct of hearing-Provision for issuance. 
    At such a hearing, the city council shall have evidence of the facts from the chiefs of the police and fire departments and the building inspector as to why, in the opinion of each, the conduct of a present junk shop or junkyard business or one at the proposed premises where business has not been conducted prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter would constitute a fire hazard, and they shall also make recommendations to the council as to the necessary steps that should be taken by the applicant for elimination of such hazard. If the council is satisfied that the applicant could safely conduct a junk shop or junkyard business at the proposed premises, the council shall direct the license inspector to issue the license, subject to the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 84-9) 
5.52.100 - Persons convicted of crimes-Hearing authorized. 
    If it is determined by the license inspector that the applicant has been convicted of the crime of larceny or removing stolen goods or other crime involving moral turpitude, the license inspector shall find the application irregular and shall not issue a license but shall report his or her refusal to do so to the city council and shall notify the applicant promptly of such action. 
(Prior code § 84-10) 
5.52.110 - Schedule of fees-Tags for vehicles required. 
A.  The license fee for junkyards and junk shops in the city is fixed at five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year, payable yearly in advance. 
B.  The license fee for any junk dealer operating his or her business solely from a vehicle and not having any place of business in the city is seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per year, payable in advance. 
C.  In addition, each truck operated by a junk shop operator, junkyard operator, or junk dealer shall have a tag issued by the supervisor of licenses containing the license number of the operator. The cost of the tag shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per truck. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 15, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 84-11) 
5.52.120 - License certificate issued-Display required. 
    The license inspector shall issue to every person to whom a license has been granted a certificate which shall state the purpose for which the license is granted, the name and business address of the licensee, the number of the license and the date of its expiration. The certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises at all times. Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his or her business shall have displayed on the exterior thereof, in a conspicuous place, in lettering two inches high, the name of the dealer and his or her business address and the words "City of Elizabeth, Licensed Junk Dealer, No. ____," with the number of the license inserted. 
(Prior code § 84-12) 
5.52.130 - Junkyards-Application-Inspection-Fencing-Report required. 
    The license inspector shall supply the building inspector of the city with a copy of every application for a license to conduct business as a junkyard. Upon receipt of the application, the building inspector shall inspect the premises in use or proposed to be used as a junkyard, to ascertain whether the appearance of the neighborhood in which the junkyard is located or proposed to be located would be improved by the erection of a substantially solid-built fence, not less than seven feet in height, to be erected on such parts of the yard as face a street or highway. Within ten (10) days after receiving a copy of the application, the building inspector shall file a report with the license inspector, containing, among other things, the reasons for his or her conclusion, and if the findings are that a fence would be essential to protect the appearance of the neighborhood, the license inspector shall notify the applicant that his or her license will be revoked if a fence is not erected according to specifications on file and obtainable from the central license bureau. In no case shall the building inspector make a finding that a fence would improve the appearance of a neighborhood around a junkyard where the area in which the junkyard is located is industrial, but such finding may only be made where some part of the junkyard property is adjacent to property used for residential purposes. The building inspector shall send a copy of his or her report to all adjoining residential property owners of the premises to be used as a junkyard where a fence is required by him or her to be erected. 
(Prior code § 84-13) 
5.52.140 - Junkyard fences-Hearing-Erection. 
A.  Any applicant who has been notified by the license inspector that a seven-foot substantially solid-built fence will be required to be erected around his or her premises may apply for a hearing on the findings of the building inspector before the city council. The license inspector shall notify all adjoining residential property owners of the existing premises or proposed premises to be used as a junkyard, of the date of the hearing and that. the applicant may be required to erect a seven-foot substantially solid-built fence around the premises. 
B.  If the city council shall find that a seven-foot fence around the premises in use or proposed to be used as a junkyard by the applicant would substantially improve the appearance of the neighborhood and would not interfere with the adjoining residential property owners' use and enjoyment of their property, the applicant shall be required to erect such fence within one year from date of formal notice by the council. 
(Prior code § 84-14) 
5.52.150 - Purchases from minors prohibited. 
    No person operating or conducting the business of a junkyard, junk shop or acting as a junk dealer shall receive or purchase any goods, articles or things whatsoever from any minor under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Prior code § 84-15) 
5.52.160 - License revocation-Cause-Hearing-Reinstatement. 
A.  Any licensee convicted of the crime of larceny or removing stolen goods or other crime involving moral turpitude during the period for which a license has been issued shall be subject to having such license revoked upon receiving a written notice of revocation from the license inspector. 
B.  The licensee shall have thirty (30) days from the date the notice of revocation is received by him or her to apply for a hearing on such revocation before the city council. If the council determines at the hearing that the crime for which the licensee was convicted has no reasonable relationship to the licensee's ability to conduct a junk business in an honest manner, the council may direct the license inspector to reinstate such license. 
(Prior code § 84-16) 
5.52.170 - Junk on streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
    No junk dealer shall permit any junk, as defined in Section 5.52.030, to be or remain on any street or sidewalk of the city or in front of the place of business conducted as a junkyard. 
(Prior code § 84-17) 
5.52.180 - Burning of materials-Supervision required-Nuisances prohibited. 
    No licensee shall burn or permit, suffer or allow to be burned upon the licensed premises any material in such a manner that the same creates nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood by excessive smoke or odor, or in such a manner that such burning might tend to extend to a conflagration either by the location of the fire or by reason of high winds. Such fire shall be under the continual supervision of the licensee or his or her employees as provided for in the fire prevention code and under the local sanitary code and Air Pollution Control Code of the state Air Pollution Control Commission. 
(Prior code § 84-18) 
5.52.190 - Compliance with additional regulations required. 
    All junkyards, junk shops and junk dealers operating in the city shall be governed and controlled under the present existing ordinances and codes of any and all departments in the city, as though the same were fully set forth in this section. 
(Prior code § 84-19) 
5.52.200 - License transfers. 
    The transfer of any licenses provided for in this chapter to any other person shall be subject to the approval of the license inspector and subject to the right of appeal to the city council as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 84-20) 
5.52.210 - Fiscal year-Full fees charged. 
    The fiscal year for the issuing of any license shall be considered as of March 1st to February 28th of the following year, and there shall be no prorating of license fees if issued at any other time of the year. 
(Prior code § 84-21) 
5.52.220 - Stolen goods-Weekly list provided-Report required. 
    The chief of the police department of the city shall supply every junkyard and junk dealer with a list of all property reported as stolen or lost. Every junkyard operator or junk dealer is obligated to inspect such weekly list and to report all property answering the description contained in the above list to the chief of the police department, to supply all information required and to cooperate in every way in any investigation being conducted by the police department. 
(Prior code § 84-22) 
5.52.230 - Record books required-Inspection authorized. 
    All junkyard dealers and junkyard operators shall keep books in which records of all purchases are made, which books are to be open to police inspection in order to enable them to trace stolen goods. Such inspections to be made only when police officers present written authorization from their superiors. 
(Prior code § 84-23) 
5.52.240 - Motor vehicle purchases-Daily reports required. 
    It shall be the duty of all junkyard dealers and junkyard operators to report daily the purchase of all motor vehicles to the police department as well as to the Director of Motor Vehicles as provided by the state law. 
(Prior code § 84-24) 
5.52.250 - Number of licenses limited-Prior licenses excepted. 
    The number of junkyards and junk shops in the city shall be limited in number to twenty-five (25), but it is not intended by this chapter to affect any license now in existence beyond that number. 
(Prior code § 84-25) 
Chapter 5.54 - TIRE REPAIR SHOPS 
Sections: 

5.54.010 - Title. 
    Tire repair shops. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 1, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    "Tire repair shop" shall mean any establishment, indoor or outdoor, whose business primarily or incidentally is the supply, repair, readjustment and/or removal of motor vehicle tires for charge. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 2, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.030 - License required. 
    No person shall engage in, keep, conduct, carry on, operate or maintain a tire repair shop in the city without first obtaining a license there for as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 3, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.040 - Application for license. 
    Each application for a tire repair shop license must be sworn to and include the following information: 
A.  A description of the facilities and services to be available on the premises of the proposed establishment and the business address at which the applicant proposes to conduct the business. 
B.  Name and home address of the individual applicant; if a firm, the names and home addresses of the members of the firm, if a corporation, the names and home addresses of the president, secretary, all other officers of the corporation and the registered agent of the corporation and any other person or entity which has a financial or beneficial interest in the business of the applicant. 
C.  If the manager in charge is to be someone other than a person named above, then his name and address. 
D.  The history of the applicant in tire repair business, including but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such permit revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation. 
E.  Whether or not any person listed in the application has, within ten (10) years of the date of the application, ever been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or disorderly persons offense, the number of convictions and the date, place and nature of the offense for which convicted. 
F.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of: 
1.  A New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved collector/hauler who removes tires from the tire repair shop to dispose of the same. 
2.  A New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved disposal facility(ies) where discarded tires are brought for ultimate disposal. 
G.  The number of tires: 
1.  The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection collector/hauler removes from the tire repair shop. 
2.  Disposed of at each New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved disposal facility(ies) for the entire prior year. 
H.  Copies of disposal receipts for each load of tires: 
1.  The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved collector/hauler removes from the tire repair shop. 
2.  Disposed of at each ultimate New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved disposal facility for the entire prior year. 
    In either of the above noted arrangements, the disposal receipt should indicate either the volume or weight of the load. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 4, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.050 - Disqualification of applicant. 
    No license shall be issued or held by any person, firm or corporation where the applicant, any partner, any officer, any person in management or any entity having a financial or beneficial interest in the business of the applicant shall have been convicted of any crime that relates adversely to the operation of a tire repair shop. Any determination made by the chief license inspector under this section shall be made in accordance with N.J.S. 2A:168A-2.1. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 5, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.060 - Issuance of licenses. 
    Upon approval of the application the chief license inspector shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 6, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.070 - License fee, term of license, renewal of license. 
A.  All licenses issued, and renewals thereof, under this chapter shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance. The chief license inspector may establish administrative rules and/or regulations pertaining to scheduling for the issuance of tire repair shop licenses as appropriate. 
B.  The annual fee for the license issued under this chapter shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) payable when the application is filed. In the event the license is not granted the application fee, less the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be returned to the applicant. 
C.  Application for renewal of a license shall be made on a form provided by the chief license inspector at least one month prior to the expiration of the current license. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 7, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.080 - Transfers. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to another or from place to place. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 8, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.090 - Investigation of licensee's conduct. 
    The chief license inspector may, upon his own initiative or upon the filing of a written verified complaint of any person, investigate the action of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 9, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.100 - Suspension and revocation of license; hearing. 
    Upon notice to the licensee by the chief license inspector a hearing shall be conducted by the chief license inspector to determine whether any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any violation of the following: 
A.  Licensee fails to comply with the fire prevention ordinance of the city after reasonable notice shall have been given to the licensee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the licensed premises; 
B.  Licensee fails to comply with any provision of the health ordinances of the city or the state after reasonable notice shall have been given to the licensee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the licensed premises; 
C.  Licensee fails to comply with any provision of the city electrical, mechanical or plumbing code after reasonable notice shall have been given to the licensee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the licensed premises; 
D.  Licensee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or other provision of city ordinance or state statute, after reasonable notice shall have been given to the licensee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such chapter on the licensed premises; 
E.  Licensee furnishes incorrect or incomplete information on its application for license or application for renewal of license; 
F.  Licensee must have an up to date record bookkeeping system of tires bought, sold, replaced, or delivered in bulk and to whom; 
G.  Licensee shall submit annually a manifest showing the proper disposal and removal of tires; 
H.  Licensee must keep receipts of pick up by any trucker or contractor to dispose of tires after first ascertaining that the trucker or contractor is licensed by the state and city to transport material for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 10, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.110 - Conduct of the holders of licenses. 
A.  The holder of any license under this chapter shall at all times abide by the statues, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the federal, state and city governments and their agencies, and especially in connection with the operation of a tire repair shop and conduct therein. 
B.  The holder of any license under this chapter shall at all times allow the city's duly authorized representatives to inspect the premises for compliance with this chapter and the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 11, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.120 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 12, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.130 - Restrictions. 
    Where there is no garage or other indoor area where tires may be repaired, removed, adjusted, changed or rotated, no license shall be issued unless the premises for which the license is to be issued shall have sufficient off-street space to accommodate at least two (2) motor vehicles in a manner so as not to obstruct any sidewalk or other public way. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 13, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.140 - Existing tire repair ordinances. 
    As of the effective date of the ordinance from which chapter derives, existing and operating tire repair facilities shall have three (3) months to make application for a license under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 14, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.150 - Storage of tires; compliance with other laws. 
    No tire repair shop shall store tires outdoors after normal operating hours. At all times, the storage of tires must comply with the fire sub-code and all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 15, 3-9-2010) 
5.54.160 - Identification/registration number prior to disposal of tires. 
    Prior to the disposal of tires or release of tires to the tire collector/hauler, the tire repair shop shall mark or paint its identification number, which will be issued by the bureau of central license, on a conspicuous place on the tire. 
(Ord. No. 4115, § 16, 3-9-2010) 
Chapter 5.56 - MASSAGE PARLORS 
Sections: 

5.56.010 - Massage business license required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize any premises in the city as or for a massage business unless and until there first has been obtained a license for such establishment or premises from the supervisor of licenses of the city, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 91A-1) 
5.56.020 - Masseur's or masseuse's license required. 
    No person shall render or perform services as a masseur or masseuse or engage in the business of or be employed as a masseur or masseuse unless and until he or she has obtained a masseur's or masseuse's license from the supervisor of licenses of the city, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 91A-2) 
5.56.030 - Application for license. 
    Each and every applicant for a license, either for an establishment or premises to be used for a massage business or for a masseur's or masseuse's license, shall set forth the following information in writing on forms provided by the supervisor of licenses: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant and all former addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application; 
B.  The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage business and a physical description of the property and facilities, if the applicant desires a license for such establishment or premises; 
C.  If the applicant desires a masseur's or masseuse's license, a statement of all employment for a period of three years prior to making the application; and 
D.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any officer or director thereof, if a corporation, has ever been convicted of a crime in this or any other state. 
(Prior code § 91A-3) 
5.56.040 - License fees. 
A.  The applicant for a license for an establishment or premises shall pay an annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) which license fee shall become due on the first day of February in each year. 
B.  The applicant for a masseur's or masseuse's license shall pay an annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which license fee shall become due on the first day of February in each year. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 16, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 91A-4) 
5.56.050 - Approval or denial of license. 
    Each application for a license or the renewal thereof, either to operate a massage establishment or premises or to engage in the business of or to be employed as a masseur or masseuse, shall be submitted to the supervisor of licenses for approval or rejection. The supervisor of licenses shall not approve such application if, on the basis of the past criminal record of the applicant or of the principals thereof, or on the basis of other evidence of bad character or morals, he or she shall determine that the granting or renewal of such license would tend to encourage or permit criminal or immoral activities within the city. 
(Prior code § 91A-5) 
5.56.060 - Treatment of opposite sex prohibited. 
    No person engaged or employed in the business of a masseur or masseuse shall treat a person of the opposite sex. 
(Prior code § 91A-6) 
5.56.070 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy treatments given: 
1.  In the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist; 
2.  In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium having a staff which includes licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors and/or physical therapists; 
3.  By any licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist in the residence of his or her patient; 
4.  At a street fair or public exhibit, when the massage is given without charge by a therapist licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53, et seq., with the recipient fully clothed while sitting in a massage chair, which is defined as a specially designed chair solely used for such purposes, in plain view of the public. 
B.  The provisions of Section 5.56.060 shall not apply to massage provided all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  The establishment solely employs massage therapists licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53, et seq.; 
2.  The massage is conducted with the recipient fully clothed while sitting in a massage chair, which is defined as a specially designed chair solely used for such purposes; 
3.  The massage is conducted in plain view of the public in an open location; and 
4.  The establishment is located in Terminal A of Newark Liberty International Airport or the Jersey Gardens Mall. 
C.  Massage therapists, licensed under N.J.S.A. 45:11-53, et seq., who are employed by an establishment located in Terminal A of Newark Liberty International Airport or Jersey Gardens Mall, shall be exempt from obtaining a license under Section 5.56.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3648 § 1, 2004: prior code § 91A-7) 
Chapter 5.60 - OPEN-AIR PARKING STATIONS 
Sections: 

5.60.010 - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated: 
    "Open-air parking station" means any lot, piece or parcel of land used for the purpose of storing motor vehicles where the owner or person storing such vehicles is charged a fee, and shall include such plots where shelters that are not completely enclosed are erected and which are open to the general public. 
(Prior code § 101-1) 
5.60.020 - License required. 
A.  No person shall maintain or conduct an open-air parking station within the limits of the city without first having obtained a license therefore from the Central License Bureau. 
B.  Persons conducting special events, including but not limited to, festivals, parades, rodeos and traveling shows, etc. must obtain a 24 hour temporary open-air parking license from the Central License Bureau. 
( Ord. No. 4615 , § 1, 8-25-2015; Prior code § 101-2) 
5.60.030 - Application procedure-Information required. 
    Applications for licenses for open-air parking stations shall be made by the persons intending to operate open-air parking stations, upon forms drawn and furnished by the central license bureau, and shall set forth the name under which and the place where the open-air parking station is to be operated; whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation; if an individual, the name and business address and residence address of the applicant; if a partnership, the name and business and residence address of each partner; if a corporation, the name, date and state under which such corporation was organized, the amount and value of the capital stock issued by such corporation and the names and business and residence addresses of the officers, managers in charge and directors thereof; whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant and, if leased, the name and residence and business of each owner or part thereof; the number of motor vehicles which may at any one time be stored upon the premises; the hours during which the motor vehicles may be stored; a complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing motor vehicles; and such other information as the license inspector may deem advisable. Each application shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent, if a partnership or corporation. 
(Prior code § 101-3) 
5.60.040 - License fee. 
A.  A license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid for each license issued for open-air parking stations under the terms of this chapter. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
B.  A license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid for a temporary open air parking license for 1 to 30 parking spaces and a license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid for a temporary open air parking license for more than 30 parking spaces. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
( Ord. No. 4615 , § 2, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4149, § 17, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 101-4) 
5.60.050 - License issuance-Expiration date-Records required. 
    If after investigation and approval by the license inspector it shall appear that the applicant has complied with tie regulations of this chapter and that the statements set forth in the application are correct and if the proper fee shall have been paid, the license inspector shall issue to the applicant a license for an open-air parking station, which license shall continue in full force and effect until the first day of January following the issuance of the license or until revoked by the license inspector. The license inspector shall keep a record of all applications and licenses issued, indexed alphabetically and by location. 
(Prior code § 101-5) 
5.60.060 - Signs-Information-Approval required. 
A.  Each licensee shall maintain at each entrance to such open-air parking station a permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using such open-air parking station of the name of the licensee, the hours of the day and/or night during which such places are open for storing motor vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hour of such station. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions and such figures shall measure not less than six inches in height, and the letters and figures indicating the closing hour shall be not less than six inches in height. 
B.  All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the central license bureau. 
C.  When separate rates or charges are made for day parking and for night parking, the change in rate and the effective hours shall be stated and notice thereof shall be posted on the signs described in subsection B of this section. 
(Prior code § 101-6) 
5.60.070 - Parking checks required. 
    At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storing or parking in an open-air parking station, the person conducting the same, his or her agent, servant or employee, shall furnish to such person parking his or her motor vehicle a distinctive check which shall be numbered to correspond to a coupon placed upon such motor vehicle, which check shall show the location of the lot and the name and address of the licensee operating such open-air parking station. 
(Prior code § 101-7) 
5.60.080 - Conditions for rate increase. 
    No licensee shall make any charge for storing any motor vehicle in an open-air parking station in excess of that set forth in his or her application for license unless and until he or she has: 
A.  Notified the central license bureau in writing of the change. 
B.  Posted signs showing such increases in the same manner as set forth in Section 5.60.060. 
(Prior code § 101-8) 
5.60.090 - Report of loss or theft required. 
    Each licensee shall immediately notify the police department of any claim made by reason of any loss, theft or conversion occurring upon his or her premises. 
(Prior code § 101-9) 
5.60.100 - Grounds for license revocation. 
    The license inspector may revoke any license after a hearing before the central license bureau if at any time: 
A.  The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the application. 
B.  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
C.  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provisions of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor vehicle without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or other person is convicted of such offense or not. 
(Prior code § 101-10) 
5.60.110 - Cleanliness-Lighting-Safety of premises. 
    Each licensee shall keep the sidewalks surrounding the open-air parking station free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the sidewalks in safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. 
A.  Persons operating open-air parking stations shall keep the same free from dust by frequent sprinkling or the use of calcium chloride or other means so that the same shall not become a nuisance to adjacent property owners or others. 
B.  All structures shall be painted and kept in a clean condition. 
C.  Parking lot areas to be used at night shall be provided with ample lighting sufficient to attract motorists and afford protection from the standpoint of safety and theft. 
D.  In the case of unattended lots in which motorists are required to park their own car, parking stalls shall be defined by clear surface markings. 
E.  Operators of parking lots shall provide for the handling of vehicles entering and leaving, in such manner as to reduce street traffic interference to a minimum. 
(Prior code § 101-11) 
5.60.120 - Unauthorized movement of vehicles prohibited. 
    Unless expressly authorized by the owner or person having control of such vehicle, it is unlawful to use or move any motor vehicle from any parking lot to any other parking lot. 
(Prior code § 101-12) 
5.60.130 - Competent attendants required. 
    Each licensee shall faithfully perform his or her duties as bailee and shall employ honest and competent attendants and help on his or her parking lot. Failure to employ reliable and competent attendants and help shall be cause for revocation of the license of such licensee. 
(Prior code § 101-13) 
5.60.140 - License issuance-Approval of fire and police departments required. 
    The issuance of a parking lot license shall be subject to approval by the fire and police departments and contingent upon a satisfactory examination of the property involved with respect to compliance with the central license bureau's rules and regulations. 
(Prior code § 101-14) 
Chapter 5.64 - PUBLIC DANCE HALLS 
Sections: 

5.64.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Dancing" shall not apply to exhibitions or performances in which the persons paying for admission do not participate. 
    "Inspector" means the license inspector, the city inspector, their authorized assistants and representatives and the duly authorized representatives of the police and fire departments. 
    "Public dance hall" means any room, place or space in the city in which dancing is carried on and to which admission can be had by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property, or any room, place or space in the city located upon the premises which are licensed to sell liquors, in which dancing is carried on and to which the public may gain admission either with or without payment of a fee. 
(Prior code §§ 66-1, 66-6) 
5.64.020 - Valid license required. 
    No public dance hall shall be conducted nor shall dancing be taught or permitted in any public dance hall unless it shall be licensed annually pursuant to this chapter and the license be in force and not suspended. 
(Prior code § 66-2) 
5.64.030 - Application procedure-Fee, approval and enforcement. 
    The application for such license shall be made in writing to the bureau of central licensing, designating the location of such dance hall and the person or persons intending to conduct the same, accompanied with a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually, whereupon a license shall be prepared and presented to the mayor, who, at his or her discretion, may grant or refuse the same. No license shall be issued until a certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the bureau of construction of the department of planning and community development, and no license shall become effective until it has received the approval of the mayor; and in case he or she shall refuse to approve such license, the money so paid to the chief license inspector shall be returned to the applicant or his or her attorney properly authorized to receive the same. It shall be the duty of the chief license inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. All moneys paid for licenses under this chapter shall be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 4149, § 18, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3391 § 1, 2002: prior code § 66-3) 
5.64.040 - Conditions for issuance and renewal-Inspections authorized. 
    No license shall be issued or renewed unless the place designated in such application complies with laws, ordinances, rules and the provisions of any building, fire or health code applicable thereto and is a safe and proper place for the purpose of which it shall be used, is properly ventilated and is supplied with sufficient toilet facilities, nor until the mayor shall have received a written report of the city inspector or his or her authorized assistant, or from other departments having pertinent jurisdiction, to that effect. Such inspectors shall be permitted to have access to all public dance halls at all reasonable times and whenever they are open for dancing, instruction in dancing or for any other purpose. Inspectors shall be required to report regularly all violations of law or of the ordinances of the city. All reports shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city license inspector and made public records. 
(Prior code § 66-4) 
5.64.050 - Duration of license-Prohibited hours of operation. 
    Every such license shall be in force for one year from the date of its issue and in no event later than June 30th of each calendar year. Such license shall be posted at the main entrance of such dance hall. Dancing in such licensed place shall not be permitted between 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sundays, 1:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Mondays through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays. All licenses shall expire on June 30th of each year. 
(Ord. 3657 § 1, 2004: prior code § 66-5) 
5.64.060 - Regulations governing dancing and sale of alcoholic beverages. 
A.  Dancing shall not be permitted in any place in the city licensed to sell liquors unless a license for a public dance hall is obtained under Sections 5.64.030 through 5.64.050. No liquors shall be sold, served or given away in any public dance hall, as heretofore defined, except in compliance with Chapter 5.08 of this title. 
B.  Public dance halls not licensed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be restricted to street level. 
C.  Minors on Premises Prohibited-Exception. Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be allowed to frequent, loiter or remain in any room or rooms used or devoted to the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon a licensed premises, unless accompanied by their parent, guardian or adult husband or wife; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to restaurants or to guest rooms and private and public dining rooms in hotels, and further provided that this provision shall not apply to establishments operating teen nights as permitted pursuant to Section 5.64.150. 
(Prior code § 66-7) 
5.64.070 - Revocations-Complaints. 
A.  A license may be forfeited for disorderly or immoral conduct permitted on the licensed premises, or on conviction of any person for violation of Section 5.64.060, or of any statute or of any common-law offense. Such license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor for such violations or whenever the licensed premises do not comply with Sections 5.64.030 through 5.64.050, provided that the licensee or person in charge shall be served with a copy of the report or complaint. In any case where a license is revoked or where the mayor refused to renew a license, reasons for action must be stated in writing and shall be public records. Any licensee who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
B.  It is lawful for any person to make complaint of such violations, before the municipal court of the city, who is authorized to hear and determine such complaints and enforce the penalties mentioned in this section. 
(Prior code § 66-8) 
5.64.080 - Appointment of officials by mayor. 
    The mayor may appoint such inspectors or other officials as he or she may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 66-9) 
5.64.090 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to annual or special balls held by any fraternal or other accredited society or bona fide branch or division thereof duly organized or incorporated in the city, nor to any entertainment held for a public charity, the net proceeds of which shall go to such charity; provided, however, that the holding thereof shall be first approved by the mayor in writing. 
(Prior code § 66-10) 
5.64.100 - Duties of licensee. 
A.  The licensee shall announce to patrons publicly the locations of building exits prior to the start of each music set or after breaks but no less than three separate times during a dance. 
B.  All operators of dance halls shall maintain a record by mechanical device during a dance of the number of patrons within the establishment. 
C.  The operator shall upon request of a city inspector provide the record of the total number of patrons within the establishment during a dance. 
D.  The operator at no time shall exceed the maximum occupancy established by city or state laws, rules or regulations. 
(Prior code § 66-11) 
5.64.110 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct or engage in the business of operating a public dance hall shall make application for the same, in triplicate, to the chief license inspector, division of licensing, department of health and human services. The application shall state the following: 
1.  The name, home address and business address, if any, and home and business telephone numbers, of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity the same information shall be supplied for each of the stockholders of the corporation or principals of the entity. 
2.  The name, home address and business address, if any, and home and business telephone numbers, of the owner of the premises, if such owner is a person other than the applicant. 
3.  The name, home address and home telephone number of the manager or other agent of the applicant, if any, who shall be in charge of the licensed premises. 
4.  The capacity, stated in a number of persons, of the teenage dance hall for which the license is sought, and the location and capacity, stated in a number of cars, of the off-street parking facility to serve the teenage dance hall for which the license is sought. 
5.  The hours of operation of such teenage dance hall. 
6.  The minimum number of employees that will be on duty at any time in solely a security or policing capacity. 
7.  The amount charged, for admission and the manner in which that charge is to be made, whether by fee, ticket, token or other device. 
8.  The amount, if any, charged for parking, and the rate of such charge. 
9.  Whether any minimum purchase will be required over and above the amount of the admission, and the amount of such minimum purchase. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing of the premises, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing its location and size; the location and size of entrances and exits; the location and size of the hall, building or place where dancing will be conducted, together with the location and size of the dance floor itself, any bandstand or similar area, any service area, the number and location of tables, and the number of chairs provided at tables or elsewhere in the dance hall itself the location and number of toilet facilities; the number, size and location of off-street parking spaces to serve the teenage dance hall; and such other data or information as may be necessary or helpful to show compliance with all the requirements of this chapter or with other pertinent ordinances, regulations or laws. 
(Prior code § 66-12) 
5.64.120 - Suspension and revocation. 
    When the operation of a public dance hall, or the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee, is so inimical to the public health, morals, safety or general welfare as to give rise to an emergency or to constitute a nuisance, the chief license inspector shall have authority summarily to order the cessation and the closing of the licensed premises or to suspend the license; or the chief license inspector, after hearing, upon a showing of good cause for so doing, may revoke any license issued hereunder. During such suspension and after any such license shall have been revoked, the license shall be inoperative and of no effect. 
(Prior code § 66-13) 
Chapter 5.68 - PUBLIC MARKETS 
Sections: 

5.68.010 - Markets and streets for public markets designated. 
    Market space for the convenience of residents of the city is established at the following locations on the public streets: 
A.  Union Square Market. 
1.  High Street: northerly side, from First Avenue to Second Avenue. 
2.  Second Avenue: easterly side, from High Street to South Street. 
3.  Center Street: northerly side, from Elizabeth Avenue to Second Avenue. 
B.  Downtown Market. 
1.  Livingston Street: northerly side, from First Street to Front Street. 
C.  940-956 Broadway and 214-218 Reid Street. 
(Prior code § 107-1) 
5.68.020 - Enforcement of regulations. 
    The supervisor of public markets, appointed by the director of public works, shall have charge of all public markets and shall enforce all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing such markets. 
(Prior code § 107-4) 
5.68.030 - Mercantile personnel restricted-Farmer defined. 
A.  No persons other than farmers, produce dealers and merchants dealing in food products shall sell goods at the public markets. 
B.  A farmer is defined as a person who grows at least sixty (60) percent of the products he or she offers for sale, and shall produce to the satisfaction of the supervisor a sworn affidavit certifying such person in operating a farm growing farm products to such a percentage, except and only when special permission may be granted by the supervisor to individuals to purchase for market purposes such commodities as may be lacking in sufficient quantity at the market to supply demand. 
(Prior code § 107-5) 
5.68.040 - Ethical conduct of business required. 
    Any person or persons having privileges at the markets can sell there only as long as he or she deals fairly with the public and so conducts his or her business that it does not become detrimental to the best interests of the markets. 
(Prior code § 107-6) 
5.68.050 - Regulations governing weights and measures. 
    All persons selling food products at the markets in retail quantities must use scales, when necessary, which have been tested by the sealer of weights and measures and abide by such other rules as are required by that department in transacting business. 
(Prior code § 107-7) 
5.68.060 - Market days and hours-Authority of supervisor. 
    Markets shall be open for trading the entire year and market days shall be as follows: 
A.  Union Square Market: Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, open at 6:00 a.m. and close at 3:00 p.m. 
B.  Downtown Market: Wednesday and Friday, open at 6:00 a.m. and close at 3:00 p.m. 
C.  The supervisor shall have the authority to designate special market days to conform to holidays. 
D.  940-956 Broadway and 214-218 Reid Street: from Tuesday to Saturday, open at 10:00 a.m. and close at 6:00 p.m., for a trial period of six months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 107-8) 
5.68.070 - Sale of live poultry prohibited. 
    The sale of live poultry from trucks or stands is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 107-9) 
5.68.080 - Schedule of fees. 
A.  The market fee for the Union Square Market shall be four dollars ($4.00) per stand of a six-foot curbline per week, payable in advance, from January 1st through December 31st, inclusive. 
B.  The market fee for the Downtown Market shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per stand for Wednesday and one dollar ($1.00) per stand for Friday from January 1st through December 31st, inclusive. 
C.  The fee for stands abutting the building line of buildings located on streets set aside by ordinance for market purposes shall be one dollar ($1.00) per stand of six feet and/or displays of merchandise (maximum of three dollars ($3.00)) per week. 
D.  The farmer season rates shall be four dollars ($4.00) per week, payable in advance, from January 1st through December 31st, inclusive. 
(Prior code § 107-10) 
5.68.090 - Honest display of merchandise required. 
    The face or top of all packages must truly and fully represent the contents as to size and quality, except that reasonable facing with well-colored specimens, when possible and desired, will be permitted. 
(Prior code § 107-11) 
5.68.100 - Mechanical means of advertising prohibited. 
    No person shall call out his or her products, or call attention thereto, by means of any sounds produced by the use of any instrument or mechanical device or contrivance. 
(Prior code § 107-12) 
5.68.110 - Display space restricted. 
    No person or persons shall be permitted to use more than two feet of the walks from the property line or the curbline, to display their merchandise. 
(Prior code § 107-13) 
5.68.120 - Sanitary and orderly operation required. 
    All market stands shall be kept in a clean and wholesome condition and conducted in an orderly manner at all times, and occupants of the stands shall clean up all refuse and place same in a suitable container kept for such purpose, and all empty boxes, crates and barrels shall be removed from the stand at closing time. 
(Prior code § 107-14) 
5.68.130 - Inspections authorized-License revocations. 
    The supervisor will at any time inspect by dumping or otherwise any or all packages of any load or any bulk load, and if in his or her judgment any person or persons are found to be violating any law of the state or ordinance or rule or regulation governing public markets, such person's or persons' privilege of occupying a stand at the markets will be revoked without refund of market fee. 
(Prior code § 107-15) 
5.68.140 - Reinstatement. 
    Any person whose privilege has been suspended or revoked shall surrender his or her stand and move all his or her property therefrom forthwith; such person may, however, apply in writing to the director of public works for reinstatement, and the director may, if deemed advisable after hearing and investigation, cause such person to be reinstated in the market. 
(Prior code § 107-16) 
5.68.150 - Additional rules and regulations authorized. 
    The director of public works may, from time to time and without notice, add to or make such other rules and regulations as shall in its judgment be necessary and proper. 
(Prior code § 107-17) 
5.68.160 - Certification of domestic cultivation required. 
    No persons shall offer for sale in the public markets any flowers, trees, shrubs or plants unless sixty (60) percent of same shall have been grown by such persons, who shall make certification to same when requested by the supervisor. 
(Prior code § 107-18) 
Chapter 5.70 - RENT CONTROL AND STABILIZATION 
Sections: 

5.70.010 - Definitions-Notices-Applications. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Base rent" means rent exclusive of capital improvements, temporary hardship increases, real property tax and sewer surcharges and other adjustments allowed by this chapter and prior rent control ordinances. 
    "Capital improvement." Capital improvements shall be defined as an added benefit to the use of the building and enjoyment of the tenants therein. It shall be a benefit which substantially changes the housing accommodations. Capital improvement shall not include any repair or replacement of an already existing facility, or those items or services required by law, or previously required by law. The addition of, or improvement, to laundry rooms, vending equipment and facilities and items of like nature shall not be considered capital improvements. The conversion of one heating system for another or the replacement of windows of similar quality shall not be deemed a capital improvement 
    "Dwelling" includes any building or structure or trailer or land used as a trailer park, condominium or cooperative apartments, rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or family units. Exempt from this chapter are motes, hotels, rooming houses and similar type buildings, housing units of two (2) units or less, housing units of three (3) are owner-occupied and housing units of four (4) which are owner-occupied. New housing units constructed after the effective date of this chapter are exempted permanently from this chapter. 
    "Equity in real property investment" means the actual cash contribution of the purchaser-landlord at the time of closing of title and any principal payments to outstanding mortgages. 
    "Fair rental housing board" is the body created by this chapter, and shall hereinafter be called the "board." 
    "Housing space" includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one or more individuals or family unit, together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of that portion of the property. 
    "Substantially rehabilitated" means the cost of improvements which exceeds forty (40) percent of the assessed value of value of the unit or building being rehabilitated and is in compliance with all New Jersey Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Laws and all local municipal housing and housing maintenance codes. Further, all work done on the structure must have been done with appropriate local approval as evidenced by permits, if necessary, and the completed improvement must be in accord with building, fire and other code regulations. 
    "Warehousing" means intentionally withholding vacant rental units in a building which is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any complex consisting of twenty-six (26) dwelling units or more in which at least one-fourth or twenty-five (25) percent of the units are vacant at the same time shall be considered being warehoused and subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any complex consisting of twenty-five (25) dwelling units or less in which at least five units are vacant at the same time shall be considered being warehoused and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Normal repairs and painting shall not be considered rehabilitation. 
C.  Notices shall be on forms prescribed by the board and shall be served by certified mail or by personal service, provided that the landlord obtains the tenant's signature acknowledging receipt of the notice. 
D.  Applications to the board shall be on forms prescribed by the board and in the manner prescribed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 5026 , § 1, 6-26-2018; prior code § 110-1) 
5.70.020 - Fair rental housing board. 
A.  There is hereby created a fair rental housing board within the city of Elizabeth. The board shall consist of seven members. 
    B The members of the board shall be appointed by the Elizabeth City Council and their terms of office shall be until their successors are appointed and qualified or as provided in Section 5.70.020(F). 
C.  Two members shall be appointed who shall be tenants within dwellings in the Elizabeth to which this chapter applies. Three members shall be appointed who shall be owners of one or two-family homes within Elizabeth who do not qualify as landlord-residential management members. Two members shall be appointed who shall be landlords or residential managers for residential dwellings within Elizabeth covered by this chapter. If a vacancy in any of the categories above described occurs, then the alternate member in that category is moved up and becomes a regular member of the fair rental housing board. 
D.  There shall be appointed one alternate member from each category cited above who shall participate as a regular member in the event of absences, disqualifications or inability to serve on the part of a member of that group. An alternate member may only sit in the place of a regular member from the group to which he or she is an alternate, i.e., a homeowner alternate representative may only sit in the place of a homeowner member of the board. The alternate in each category shall become a regular member in the event of a vacancy. 
E.  The landlord-residential management representatives need not be residents of Elizabeth. 
F.  Removal of Board Members. Members of the fair rental housing board may be removed from office by the Elizabeth City Council for neglect of duty or misconduct in office, but a member shall be removed only after he or she shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing thereon and after an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. In the event of the removal of any board member, a record of the proceeding, together with the charges and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 110-2) 
5.70.030 - Powers of the board 
    The fair rental housing board is hereby granted, and shall have and exercise in addition to other powers hereby granted and the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  To issue and promulgate rules and relations as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter which rules and regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or amended from time to time by the board in the exercise of its discretion, provided that the rules are filed with the city clerk. 
B.  To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help them comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  To hold hearings and make determinations of applications from landlords for additional rental as hereinafter provided and to adjust base rent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to determine whether any increases granted are temporary or are permanent. Permanent increases are part of base rent. 
D.  To hold hearings and make determinations on applications from tenants for reduced rental as hereinafter provided. 
E.  The board shall have investigative powers which shall allow assignment of staff to assert validity of complaints covered by this chapter. 
F.  The board shall have the power to receive, investigate and conciliate and/or refer to proper appropriate governmental authorities all landlord-tenant matters brought before it as may be defined and covered by the New Jersey Truth-in-Renting Act, P.L. 1975, c. 310, as amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A. 46:8-43, et al). 
G  The board shall have the power to issue a summons in the municipal court for the violation of any provision of this chapter with the approval of the majority of the board. 
(Prior code § 110-3) 
5.70.040 - Hearings. 
    All hearings conducted under the authority of this chapter by the board shall be held not later than ninety (90) days from the receipt of an application by the board, and a decision shall be rendered within thirty (30) days from the last formal hearing date. However, by agreement between the applicant arid the board, this time period may be extended. 
(Prior code § 110-4) 
5.70.050 - Registration. 
A.  All dwellings subject to this chapter shall be registered annually with the board. Registrations on forms provided by the fair rental housing board shall be filed annually in the office of the board according to the street address of the dwelling. The registration shall include the name, address and telephone number of the owner and any agent of the owner, the services provided in the dwelling, a listing of the housing space in the dwelling, the present base rent for each unit and other information the board specifies. All registration reports shall be as of January 1 of each year. 
B.  All completed registration forms must be filed by March 1, and every subsequent twelve (12) months. 
C.  No increase in rent in any dwelling shall be charged or collected unless the landlord of the dwelling shall have complied with Section 5.70.050(A) and (B). 
D.  Any landlord who willfully fails to file an annual registration form may be subject to the penalties provided in Section 5.70.230. 
(Prior code § 110-5) 
5.70.060 - Increases in base rent. 
A.  Establishment of base rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this act is applicable shall hereinafter be determined by the provisions of this chapter. At the expiration of a lease, termination of a lease of a periodic tenant or at the anniversary date of the building, no landlord shall request or receive any increase in base rent in excess of three percent over the base rent received for the twelve (12) months prior. When three percent over the base rent received for the twelve (12) months prior exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00), the maximum allowable increase shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
B.  No landlord may request or receive more than one increase in base rent for any twelve (12) month period. 
C.  Any landlord who willfully violates this section may be subject to the penalties provided in Section 5.70.220. 
(Prior code § 110-6) 
5.70.070 - Notices to tenants. 
A.  Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall provide notice to the tenant no less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed increase. 
B.  A landlord must give all new tenants a copy of a statement of legal rights and responsibilities as required under the New Jersey Truth-in-Renting Act as defined under N.J.S.A. 46:8-43, et al., or any analogous successor to that statute. 
C.  A landlord must inform tenants, at the initial rental and at least annually, that the tenant has legal rights and responsibilities as defined in the New Jersey Truth-in-Renting Act and this chapter. 
D.  A landlord must inform tenants, at the initial rental and at least annually, that the landlord is required to file a rental registration form with Elizabeth's fair rental housing board, on an annual basis, and that the tenant may verify the present base rent by contacting the fair rental housing board's rent registration representative. 
E.  A landlord must inform tenants, at the initial rental and at least annually, that the tenant has a right to file a complaint and request a hearing with Elizabeth's fair rental housing board if they believe that their rights under this chapter have been violated. 
F.  A landlord must inform tenants that they may receive a copy of this chapter by contacting the fair rental housing board. 
G.  A landlord must provide to all tenants the name, address and telephone number of Elizabeth's fair rental housing board and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Office of Landlord/Tenant Information. 
(Prior code § 110-7) 
5.70.080 - Rent increases in cases of vacancy. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a landlord may raise the rent of an apartment when the preceding tenant has vacated the apartment or has been evicted, at a rate not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the base rent received for the twelve (12) months prior, for the first year only. This is to be deemed the maximum annual rental increase allowable on the base rent. 
B.  In the event a landlord should seek to increase the base rent pursuant to subsection A, then the landlord must file a statement with the fair rental housing board stating that the preceding tenant has voluntarily vacated the apartment or has been evicted pursuant to state law, and did not vacate the apartment by harassment, threat, or threat of reprisal by the landlord. 
C.  No landlord may request or receive more than one vacancy increase in rent for any twelve (12) month period, regardless of the number of vacancies in an individual apartment. 
(Prior code § 110-8) 
5.70.090 - Real property tax rebate. 
A.  In the event that a real property tax appeal is taken by the landlord and the landlord is successful in the appeal and the real property taxes are reduced, the tenant shall receive fifty (50) percent of the reduction as applied to its tax portion, after deducting all expenses incurred by the landlord in prosecution of the appeal, including the landlord's legal fees. 
B.  In the event that the landlord is successful in obtaining a tax reduction or rebate from any source whatever, other than that mentioned in subsection A above, then, in that event, the tenant shall receive the benefit of the reduction, and it too shall be applied to the tax portion. 
C.  The tax reduction or rebate shall be paid to each tenant in twelve (12) monthly payments. 
D.  The tax assessor, upon the filing of a tax appeal application, shall notify the fair rental housing board of the tax appeal application. 
E.  The tax collector shall notify the fair rental housing board of all real property tax refunds given to property owners with rent controlled housing units. The full amount of the rebate to which tenants are entitled, pursuant to this section, must be remitted by the property owner to the tenants within forty-five (45) days of the refund date. In the case of any tenant who has moved, the property owner shall make a diligent effort to forward the refund to the tenant; and if the property owner is not successful in effecting the refund, then, in that event, the property owner shall pay or apply the refund on a pro rata basis to or for the benefit of those remaining tenant(s) who occupied the dwelling housing space during the time period for which the taxes and/or assessment were the subject matter of a successful appeal. 
F.  The tax collector shall also notify the property owner that the tenant's portion of the refund must be returned to their respective tenant within forty-five (45) days from the date of the refund check. 
G.  The property owner shall post, in a common area, for at least one year, a notice that a real property tax appeal application has been filed. The notice shall state the tax year for which the appeal has been filed. Upon receipt of a tax rebate, refund and/or reduction from a successful tax appeal, the property owner shall post notice of the amount of the tax reduction received and send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to each tenant entitled to a tax refund that a reduction has been obtained. The common area notice shall remain posted for at least one year. The property owner shall also file with the fair rental housing board, a certification stating that the tax refund and/or rebate has been made, the sum rebated to each rental unit and the method of calculation used in determining the refund. The certification shall also include a statement certifying that the notices required by this subsection were posted and that certified mailings have been made. 
(Ord. 3177 §§ 1, 2, 1999; prior code § 110-9) 
5.70.100 - Hardship increase. 
A.  1.  A landlord or owner is entitled to a fair return on his or her equity investment. Upon application to the fair rental housing board on board prescribed forms, the applicant will be granted a hearing. No date for a hearing will be granted until and unless the applicant provides a completed application as hereinafter described. At that time, the landlord shall make available all books and records to the tenants or their representatives including tax records, cash receipts and disbursements, a tenant ledger, insurance policies, general ledgers and supporting paid bills. In addition to providing the board with a fully completed application, on the form prescribed by the board, the applicant will also provide the board with the following essential information regarding income and costs associated with the operation of the subject property. 
a.  Real property taxes and proof of payment; 
b.  Fuel and utility costs and proof of payment; 
c.  Building, maintenance and material costs and proof of payment; 
d.  Salaries of residential manager and/or superintendent and proof of payment; 
e.  Insurance costs and proof of payment; 
f.  Debt service and proof of payment; 
g.  A listing of each apartment with the rental income for each apartment; 
h.  The date and amount of the last rental increase for each apartment; 
i.  The average number of vacant apartments for the preceding calendar year; and 
j.  The total amount of income received of non-rentals and other sources such as vending and laundry machines for the past calendar year. 
2.  In addition to the foregoing required documentation, the board may consider the following factors: 
a.  Taxes; 
b.  Cost of maintenance and operation of the property; 
c.  The kind, quality and quantity of the services being furnished or withheld by the landlord; 
d.  The number and frequency of prior hardship or capital improvement increases for the multiple dwelling; 
e.  Landlord's original and current equity investment; 
f.  The dates, amounts, terms and interest rate of all past and current mortgages; 
g.  The amount of current professional and management fees and the relation, if any, between the landlord and the recipients of the fees; 
h.  The age of the dwelling as well as its original and current appraisal value; 
i.  The present and past rates of vacancy; 
j.  The efficiency of current management; 
k.  Cash flow history; and 
l.  Other factors which the board, through its experience, shall determine to affect the rate of return. 
B.  The landlord shall be entitled to a hardship increase if he or she qualifies for same pursuant to one or more of the following formulas and demonstrates that the application of the particular formula is appropriate for his or her particular building. The formulas which the board shall consider are as follows: 
1.  In the event that a landlord's annual residential operating expenses, as hereinafter defined, exceeds sixty (60) percent of his or her gross annual residential income, as hereinafter described, then the landlord shall qualify for a hardship rental increase in an amount sufficient to reduce his or her operating expenses to income ratio to sixty (60) percent. 
a.  For purposes of this chapter, the term "gross annual residential income" is defined as all annual income derived directly or indirectly from the operation of the landlord's property, including but not limited to all residential rents received, all earnings from commissions from vending machines, laundry equipment and supplies, deductions from security deposits, late fees, parking fees, garage fees, key charges, finders' fees, income from rebates, capital improvement, surcharges and hardship surcharges. The fair rental housing board may request that the landlord supply documentation supporting the gross annual income as stated in the landlord's application. In any case, where rental units are occupied in whole or in part rent free, the full rental value shall be considered the legal rent therefore for the purpose of setting forth gross annual residential income. 
b.  For purposes of this section, the term "annual residential operating expenses" as defined as all reasonable, necessary and valid annual expenses (as determined by the fair rental housing board) incurred and paid by the landlord for the rental property for which a hardship increase is requested, excluding, however, depredation, mortgage interest and amortization, and including but not limited to expenses for supplies, administrative costs, management fees limited to five percent of the gross rental, heating fuel, electricity, water supply, sewerage charges, garbage disposal, gas, building services, security, grounds maintenance, repairs (other than reimbursed repairs), painting and decorating, real estate taxes, other taxes, permit fees, insurance, wages and recreational amenities. However, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1981, c. 226, increased costs which are solely the result of a conversion, as defined within the meaning of P.L. 1981, c. 226, including but not limited to any increase in financing in carrying costs, and which do not add services or amenities as previously provided, shall not be used as a basis for an increase in the hardship hearing before the board or in any appeal from the determination. 
c.  Where nonresidential income is received in connection with the property, the landlord shall, in addition to the above, furnish to the fair rental housing board the income and expenses related to the nonresidential uses for the purposes of determining the effect thereof on the hardship application of the landlord. 
2.  Fair Return on Investment. The landlord shall be entitled to a fair return, meaning the percentage of return on equity in real property investment. The amount of return shall be measured by the net income before depreciation. The board shall consider a fair rate of return in efficiently run multiple dwelling to be six percent above the maximum passbook demand deposit savings account interest rate available in the municipality. Six percent is provided to reflect the higher risk three percent and lesser liquidity three percent of the real property investment in comparison to savings account investment. The board shall consider, for purposes of this section, annual residential operating expenses and gross annual residential income in determining a fair rate of return. In the event that the applicant's rent roll is less than what is calculated to give the applicant a fair rate of return, then he or she shall be entitled to an increase in an amount sufficient to achieve the rental which would grant him or her a fair rate of return. 
3.  Maintenance of Net Operating Income (NOI). A landlord is entitled to an increase if the landlord has suffered a decline in NOI from the base period. The base period NOI is defined as the average NOI for a period of three years prior to the year in which the application is presented. NOI equals gross annual residential income minus annual residential operating expenses. The landlord shall be entitled to an increase which will raise the dollar net operating income to the base period level. 
    For example: 
    Base Year 
    Gross annual residential income ..... $50,000.00 
    Annual residential operating expenses ..... -25,000.00 
    Net operating income ..... 25.000.00 
    Current Year 
    Gross annual residential income ..... $55,000.00 
    Annual residential operating expenses ..... -32,000.00 
    Net operating income ..... 23,000.00 
    Hardship increase permitted: ..... $2,000.00 
4.  The fair rental housing board, in making its findings of fact on each application, shall make findings of fact which shall determine which of the above formulas for hardship is best particularly suited fur each application. The board shall use its expertise and the evidence presented before it to make the determinations. The board shall make the final determination as to which hardship formula shall apply to the particular application. 
5.  At the request of the fair rental housing board, the landlord shall supply documentation supporting all or any of the items listed in the application, and all figures set forth therein shall be certified by a professional certified public accountant licensed by the state of New Jersey, or, in the alternative, by the landlord individually, if a sole proprietor, or a partner if a partnership, or a corporate officer of a corporation, to be a true and accurate summary of the landlord's books and records. Documentation must be sworn to before an officer authorized to take oaths. 
6.  A public hearing on the application shall be held up later than ninety (90) days after the date of receipt of a completed application, at which time the fair rental housing board and landlord and tenants and/or their respective agents or representatives shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The fair rental housing board shall render a decision on each application within thirty (30) days of the completed hearing on the application. If a rent increase is granted, it shall take effect after the tenant has received a thirty (30) day notice of rental increase. No hardship increases may be collected until any and all outstanding Health and Housing Code violations are remedied. This shall not preclude the board from making a determination on an application for hardship or capital improvement. The fair rental housing board shall have the authority and shall determine the duration of the relief sought, if granted. 
7.  The landlord shall notify each tenant of the subject property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, of the date, time and place of the public hearing and of the substance of the landlord's application at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing and shall provide proof of service to the fair rental housing board. 
8.  No hardship appeal is to be considered by the board if the units which are the subject of the appeal are to any extent being warehoused. The board is empowered to make a physical inspection of the premises to determine if warehousing is taking place. 
(Prior code § 110-10) 
5.70.110 - Substantially rehabilitated building or dwelling. 
    If a vacant building or vacant dwelling has been substantially rehabilitated, the vacant building or vacant dwelling shall become decontrolled from the provisions of this chapter for a period of one year from the date of completion of the rehabilitation. Prior to the rehabilitation, the landlord shall first make advance application to the fair rental housing board, on board prescribed forms if required, to be accompanied by plans to be reviewed by the fair rental housing board. The fair rental housing board shall rule within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application as to whether or not the contemplated plans qualify as "substantially rehabilitated" as that term is defined in this chapter. In the event the application is approved by the fair rental housing board, the landlord may proceed with rehabilitation. Upon completion of the rehabilitation, the landlord shall apply to the rental housing board, on board prescribed forms, if required, which application shall certify that the vacant building or vacant dwelling unit has been substantially rehabilitated and shall provide proof of expenditures and detail improvements that were made. Accompanying the certification shall be a verification to the fair rental housing board from the construction official that the work has been completed, inspected and falls within the definition of "substantially rehabilitated" as defined in this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to obtain the verification of the city construction official. Upon satisfaction of the completion of the work, the fair rental housing board shall notify the applicant within thirty (30) days that the vacant building or vacant dwelling, as the case may be, is decontrolled for a one year period from the date of completion of rehabilitation. 
(Prior code § 110-11) 
5.70.120 - Capital improvements or service surcharge. 
A.  A landlord seeking a capital improvement or service surcharge shall apply for the surcharge to the fair rental housing board, which shall determine if the improvement is a capital improvement and, if so, shall permit the increase to take place. If the increase is granted, it shall not be considered rental and calculated in base rent. The landlord must notify each tenant no less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed hearing on the increases. All notices under this section shall include total costs of the completed capital improvement, or service, by the landlord for purposes of depreciation for income tax purposes, the average cost of improvement and the capital improvement or service surcharge he or she is seeking from each tenant. 
B.  Capital improvements shall be defined as an added benefit to the use of the building and enjoyment of the tenant therein. It shall be a benefit which substantially changes the housing accommodations. Capital improvements shall not include any repair or replacement of an already existing facility, or those items or services required by law, or previously required by law. The addition of or improvement to laundry rooms, vending equipment and facilities and items of like nature shall not be considered capital improvements. 
(Prior code § 110-12) 
5.70.130 - Multifamily building rehabilitation projects. 
A.  If a landlord participates in a multifamily building rehabilitation project sponsored by the Elizabeth Department of Community Development, the landlord shall be entitled to the following: 
1.  Conditional rent increases will be permitted, contingent upon bank loan approval and completion of rehabilitation work. 
2  Eligible rent increases would be limited to improvements allowed under the small multifamily rehabilitation project guidelines. 
3.  Eligible rent increases would be based on the monthly payment required to carry the loan over a minimum of a ten (10) year period and would be based on the actual term of the loan if it exceeds ten (10) years. 
4.  The rent increase would be determined by dividing the monthly payment by the number of rooms in the building to determine the rent increase per room. The per-room rent increase would be multiplied by the number of rooms in each unit to determine the per-unit rent increase. 
5.  The capital improvement rent would not effect the owner's ability to request other rent increases normally permitted over the course of a year. 
B.  The Elizabeth Home Improvement Program (EHIP) staff is given the responsibility of approving rent increase requests under the small multifamily building rehabilitation project. 
C.  The Elizabeth Home Improvement Program (EHIP) staff would decide whether to approve rent increases based on the extent of improvements needed to alleviate health and safety violations. 
(Prior code § 110-13) 
5.70.140 - Fees. 
    An applicant for a hardship increase in rent, a capital improvement increase or rehabilitation exemption shall pay to the fair rental housing board a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for applications in any of the above three categories where the increase in income sought or the expenditures made is under five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for applications for any of the above three categories where the increase in income sought or the expenditures made exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). This section does not apply to condominium conversions. 
(Prior code § 110-14) 
5.70.150 - Payment of increases. 
    All payments by the tenant provided for in this chapter over and above the base rent shall be paid in twelve (12) equal monthly payments, or as provided by the board. 
(Prior code § 110-15) 
5.70.160 - Maintenance of services and equipment by landlord. 
A.  During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain heat and air conditioning, were applicable, in the housing space, as well as the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he or she provided or was required to do by law or lease at the commencement of the lease. 
B.  A landlord's failure to maintain the same services and equipment as set forth in subsection A of this section may be considered a reduction in services entitling the tenant to a reduction in rent as may be appropriate. 
C.  The property owner shall have a superintendent on the premises and accessible twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week in all buildings with twelve (12) or more units. 
(Prior code § 110-16) 
5.70.170 - Increases in parking fees. 
A.  No landlord may request or receive any increase in parking fees that were in effect on September 1, 1987 for off-street parking facilities for the first vehicle per rental unit. If off-street parking facilities are provided by the landlord for more than one vehicle per rental unit then, in that event, the landlord may not request or receive an increase in excess of three percent of the parking fees received twelve (12) months prior. 
B.  No landlord may request or receive more than one increase in parking fees that were in effect on September 1, 1987. 
C.  No landlord may request or receive more than one increase in parking fees in excess of three percent annually for the second vehicle per rental unit. 
(Prior code § 110-17) 
5.70.180 - Limitations of complaint. 
    The chapter should provide for a three year statute of limitations on the filing of a complaint by either owners or tenants. 
(Prior code § 110-18) 
5.70.190 - Refunds for overcharges. 
    If a landlord has been in violation of the chapter, then the tenants shall have a remedy to receive a refund for an overcharge retroactive to two years from the date of the complaint. 
(Prior code § 110-19) 
5.70.200 - Collection of additional fees, late fees, rental increases or surcharges. 
A.  No landlord shall be entitled to collect any additional fees, late fees, rental increase or surcharges except as expressly provided herein. No landlord may request or receive a late rental fee in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. 
B.  No landlord may request or receive a late rental fee except where payment is received more than five business days after the date the rent is due. 
(Prior code § 110-20) 
5.70.210 - Harassment, threat or reprisal. 
    Any landlord, landlord's agent or tenant who, by harassment, threat, reprisal or threat of reprisal, shall attempt to deter any person from seeking his or her right under this chapter shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 110-21) 
5.70.220 - Rental housing warehousing. 
A.  Owners of Dwelling Units Subject to Provisions-Exemptions. 
1.  The owner of any dwelling unit other than those exempted below shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
2.  The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Units in owner-occupied buildings where there are four units or less and one of these units is owner occupied. 
b.  Units in newly constructed buildings which are being rented for the first time. After the first rental, the units will be subject to the provisions of this section. 
c.  Units where the owner is participating in an affordable housing project approved by the fair rental housing board. 
d.  Units in a building whose owner has transmitted his or her first sixty (60) day notice of his or her intentions to convert the building into a condominium or cooperative and his or her full plan of conversion to the city clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:19-61.8. 
e.  Units in motels and hotels. 
B.  Rental Requirement-Exemptions. All units shall be rented and occupied by a new tenant within two months after the end of the preceding tenancy, which shall be defined as the last day of residence by the preceding tenant or tenants, except where this requirement has been waived by the fair rental housing board under the provisions of Section 5.70.230(E), in which event the unit shall be rented and occupied within the time period specified in the waiver. 
C.  Notification of Vacancies. 
1.  The owner of any unit which is still vacant thirty (30) days after the end of the preceding tenancy shall notify the fair rental housing board within five days, in writing, of the continuing vacancy. 
2.  The notification shall include the following information: 
a.  The address and location within the building of the unit; 
b.  The rent charged the preceding tenant and rent to be charged the proximate incoming tenant; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner; and 
d.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner's agent and/or resident manager, if any. 
3.  No notification shall be required with respect to any unit rented and occupied within thirty (30) days or less from the end of the preceding tenancy. 
D.  Notification of Occupancy. Within thirty (30) days after submission of the report required under Section 5.70.230(C), the landlord shall notify the fair rental housing board that the unit has been rented and occupied, with the names of the new tenant or tenants and the terms of the tenancy. Failure to have the unit rented and occupied within sixty (60) days after the end of the preceding tenancy, except where a waiver has been granted by the fair rental housing board, shall be considered a violation of this section and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 5.27.230(G). 
E.  Landlords Seeking Waivers of Requirements. 
1.  A landlord may seek a waiver of the requirement to rent the unit within sixty (60) days of the end of the preceding tenancy where the condition of the unit or other special circumstances make rental within the time period impossible. In order to obtain a waiver, the landlord must submit a request, in writing, to the fair rental housing board, within thirty (30) days or less from the end of the preceding tenancy, setting forth with specificity: 
a.  The reasons that the unit cannot be rented within the time period; 
b.  The steps the landlord shall take to remedy the conditions that make it impossible to rent the unit; and 
c.  The date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. 
2.  Full documentation, such as code violation reports, engineering or inspection reports, etc., shall be provided by the landlord. Any waiver granted by the board under this section shall specify a date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. The board may extend that date upon written request of the landlord but may not provide more than two extensions of not more than sixty (60) days each. 
3.  In no circumstances shall any waiver, including extensions, exceed six (6) months from the time of granting of the waiver. 
4.  The following circumstances shall constitute grounds for granting of a waiver by the fair rental housing board: 
a.  An owner wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to reserve the unit for a family member. The owner shall provide in the waiver request full documentation, such as the name of the future tenant and the date of occupancy. 
b.  An owner wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to improve the conditions of the unit. The owner shall provide full documentation in the waiver request, such as up-to-date building and housing inspection reports, improvement plans, all related permits and the date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. 
c.  An owner maintains a vacant unit in order to correct code violations in the unit. The owner shall provide with the waiver request full documentation, such as code violations reports, correction plan, permits and the date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. 
F.  Filing Complaints. Any individual affected by the action or inaction of an owner of a dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this section, any civic organization and any appropriate municipal agency may file a complaint of violation of this section with the Elizabeth Municipal Court. 
G.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  A first violation of Section 5.70.230(B) or the conditions upon which a waiver has been granted by the board shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each unit in violation. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day during which an owner is in violation of Section 5.70.230(B) or the conditions upon which a waiver has been granted shall constitute separate violation hereunder. 
2.  A violation of any other provisions of this section, where there has been no finding of a violation of Section 5.70.230(B), shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each unit found in violation for each day the owner is found in violation. 
H.  Vacancies Upon Effective Date. Any landlord of any unit which has been vacant thirty (30) days or more from the end of the preceding tenancy as of the effective date of this section, shall be required to file the notification required under Section 5.70.230(C) within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 110-23) 
5.70.230 - Violations and penalties. 
    A willful violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to the willful filing with the fair rental housing board of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. A violation affecting more than leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold. 
(Ord. No. 4666 , § 1, 2-9-2016; prior code § 110-22) 
5.70.240 - Construal of provisions. 
    This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof. 
(Prior code § 110-24) 
5.70.250 - When effective-Expiration date. 
    This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until December 31, 2020, at which time it shall automatically cease and be of no force and effect after the date, unless specifically extended by the governing body. Any such extension action must be taken by the governing body prior to the expiration date set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 5091 , § 1, 11-13-2018; Ord. No. 4765 , § 1, 11-9-2016; Ord. No. 4482 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4325, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 9-28-2010; Ord. 3971 § 1, 2008: Ord. 3870 § 1, 2006: Ord. 3668 § 1, 2004: Ord. 3459 § 1, 2002: Ord. 3252 § 1, 2000: prior code § 110-28) 
Chapter 5.71 - REGULATION OF THE HOURS OF OPERATION OF CERTAIN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 

5.71.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms or words will have the following definitions, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    "Commercial zone" means and includes neighborhood commercial zone (C-1) and community commercial zone (C-2) as described and delineated in Chapter 40-116 of the code of the city of Elizabeth entitled "Land Development Control" and as described and delineated more fully on the official city of Elizabeth zoning map. 
    "Pharmacy" means and includes a drug store where a pharmacist or druggist dispenses prescription and nonprescription drugs. 
    "Residential zone" means and includes single-family residential zone (R-1), two-family residential zone (R-2 and R-2C), multifamily residential zone (R-3), four-family residential zone (R-3A) and elevator apartment zone (R-4) as described and delineated in Chapter 40-116 of the code of the city of Elizabeth entitled "Land Development Control" and as described and delineated more fully on the official city of Elizabeth zoning map. 
    "Restaurant" means any retail establishment that prepares and serves meals or food for consumption inside the retail establishment. In order to be considered a restaurant under the terms of this chapter, a retail establishment must devote ninety-five (95) percent of its business to the preparation and service of meals or food for consumption inside the retail establishment. 
    "Retail establishment" means and includes, but not be limited to, any store, location or pushcart which sells or provides goods, merchandise or services to consumers. 
    "Special improvement district" means and includes an area within the city of Elizabeth designated by ordinance as an area in which a special assessment on all property within the district is imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the municipality. Shall include, but not be limited to, the Midtown Elizabeth special improvement district and the Elizabeth Avenue special improvement district. 
(Ord. 3542 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 3530 § 1, 2003: prior code § 97B-1) 
5.71.020 - Hours of operation. 
    No retail establishment, located below a residential unit, other than the exceptions stated in Section 5.71.030 of this chapter, shall conduct business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next day in any residential zone and/or commercial zone as defined herein above. 
(Ord. 3542 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 3530 § 2, 2003: prior code § 97B-2) 
5.71.030 - Exceptions. 
    The following establishments shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Any retail establishment licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1, et seq., entitled "Intoxicating Liquors" and/or Chapter 48 of the code of the city of Elizabeth entitled "Alcoholic Beverages." 
B.  Any restaurant as defined in Section 5.71.010 of this chapter. 
C.  Any pharmacy as defined in Section 5.71.010 of this chapter. 
D.  Any retail establishment located within a special improvement district. 
E.  Any barbershop as defined and regulated in Chapter 38 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3542 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 3530 § 3, 2003: prior code § 97B-3) 
Chapter 5.72 - ROLLER RINKS 
Sections: 

5.72.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Place" means the enclosed auditorium within which it is intended to produce, offer, present or allow roller skating to and for members of the public for profit, or conducted as a club with restricted membership. 
    "Roller skating" means skating or performing on roller skates or other wheeled devices attached to the feet. 
(Prior code § 111-1) 
5.72.020 - License required. 
    No person, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, give, conduct, produce, present, permit, allow or offer roller skating in any place without first having obtained a license therefor from the supervisor of licenses. 
(Prior code § 111-2) 
5.72.030 - Application for license. 
A.  The applicant shall, in writing, signed by him or her or them, set forth a description of the kind of amusement, the highest price to be charged for admission and the attendance capacity of such place. Such application shall contain, plainly printed thereon, the following agreement: 
1.  That every ticket of admission issued by such applicant, when licensed under such application, shall have conspicuously printed upon its face the price thereof and that no price in excess of that so designated will be asked or accepted by or on behalf of such licensee. 
2.  That no ticket of admission shall be issued, sold or offered for sale by or on behalf of such licensee at a price in excess of that designated thereon or with the knowledge, purpose or intention that such ticket is to be resold or offered for resale, and no licensee and no manager, officer, agent or employee of any such licensee shall, directly or indirectly, receive any consideration of any nature whatsoever upon the sale of any such ticket beyond or in excess of the price designated thereon, or directly or indirectly enter into any arrangement, agreement or understanding for the receipt of any such consideration. 
B.  When such application and the agreement therein contained shall have been signed by the applicant, the health officer, the police chief and the fire chief shall make, or cause to be made, an examination of such place to determine if all the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to amusements and the location, construction and maintenance of the places within which such amusements are held or given are complied with. 
C.  No license shall be issued until the building inspector shall have certified in writing that the place where the roller skating is to be held or given complies in every respect with the reasonable requirements for safety of the public. 
D.  Each applicant for a license to conduct a roller skating rink shall, in addition to other requirements, fill out a form provided by the supervisor of licenses which shall include true answers and information on the following points: name, residence, citizenship, employment or business of the applicant in the previous five years, whether or not the applicant was ever convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether or not the applicant owns real estate and the value of the same and the names and addresses of three references who are householders in the city. Such application shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation as to the moral status of the applicant and the moral conditions surrounding the proposed location, and the chief of police shall transmit to the supervisor of licenses the results of his or her investigation. No license shall be issued for a roller skating rink until the chief of police has approved the application. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable for the obtaining of renewal licenses. 
(Prior code § 111-3) 
5.72.040 - Amusement devices. 
    No licensee shall keep or permit, in and about his or her or their place of roller skating, for gain or profit from operation, any amusement device the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of money, coin or token. 
(Prior code § 111-4) 
5.72.050 - Hours of operation. 
    Premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to operate on Friday evenings until 2:15 a.m. Saturday mornings and on Saturday evenings until 2:15 a.m. Sunday mornings and on the evenings prior to an observed holiday as set forth below until 2:15 a.m. the morning of the observed holiday: 
    New Year's Day; 
    Lincoln's Birthday (observed); 
    Washington's Birthday (observed); 
    Martin Luther King's Birthday; 
    Memorial Day (observed); 
    Fourth of July; 
    Labor Day; 
    Columbus Day; 
    Veterans Day; and 
    Thanksgiving. 
(Prior code § 111-5) 
5.72.060 - Sale of intoxicating beverages. 
    No licensee hereunder shall permit the sale of intoxicating beverages in the place where roller skating shall be conducted or permitted by it. 
(Prior code § 111-6) 
5.72.070 - License fee. 
    An annual license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each year of operation is required for the operation of any place permitting, offering or presenting roller skating. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 19, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 111-7) 
5.72.080 - License conditions. 
    Every license issued under this chapter shall contain appropriate words indicating that the same is issued and accepted subject to the conditions and agreements set forth in the application for the same and subscribed by the licensee when such application was made, and the conditions shall, upon the issuance of such license, at once become binding on the licensee, his or her agents and employees, who shall conform to the requirements of same. 
(Prior code § 111-8) 
Chapter 5.76 - ROOMING HOUSES 
Sections: 

5.76.010 - License required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no rooming or boarding house shall hereafter be located or operated in any municipality which elects to license such facilities except upon premises licensed for that purpose by the licensing authority of the municipality. Any rooming or boarding house that is in lawful operation on the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be entitled to continue in operation for one year from that date and, if the owner of the premises applies for licensure not later than the sixtieth day next preceding the expiration of that year, until a final determination is made upon that application. 
(Prior code § 113-1) 
5.76.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Licensing authority" means the department of health and human services. 
    "Operator" means any person including for the purposes of this chapter any corporation or association of persons and any agency or instrumentality of state or local government, which operates or proposes to operate a rooming or boarding house. 
    "Owner" means the holder of title in fee simple to premises and any lessor or sublessor of whom an operator is or proposes to become a sublessor in connection with an application for a license, or for renewal thereof, pursuant to this act. 
    "Population" means the most recent population count reported by the Department of Labor. 
    "Rooming or boarding house" means a rooming or boarding house licensed pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 496 (C. 55:13B-1 et al.). 
(Ord. No. 4551 , § 1, 2-24-2015; prior code § 113-2) 
5.76.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4551 , § 2, adopted February 24, 2015, repealed the former section 5.76.030 in its entirety, which pertained to the establishment of the licensing board, and derived from the prior code, § 113-3. 
5.76.040 - Applications for licensing. 
    Applications shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Application for a license under this chapter shall be made by the owner to the licensing authority. The application shall be in such a form, and shall contain such information and declarations as prescribed by the licensing authority and be accompanied by an application fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). The application shall be filed with the director of the department of health and human services. The form of application prescribed by the licensing authority shall require the submission of such information and supporting documentation to provide a basis upon which the licensing authority may conduct the investigation and reach the conclusion required under this chapter for the issuance or denial of a license. To the extent that the form of application requires the furnishing of information by the operator, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant owner to obtain such information and to exercise due care and diligence to assure its completeness and accuracy. The licensing authority may require that information required from the operator be duly sworn by the operator in order to form a valid part of the application. 
B.  An application filed pursuant to subsection A of this section shall include a deposit in full of the prescribed application fee, of which ninety (90) percent shall be refunded if the application is denied, and ten (10) percent retained and employed in defraying the expense of the licensing authority in carrying out its functions under this chapter. 
C.  All applications by a natural person, partnership or unincorporated association of natural persons shall be duly sworn to by each of the applicants. An application by a corporation shall be duly sworn to by the president or vice president of the corporation. All statements in an application shall be deemed material, and any person who knowingly misstates any material fact therein shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 4551 , §§ 3, 5, 2-24-2015; Ord. No. 4149, § 20, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 113-4) 
5.76.050 - License investigations. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensing authority to receive applications made pursuant to Section 5.76.040 and to conduct such investigations as may be necessary to establish: 
A.  With respect to the premises for which a license is sought: (1) that they are in compliance with all applicable building, housing, health, and safety codes and regulations; and (2) that the location of the premises will not, in conjunction with the proximity of other rooming boarding houses, lead to an excessive concentration of such facilities in the city or a particular section thereof; 
B.  With respect to the owner or owners of the premises: (1) if a natural person or persons, that he or she or they are twenty-one (21) years of age or older, citizens of the United States and residents of the state of New Jersey, and never convicted, in this state or elsewhere, of a crime involving moral turpitude, or any crime under any law of this state licensing or regulating a rooming or boarding house, and have never had a license required pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 496 (C. 55:13B-1 et al.) revoked; and (2) if a corporation, that all officers and members of the board of directors, and every stockholder holding ten (10) percent or more of the stock of the corporation, directly or indirectly having a beneficial interest therein, have the same qualifications as set forth in this subsection for an applicant who is a natural person; 
C.  With respect to the operator or proposed operator, that he or she meets the requirements for licenser by the department of community affairs; and 
D.  That the owner and operator, either individually or jointly, have established sufficient guarantee of financial and other responsibility to assure appropriate relocation of the residents of the rooming or boarding house to suitable facilities in the event that the license is subsequently revoked or its renewal denied. The department of community affairs shall determine, in case of each type of rooming and boarding house under its jurisdiction what constitutes suitable facilities for this purpose. 
E.  No license shall be issued which would result in increasing the total number of persons authorized to be residents in rooming or boarding houses within the city to more than one-half of one percent of the city population; but nothing in this subsection shall warrant refusal of a license or license renewal for premises where a rooming or boarding house has been in lawful operation prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
F.  No license shall be issued for be issued for premises when any part of the boundary line of the premises is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary line of any other premises for which a license is in force; this standard may be increased to two thousand (2,000) feet, at the discretion of the licensing authority, but nothing in this subsection shall warrant refusal of a license or license renewal for premises where a rooming or boarding house has been in lawful operation prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
G.  The licensing authority may refuse to grant a license for any rooming and boarding house to be situated in a neighborhood zoned as single-family resident. 
(Ord. No. 4551 , § 6, 2-24-2015; prior code § 113-5) 
5.76.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4551 , § 6, adopted February 24, 2015, repealed the former section 5.76.060 in its entirety, which pertained to public hearing, and derived from the prior code, § 113-6. 
5.76.070 - License issuance and renewal. 
    If the applicant satisfies the requirements under section 5.76.050, the licensing authority shall issue a license. 
A.  The license when issued shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and until such time as the licensing authority has acted upon the application for renewal, unless sooner terminated by revocation pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
B.  Not later than the sixtieth (60th) day preceding the anniversary date of the issuance, the holder of a license shall make application to the licensing authority for its renewal. Applications for renewal shall follow the same procedure and requirements as prescribed for a new application and shall necessitate de novo consideration and determination by the licensing authority in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 4551 , § 7, 2-24-2015; prior code § 113-7) 
5.76.080 - License revocation. 
    Licenses may be revoked by the licensing authority in accordance with the following: 
A.  A licensing authority may revoke a license granted under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  A finding that there was any misstatement of material fact in the application upon which the license was issued. 
2.  The occurrence of any fact which, had it occurred and been known in the licensing authority before issuance of the license, would have resulted in the denial of the application. 
3.  Repeated violations, or prolonged failure to correct any violation, of any applicable building, housing, health or safety code or regulations. 
4.  Refusal to allow access to any portion of the licensed premises at all reasonable times, with or without advance notice, in order that officers or agents of the licensing authority, or any official charged with enforcement within the municipality of any building, housing, health or safety code or regulations applicable to the premises may determine compliance with such codes and regulations. 
5.  Revocation by the department of community affairs of the operator's license or other authorization to operate a rooming or boarding house on the premises. 
6.  Notification by the department of community affairs that the premises are not, or are no longer suitable for operation of a rooming or boarding house on the premises. 
7.  Failure or refusal to comply with any lawful regulation or order of the licensing authority. 
8.  A license shall not be revoked until five days' prior notice of the grounds therefor has been served upon the licensee, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises, and a reasonable opportunity given to the licensee to be heard thereon. 
(Prior code § 113-8) 
5.76.080 - Appeals. 
    Upon determination by a licensing authority to refuse the granting or renewal of a license, or to revoke a license, the licensee affected shall be entitled to appeal to the commissioner of community affairs for a review of that determination; and the commissioner shall have authority to reverse the licensing authority's determination if it concludes that the application was improperly denied or the revocation improperly imposed. Such review by the commissioner shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.). The decision of the commissioner in such cases shall be subject to appeal to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court. If an applicant for license renewal has made timely and sufficient application for a renewal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules of the licensing pursuant thereto, his or her license shall not expire until any appeals under this section have been finally determined and disposed of. 
(Prior code § 113-9) 
Chapter 5.80 - SALE OF SPRAY PAINT AND INK MARKERS 
Sections: 

5.80.010 - Defined-Sales to minors prohibited-Violation-Penalty. 
A.  "Spray paint" means any paint or pigmented substance in an aerosol or similar spray container or intended for use in an aerosol or similar spray container. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any spray paint, hobby kit or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint and any ink marker. 
C.  No person may sell or offer to sell spray paint to any other person unless the buyer presents evidence of his or her identity and age. 
D.  Containers of spray paint and any ink marker which is not water soluble may not be displayed in any retail business premises except in a locked case only accessible by the owner(s) or designated agent(s) of the retail business. 
E.  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to: 
1.  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) and community service not exceeding ninety (90) days; and/or 
2.  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. 3975 § 1, 2008; prior code § 82A-1) 
5.80.020 - Possession of spray paint and/or marker, which is not water soluble, by persons under the age of eighteen prohibited-Exceptions. 
    No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall possess any paint in a spray can or any marker containing a fluid that is not water soluble. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
A.  A child using paint or marker while under the immediate supervision of his or her parent or legal guardian; 
B.  A student using paint or a marker while under the immediate supervision of his or her teacher; and 
C.  An employee using paint or marker under the supervision of his or her employer. 
(Ord. 3975 § 2, 2008: prior code § 82A-2) 
5.80.030 - Possession of spray paint and/or marker, which is not water soluble, within public buildings unlawful-Possession with intent to deface unlawfully. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint container or any marker that contains fluid that is not water soluble on the property of another or in any public building or upon any public facility. It shall be a defense to an action for violation of this section that the owner, manager, or other person having control of the property, building or facility, consented to the presence and use of the paint or marker. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint container or any marker that contains fluid that is not water soluble on the public way with intent to use same to deface any building, structure or property. This prohibition shall not apply to any employee of a public utility or of the municipal, state or federal government using spray paint or any marker within the scope of his or her prescribed duties. 
(Ord. 3975 § 3, 2008: prior code § 82A-3) 
5.80.040 - License required for sale of spray paint. 
A.  No person, except a wholesale dealer, may sell, offer to sell or possess with intent to sell any spray paint or hobby kit or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint without first obtaining a license from the superintendent of licenses. "Wholesale dealer" means any manufacturer and any person who sells spray paint to persons who are reasonably understood not to be the ultimate consumers. Applications for licenses to sell spray paint shall be made in the form prescribed by the superintendent of licenses and accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable to the city. 
B.  Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year from the date issued. 
C.  The license or certified copy of the license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place within the business premises where it can be easily read. 
D.  A license may be suspended or revoked, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, if the licensee is convicted of a violation of this chapter or if the superintendent of licenses finds that the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 21, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 82A-4) 
5.80.050 - Posting of signs and display requirements for certain aerosol containers and marker pens. 
A.  Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint or markers regulated by this chapter shall post in clear public view at or near the display of such products using a bold lettering at least one inch in height a placard stating the following: 
    "Any person defacing real property not his or her own with paint, non-water soluble markers or any other liquid shall be subject to: 
     i. a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1250 and community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, and/or 
     ii. imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days." 
B.  Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint or markers regulated by this chapter shall also post in the direct view of such person or persons responsible for accepting customer payment for such spray paint container or marker pens, using bold lettering at least one inch in height a placard stating as follows: 
    "It is unlawful to sell or otherwise convey spray paint or non-water soluble markers to persons under eighteen (18) years of age in the City of Elizabeth. Violators shall be subject to: 
     i. a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1250 and community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, and/or 
     ii. imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days." 
(Ord. 3975 § 4, 2008: prior code § 82A-5) 
5.80.060 - Aiding and abetting persons under the age of eighteen to obtain spray paint or marker prohibited herein. 
    No person shall aide, assist or abet a person under the age of eighteen (18) in obtaining possession of paint in a spray can or any marker that contains fluid that is not water soluble. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
A.  A parent or legal guardian assisting and supervising his or her own child or ward in use of paint or a marker; 
B.  A teacher, assisting and supervising his or her student in the use of paint or a marker; and 
C.  An employer assisting and supervising his or her employee in the use of paint or a marker. 
(Ord. 3975 § 5, 2008: prior code § 82A-6) 
5.80.070 - Identification requirements-Log-Record retention-Inspection. 
    Any person or persons or retail entity or agent of that retail entity who sells or offers to sell spray paint, hobby kits or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint, and any marker subject to the requirements of this chapter must request from the purchaser a state-issued identification card or driver's license. It shall also be unlawful for any person or persons or retail entity or agent of that retail entity to sell an item mentioned herein to a purchaser without obtaining and recording identification information set forth herein. 
    It is unlawful for any purchaser to purchase spray paint, hobby kits or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint, and any marker subject to the requirements of this chapter without producing identification as set forth herein. 
    At the point of sale, the person or persons or retail entity or agent of that retail entity must record in a logbook the name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the purchaser. The person or persons or retail entity or agent of that retail entity must keep the entry in the logbook for a period of at least one year from the date of the entry. The logbook must also be immediately made available upon request for inspection by any city official, inspector or police officer at any time during the operating hours of the retail establishment. 
(Ord. 3975 § 6, 2008) 
5.80.080 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of a violation of any part of this chapter shall be subject to: 
A.  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) and community service not exceeding ninety (90) days; and/or 
B.  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. 3975 § 7, 2008) 
Chapter 5.84 - SALE OF UTILITY KNIVES AND BOX CUTTERS TO MINORS 
Sections: 

5.84.010 - Sale to minors unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, distribute or make available in any manner whatsoever a utility knife or box cutter to a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. It is also unlawful for a minor under the age of eighteen (18) to buy, carry, or have in his or her possession a utility knife or box cutter. 
(Prior code § 82B-1) 
5.84.020 - Assisting in or encouraging violations. 
    It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having custody and care of any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage such minor to violate the provisions of this chapter, as defined herein, either by words, overt act, by failing to act, or by lack of supervision and control over such minor child. 
(Prior code § 82B-2) 
5.84.030 - Minors in violation-Parent subject to penalties. 
    Any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years apprehended for the violation of this chapter shall be brought before a judge of the Union County family court, and the parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of such minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the judge of the municipal court of the city and be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(Prior code § 82B-3) 
5.84.040 - Violations-Penalties-Exceptions. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days in the county jail, or both in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
B.  An exception to this section shall be any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall, upon conviction be subject to the penalties imposed on him or her by the judge of the Union County family court. 
(Prior code § 82B-4) 
Chapter 5.88 - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 

5.88.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Auto parts" means any part or equipment that is used in the manufacturing of an automobile including, but not limited to, auto body parts, radio/stereo equipment, compact disc players, cellular phones, speakers, tires, rims, mags and chrome fixtures. 
    "Electronic device" means electronic equipment including, but not limited to, VCR's, televisions, computers, video games, pagers, beepers, cellular phones, telephones, typewriters, fax machines and audio/stereo equipment. This shall also include, but not be limited to, the parts for building or making electronic equipment. 
    "Jewelry" means any ornament or decorative piece made from gold, silver, precious stones, semi-precious stones or gems or any ornament or decorative piece containing gold, silver, precious stones, semi-precious stones or gems including, but not limited to, necklaces, watches, rings, bracelets, earrings and cufflinks. 
    "Merchant/dealer" means any person(s), partnership or corporation who advertises, sells, offers to sell or attempts to sell used personal property including, but not limited to, used jewelry, used auto parts or used electronic devices to any other person, partnership or corporation. 
    "Metal" means any of a class of elementary substances or an alloy thereof including, but not limited to gold, silver, copper and aluminum. 
    "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
    "Regulated activity" means the sale or purchase of any used personal property including, but not limited to, used jewelry, used auto parts, used electronic devices and used metals. 
    "Used item" means any used personal property including, but not limited to, jewelry, electronic devices, auto parts and metals sold from one party or parties to a second party or parties. 
(Prior code § 108-1) 
5.88.020 - License requirement-Application and application fee-Bond requirements-Expiration date. 
A.  License Requirement. No person or persons shall engage in the regulated activity without first having obtained a license from the chief license inspector of the city. The license shall bear a number issued by the chief license inspector and shall be clearly displayed within the licensed premises. The license shall also be available for inspection at any time by city officials. 
B.  Application and License Fee. An application to engage in the regulated activity must be completed and submitted to the chief license inspector for review and approval. The application shall be submitted along with an annual license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
C.  Bond Requirement. Each licensee shall submit, in addition to the initial application and application fee, a bond to the chief license inspector executed by the applicant as principal, from a surety company authorized to conduct business under the laws of the state of New Jersey. The bond shall be in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this chapter and for the protection of any person who purchases a used item which is determined to be stolen or sold deceptively or fraudulently by a court of law of the state of New Jersey. 
D.  Expiration Date. Each license shall expire on December 31st of the year in which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 4194, § 1, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 22, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 108-2) 
5.88.030 - Application process-Approval or denial-Return of application fee-Appeals process. 
A.  Application Process. Upon demand, a member of- the central license bureau shall make available to a merchant an application for the purposes of maintaining, keeping and operating such business within the city. No permit shall be issued unless such application is completed, executed and all requirements contained therein are fully met and delivered to the chief license inspector. Upon receipt of an application, fee and bond surety, the chief license inspector shall refer such application to the chief of the police department, who shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. Upon the completion of the investigation and within a reasonable amount of time, the chief of police shall return the application, or a copy thereof with any recommendations, to the chief license inspector. 
B.  Approval or Denial. The police chief, after engaging in the necessary investigation, shall make a recommendation to the chief license inspector as to whether the application should be approved or denied. The grounds for denial of an application shall be clearly stated and may include, but not be limited to, with respect to the owner or owners of the premises: (1) if a natural person or persons, including partners of a partnership, that he, she or they are twenty-one (21) years of age or older, citizens of the United States and residents of the state of New Jersey, and never convicted, in this state or elsewhere, of a crime involving moral turpitude involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation; and (2) if a corporation, that all officers and members of the board of directors, and every stockholder holding ten (10) percent or more of the stock of the corporation, directly or indirectly having a beneficial interest therein, have the same qualifications as set forth in this subsection for an applicant who is a natural person. The chief license inspector, upon the recommendation of the police chief, shall approve or deny the license accordingly. If such application is denied, the chief license inspector shall set down in writing his or her findings and conclusions and deliver a copy of same to applicant upon demand. 
C.  Return of Application Fee. If the application for license is denied, seventy-five (75) percent of the fees shall be returned to the applicant. The balance of the application fee will be kept by the city to offset the costs of the investigation. 
D.  Appeals Process. Any person aggrieved by such denial may appeal to the city council of the city within thirty (30) days of the date of denial of the application. The city council may, at its own discretion, affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the chief license inspector. 
(Prior code § 108-3) 
5.88.040 - Accurate accounts and records required-Inspections authorized. 
A.  Submission to the Police Department of Transaction Forms-Time Limit Prescribed. Each licensed dealer operating in the city shall deliver to the chief of police and the chief license inspector a description of all items purchased, received or sold, as well as the identities of those who sold or bought the items from him or her. The dealer shall file this description on consecutively numbered transaction forms prescribed and provided by the chief of police. The prescribed transaction form must be filed within seventy-two (72) hours after the purchase, sale or receipt of any item. A copy of the transaction form is to be kept on the subject premises at all times during operating hours and available for review and inspection by any city official. 
B.  Records Book. All licensees shall keep an accurate log of accounts of all sales made. The logs shall be open to inspection by any city official. This log shall be kept on the subject premises at all times during operating hours. This log shall also include sales tax collected for each transaction. 
(Prior code § 108-4) 
5.88.050 - Restrictions. 
A.  No dealer shall melt, change the form of or dispose of any used items purchased or received within five days from the date the notification is made to the chief of police and the chief license inspector, and all such items shall remain on the premises where the purchase was made for at least five days from the date of notification of the chief of police and the chief license inspector. 
B.  Each dealer must require two forms of identification from the person with whom he or she is transacting business. The type of identification must be noted on the transaction form presented to the chief of police and chief license inspector. 
C.  Each dealer shall photograph each seller of merchandise and shall identify the photograph by name, date of sale, item purchased, amount paid. The photograph shall be retained for a period of two years and shall be subject to inspection by any city official. 
(Prior code § 108-5) 
5.88.060 - Sale or purchase by minors. 
    No merchant or dealer shall sell, purchase or receive any used item, goods, article or thing from any minor unless the minor has expressed written parental consent to make such transaction. In the event that written consent be provided, the merchant or dealer must keep written consent on file for potential inspection by the proper city official. 
(Prior code § 108-6) 
5.88.070 - Exemptions. 
    Used car lots, properly licensed by the state of New Jersey, shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 108-7) 
5.88.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by the city for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 108-8) 
Chapter 5.92 - SIDEWALK SALES 
Sections: 

5.92.010 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall govern and control sidewalk sales and flower and plant sales in the city. 
(Prior code § 123-61(A)) 
5.92.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Flower and plant sale" means a sale of flowers and plants by business establishments within the city where flowers and plants are displayed and/or sold upon the open or sidewalk area immediately in front of or adjacent to the business establishment. 
    "Sidewalk sales" means those sales by business establishments within the city where the goods or services of the particular establishment are displayed and/or sold upon the open or sidewalk area immediately in front of or adjacent to the business establishment. 
(Prior code § 123-61(B)) 
5.92.030 - Permit required-Application-Regulations. 
A.  Sidewalk sales and flower plant sales shall be conducted by permit only upon the filing of the necessary application and payment of the fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) to the supervisor of licenses, bureau of central licensing, department of health, welfare and housing, and upon approval of the city council. The application and fee may be made by an individual business establishment or by an organized group whose members consist of the business establishments of a certain area within the city. 
B.  Each applicant for a sidewalk sale permit or a flower and plant sale permit shall agree with and abide by the following rules and regulations: 
1.  No display racks or tables shall be placed closer than three feet to the curb, thereby permitting safe entry and exit to motor vehicles. 
2.  There shall be but one aisle in the middle of the sidewalk, sufficient in width to permit the passage of pedestrians. 
3.  The business establishment agrees to abide by and consent to all directives of the police and fire departments relative to safe and proper conduct of the sale. 
4.  Each applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the city, its employees and departments harmless from any and all legal liability including, but not limited to, lawsuits, claims, injuries and other causes of action arising from the sales and further agrees to provide with its application the appropriate certificate of insurance evidencing the existence of an insurance policy with limits in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for general liability for personal injury and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage, and naming as a coinsured, along with the applicant, the city with a provision of thirty (30) days' notice for cancellation thereof. Such certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the law department of the city prior to the issuance of any permit. 
C.  A business establishment, whether applying individually or as a member of a group, shall be allowed to have only four sidewalk sales per year. 
D.  Each sidewalk sale permit shall be issued for a maximum period of three consecutive days. 
E.  Flower and plant sales shall be conducted only upon authorization of the city council by resolution and in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth therein and consistent with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Nothing in this chapter shall in any way abrogate or restrict the right and obligation of any city department or agency from conducting its duties necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 23, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 123-61(C)-(H)) 
Chapter 5.96 - SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS FROM MOTORISTS IN ROADWAYS 
Sections: 

5.96.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Applicant" means any person or charitable organization who seeks a permit to solicit in city roadways from the city chief license inspector. 
    "Charitable organization" means: 
1.  Any person determined by the Federal Internal Revenue Service to be a tax exempt organization pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3); or 
2.  Any person who is, or holds himself or herself out to be, established for any benevolent, philanthropic, humane, social welfare, public health, or other eleemosynary purpose, or for the benefit of law enforcement personnel, firefighters or other persons who protect the public safety, or any person who in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation, or in an appeal which has a tendency to suggest there is a charitable purpose to any such solicitation. 
    "Charitable purpose" means any purpose described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. Section 501 (c)(3); or any benevolent, philanthropic, humane, social welfare, public health, or other eleemosynary objective, or an objective that benefits law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public safety. 
    "Roadway" means any city of right-of-way, street or intersection located within the boundaries of the city and maintained by the city. 
    "Solicit" means to seek, request, petition, influence or incite another party to purchase goods, merchandise or tickets, or to ask for a monetary contribution. 
(Ord. 3302 § 1, 2001) 
5.96.020 - Roadways where solicitation is allowed. 
    Charitable organizations shall be permitted to solicit contributions in the right-of-way of a highway, other than interstate highways, freeways, toll roads maintained by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority, or the New Jersey Highway Authority, and other than traffic circles or highway segments determined to be inappropriate by the police chief in the interest of public safety. Solicitation shall be permitted only at signaled intersections or when the signalized intersections or when the traffic control device causes temporary interruption in the flow of normal traffic, such as at the opening of a movable bridge. 
(Ord. 3302 § 2, 2001) 
5.96.030 - Application procedure. 
A.  No person or member of a charitable organization shall solicit for any cause without first obtaining the proper permit from the chief license inspector of the city. 
B.  An applicant shall make application for a permit by written request to the chief license inspector no later than thirty (30) days prior to the intended date(s) of solicitation. 
C.  The applicant shall enclose an application fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) with the application. 
D.  The application shall contain a listing of the streets/intersections proposed for the solicitation. 
E.  The chief license inspector shall submit the application for review to the police department traffic division. Upon completion of the application and approval by the police department, the chief license inspector shall not unreasonably withhold approval of a permit. 
F.  The chief license inspector may refuse to grant a permit, or revoke the privileges of such permit, at any time, for failure of the applicant to adhere to the guidelines provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 24, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3302 § 3, 2001) 
5.96.040 - County and state roadways. 
    The city shall not authorize solicitation in county or state roadways without the charitable organization first obtaining the approval of the board of chosen freeholders or Director of the State Department of Transportation. No charitable organization shall solicit contributions in state roadways without obtaining a state-issued charitable solicitation permit from the Director of the Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. 3302 § 4, 2001) 
5.96.050 - General provisions and restrictions. 
A.  The permit shall be in the possession of the solicitor during all times of solicitation and be available for inspection by local, county and State Police enforcement personnel and any appropriate city official. 
B.  Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of the charitable organization shall be at least eighteen (18) years old. 
C.  Solicitation shall be subject to the specific terms of each permit as determined by the police department. 
D.  Solicitation shall not stop or impede the flow of traffic. Traffic shall already be stopped before solicitation may occur and shall cease while traffic is moving. Use of flag men shall be prohibited. 
E.  The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any debris from the right-of-way. 
F.  Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours. 
G.  State, county, local police, the Department of Transportation or the appropriate city official may suspend solicitation operations at any time if any condition of the permit is violated, or, if in the police officer's sole discretion, traffic is being impeded or delayed or the public safety is at risk. 
H.  Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use drugs or be under the influence of drugs or alcohol when soliciting. Solicitors shall not harass the public. 
(Ord. 3302 § 5, 2001) 
5.96.060 - Safety criteria. 
A.  All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with NJDOT standards. 
B.  The solicitor shall not install any traffic control devices. 
(Ord. 3302 § 6, 2001) 
5.96.070 - Denial of permit-Appeal. 
A.  The city may deny a permit based on the following reasons: 
1.  To ensure that traffic flow is not unreasonably impeded, interrupted or delayed; 
2.  The design of the particular highway and/or intersection, turning movements, traffic densities, and/or speeds do not permit the safe interaction between the solicitor and vehicular traffic; 
3.  The solicitation would interfere with construction activity; or 
4.  To protect public safety. 
B.  An applicant who has been denied a permit may appeal such a denial to the chief license inspector. The applicant shall submit a written request for reconsideration, within thirty (30) days of denial of a permit. The chief license inspector may provide the opportunity to meet with the applicant. The director shall issue an opinion, in writing, to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of such meeting or within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written request, if there is no meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. 3302 § 7, 2001) 
5.96.080 - Governmental immunity. 
    As provided for in N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, the city is granted immunity from civil liability for personal injury or property damage resulting from motor vehicle accidents occurring in the course of or during such sales and/or solicitations described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 3302 § 8, 2001) 
Chapter 5.97 - DONATION CLOTHING BINS 
Sections: 

5.97.010 - Incorporation by reference. 
    The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60, et seq. shall hereby be incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 4029, § 2, 3-10-2009) 
5.97.020 - Initial application and permit; fee; expiration. 
    The initial application fee for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be $25.00 and shall be valid from the date of issuance until December 31st of the same year the initial permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 4029, § 3, 3-10-2009) 
5.97.030 - Renewal application and permit; fee; expiration. 
    The permit for a clothing donation bin shall be renewed on the first of January and shall be valid for a period of one year. The application fee for a renewal permit shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 4029, § 4, 3-10-2009) 
Chapter 5.100 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 

5.100.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Airport Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. An "airport certificate of public convenience and necessity" issued by the central licensing bureau authorizes the holder thereof to pick up passengers at Terminal A of Newark International Airport. 
    "Airport permit" means a license issued by the license inspector for each vehicle operated under an airport certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
    "Call box" means a place alongside a street or elsewhere where the central license bureau has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity to install a telephone or "call box" for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs. 
    City Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. A "city certificate of public convenience and necessity" issued by the central licensing bureau authorizes the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    "City permit" means a license issued by the license inspector for each vehicle operated under a city certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
    "Cruising" means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    "Designated taxi stands" means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city, which has been designated by the central license bureau as reserved exclusively for the use of certain taxicabs. 
    "Driver's license" means the permission granted by the license inspector to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city. 
    "Holder" means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
    "License inspector" means the supervisor of licenses. 
    "Luggage" means suitcases, trunks and baggage. Shopping bags are considered to be a non-rigid container of paper or plastic. 
    "Manifest" means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by such driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    "Packages" means containers under twenty-four (24) inches. 
    "Permit" means a license issued by the license inspector for each volume operated under a certificate. 
    "Persons" means and includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity, a partnership and any unincorporated association. 
    "Rate card" means a card issued by the license inspector for display in each taxicab which contains the rate of fare then in force. 
    "Taxicab" means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of four persons and not operated on a fixed route. 
    "Taxicab dispatcher license" means a license issued to one who is engaged in the dispatching of taxicabs at various times to various destinations upon the request of the public. 
    "Temporary license" means a license issued to a driver of a taxicab pending final approval of his or her driver's license application, which temporary license shall be good for thirty (30) days from the date of its issuance. 
    "Waiting time" means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers. 
    "Zone map" means a map showing the city by streets and the fare zones, with the amount of the fare for each zone shown thereon, which map shall be in each cab and must be produced upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 4658 , § 1, 1-12-2016; Ord. 3188 § 1, 1999; prior code § 133-1) 
5.100.020 - Certification of public convenience and necessity and permit required-Classification by permit and certificate-Exception. 
A.  No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by an individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city or at Terminal A of Newark International Airport without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity and an appropriate taxicab permit from the central licensing bureau as provided for in this chapter. 
B.  There shall be two classifications of taxicab permits and certificates of public convenience and necessity in the city. 
1.  A city taxicab permit and city certificate of public convenience and necessity shall permit the holder thereof to provide taxicab service within the city, with the exception that the holders of city taxicab permits and city certificates of public convenience and necessity shall not be permitted to pick up passengers at Terminal A of Newark International Airport. The holder of a city certificate of public convenience and necessity for city taxicabs may operate more than one vehicle under each city certificate of public convenience and necessity provided that the holder has a city taxicab permit for each vehicle operated under the city certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
2.  An airport taxicab permit and airport certificate of public convenience and necessity shall permit the holder thereof to pick up passengers only at Terminal A of Newark International Airport. The holder of an airport certificate of public convenience and necessity for airport taxicabs shall operate one vehicle under each airport certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
C.  Exception. The holder of a city taxicab permit and city certificate of public convenience and necessity may only pick up passengers at Terminal A of Newark International Airport when the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey or its designee at Terminal A of Newark International Airport determines that there are insufficient city airport taxicabs to accommodate passenger needs at Terminal A. In such an event, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey or its designee may call the holders of city taxicab permits and city certificates of public convenience and necessity, on a rotating basis, for the purpose of picking up passengers at Terminal A as it may deem necessary. 
D.  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of Section 5.100.020 shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. 
(Ord. No. 4780 , § 1, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 4658 , § 2, 1-12-2016; Ord. 3188 § 2, 1999: prior code § 133-2) 
5.100.030 - Application for certificate-Procedure-Information required. 
    An application for a certificate shall be filed with the central license bureau upon forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. 
B.  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments. 
C.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
D.  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate. 
E.  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant, and the location of proposed designated taxi stands. 
F.  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant. 
(Prior code § 133-3) 
5.100.040 - Public hearing-Publication of notice-Confirmation by mayor. 
A.  Upon the filing of an application, the license inspector shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofor issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by posting a notice of such hearing in the Daily Journal at least seven days prior to such hearing, which notice shall be at the expense of the applicant. Any interested person may file with the license inspector a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a certificate. The procedure set forth in this section and Section 5.100.050 shall not apply to any license in existence as of the date of the final adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  In no event, however, shall the approval or denial of an application be considered final until the mayor has confirmed the decision of the license inspector as to approval or disapproval, and the mayor may, after considering the report of the license inspector, act upon his or her recommendation without a public hearing, or he or she may order another public hearing to be held thereon. Notice shall be given in the Daily Journal as set forth in this section in the event that the mayor orders a public hearing. 
(Prior code § 133-4) 
5.100.050 - Issuance of certificate-Procedure-Criteria-Permitted ratio. 
A.  If the license inspector finds that further taxicab service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the license inspector, then the license inspector shall recommend approval, and after confirmation of same by the mayor as hereinafter set forth, he or she shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under such certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise the application shall be denied. 
B.  In making the above findings, the license inspector and the mayor shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the location of the designated taxi stand, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the good character, satisfactory experience and responsibility of the applicant. In no event, however, shall the ratio of taxicabs in the city exceed a ratio of one cab to one thousand five hundred (1,500) population in the city, as determined by the last United States Census. 
C.  Anything contained in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the license inspector is authorized to recommend, and the mayor is authorized to confirm, the issuance of not more than fifty (50) additional certificates of necessity and permits thereunder for the sole purpose of accommodating the increased taxicab traffic from that portion of Newark Airport, which was recently opened and which is located within the city. No person, firm or corporation may be issued more than one certificate of necessity and/or permit under this chapter at the present time. Any permit issued under this section shall contain a provision that the taxicab which the permit authorizes shall be used only for airport traffic and the following legend, in addition to the name of the taxicab owner, shall be inscribed on both sides of the taxicab: "Airport Taxicab - Elizabeth, N.J." 
D.  In addition to the fifty (50) permits previously authorized and issued pursuant to subsection C of this section, there is authorized to be issued an additional fifty (50) certificates of public convenience and necessity and permits thereunder for the sole purpose of providing additional taxicab service at Terminal A of Newark International Airport in the city. The distribution of the aforementioned fifty (50) additional certificates of public convenience and necessity and permits thereunder shall be by three separate lotteries in accordance with the categories hereinafter set forth. 
1.  Twenty (20) permits to current airport taxi owners who have a minimum of ten (10) consecutive years of service since 1973. If the successful participant in this lottery is also a driver or the spouse of a driver, the driver will not be eligible to participate in the lottery for drivers. 
2.  Twenty (20) permits to current airport taxi drivers having a minimum of ten (10) years of experience and continuous service at Terminal A of Newark International Airport, as well as complying with other applicable provisions of this chapter and state law. The applicant driver shall be required to supply proof that he or she meets the requirements set forth herein satisfactory to the chief license inspector. 
3.  Ten (10) permits to city taxi owners and city taxi drivers. The city taxicab owners and city taxicab drivers must have a minimum of ten (10) consecutive years of service since 1973. 
E.  In addition to the airport certificates of public convenience and necessity and airport permits previously authorized and issued pursuant to subsections C and D of this section, there are authorized to be issued an additional one hundred thirty-six (136) airport certificates of public convenience and necessity (hereinafter referred to as "CPCN") and airport permits for the sole purpose of providing additional taxicab service at Terminal A of Newark Liberty International Airport in the city. 
    The distribution of these one hundred thirty-six (136) additional airport certificates of public convenience and necessity and airport permits shall be as follows: 
1.  Airport and City Owner. Sixty-eight (68) airport certificates of public convenience and necessity and airport permits are to be allocated to airport owners and city owners. Each current airport owner and each current city owner shall receive one airport CPCN and airport permit. In the event that there is a surplus number of CPCN's and airport permits after distribution in this category, those remaining CPCN's and airport permits shall be distributed to airport drivers and city drivers in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Airport and City Drivers. Sixty-eight (68) airport CPCN's and airport permits shall be allocated to current airport and current city drivers. 
3.  Seniority. Eligibility to receive a CPCN and airport permit distributed in the above two categories shall be on the basis of seniority. 
4.  Review of Application-Administrative Process. All candidates seeking to obtain a CPCN and airport permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter must complete the application required by the city. After review of the application, notice of eligibility or ineligibility will be sent to the applicant by the city. Notices of eligibility will also be published in a newspaper circulated in the city. Any applicant found to be ineligible, or any applicant found to be eligible and whose eligibility is challenged by a third party, will have a right to an administrative hearing before an administrative hearing officer to be appointed by the city. Any applicant may appeal the determination of the administrative hearing officer to the New Jersey Superior Court, Law Division, Union County. 
5.  Application. The time to submit an application for obtaining a CPCN and airport permit shall be reopened for a period of twenty (20) days commencing on a date to be decided by the city division of central license. Any applicant who submitted an application for a CPCN and airport permit prior to November 15, 2001, does not need to apply again under this chapter. 
F.  No individual, corporation, partnership or entity selected to receive an airport CPCN and airport permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter may receive more than one airport CPCN and airport permit. 
G.  No individual, corporation, partnership or entity shall apply for or be eligible to receive an airport CPCN and airport permit in more than one of the above categories. 
H.  In no event shall any individual, or his or her spouse or child, with an interest in a corporation, partnership or entity receive an airport CPCN and airport permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter if the individual, corporation, partnership or entity is due to receive an airport CPCN and airport permit from the above allocation. In no event shall a corporation and/or partnership receive an airport CPCN and airport permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter if any individual, or his or her spouse or child, with an interest in that corporation and/or partnership is due to receive an airport CPCN and airport permit from the above allocation. 
I.  All airport CPCN's and airport permits issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be nontransferable, with the exception of the following: 
a.  An airport CPCN and airport permit may be transferred to a spouse or child of a deceased holder of an airport CPCN and airport permit; 
b.  An airport CPCN and airport permit may be transferred back to the city; and/or 
c.  An airport CPCN and airport permit may be transferred, one time only, from the individual recipient of the airport CPCN and permit, obtained under the terms of this chapter, to a corporation in which the individual recipient of the airport CPCN and airport permit has one hundred (100) percent interest. Proof, satisfactory to the chief license inspector of the city, of a transfer referred to herein above will be required prior to the transfer. 
J.  To be eligible to receive an airport CPCN and airport permit pursuant to this chapter, an applicant must be a citizen and/or have proper legal status to own a business and/or to work in the United States of America. 
K.  The initial administrative processing fee for the additional one hundred thirty-six (136) airport CPCN and airport permits allotted under the terms of this chapter is one thousand dollars ($1000.00) per certificate and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per permit, which fees shall be payable upon issuance. 
(Ord. 3490 § 1, 2003; prior code § 133-5) 
5.100.060 - Insurance required. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof shall comply with all of the provisions of N.J.R.S. 48:16-1 et seq., and N.J.R.S. 39:1-1 et seq., and all other statutes applicable to the operation of taxicabs in the state of New Jersey, including but not limited to all insurance requirements as provided by state law. 
(Prior code § 133-6) 
5.100.070 - License fees-Licensing year established-License transfer fee. 
A.  No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid a yearly license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the right to engage in the taxicab business and one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) each year for each permit issued for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience and necessity. The license fee shall be for the licensing year and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to the holder or the vehicle or vehicles under his or her operation and control. For purposes of this chapter, the licensing year shall be for a period of one year from April 1st to March 31st of the next ensuing year. The fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
B.  Whenever any license issued under the authority of this chapter is legally transferred person to person, a transfer fee is established, made payable to the city, in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), to be paid by the transferor. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 25, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 133-7) 
5.100.080 - Transfer of certificates or permits-Consent required. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity or permit for a city taxicab or an airport taxicab may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the supervisor of licenses. 
(Prior code § 133-8) 
5.100.090 - Suspension or revocation of certificates or permits-Causes-Procedure-Hearing. 
A.  A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the license inspector subject to the approval of the mayor, if the holder thereof has: 
1.  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Discontinued operations for more than thirty (30) days, unless for good cause shown. 
3.  Violated any ordinances of the city or the laws of the United States or the state of New Jersey, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
B.  Prior to the license inspector recommending to the mayor that the certificate be suspended or revoked, the holder shall be given at least five days' notice of the proposed recommendation and shall have an opportunity to be heard by the license inspector. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the license inspector to suspend or revoke the certificate of the holder, the mayor shall, within thirty (30) days, approve or disapprove the recommendation of the license inspector. Upon written request by the holder, the mayor shall give the holder an opportunity to be heard prior to his or her decision. 
(Ord. 3343 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 133-9) 
5.100.100 - Taxicab driver's license required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be driven, and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 133-10) 
5.100.110 - Application procedure-Information and credentials required-Filing fee. 
A.  An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the central license bureau on forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the applicant's name and address and the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of three residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of one year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
2.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers and that he or she has driven a motor vehicle for at least one year. 
3.  The educational background of the applicant. 
4.  A concise history of his or her employment. 
5.  The age of the applicant, which must be at least eighteen (18) years, and a representation that the applicant is able to read and write the English language, a representation that he or she is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs and an agreement that he or she shall not partake of intoxicating liquors during his or her regular tour of duty. 
6.  Length of time he or she has resided in the city; marital status; and prior criminal record, if any. 
7.  Information as to whether his or her New Jersey state driver's license has ever been revoked or suspended and for what reason. 
8.  Four recent photographs of himself or herself not less than one and one-half inches in diameter. 
9.  Fingerprints. 
B.  Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the licensing year. A license for every licensing year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of ninety dollars ($90.00) unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. The fee of ninety dollars ($90.00) shall not apply to owner-operators. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 26, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 133-11) 
5.100.120 - State motor vehicle operator's license required. 
    Before any application is finally passed upon by the central license bureau, the applicant shall be required to show that he or she has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued by the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 133-12) 
5.100.130 - Police investigation of applicant required. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the central license bureau. 
(Prior code § 133-13) 
5.100.140 - Consideration of application-Hearing for reconsideration. 
    The license inspector shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the mayor to offer evidence why his or her application should be reconsidered. 
(Ord. 3343 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 133-14) 
5.100.150 - Issuance of license-Duration-Annual fee. 
A.  Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the central license bureau shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
B.  Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the licensing year. A license for every licensing year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of ninety dollars ($90.00), unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. The fee of ninety dollars ($90.00) shall not apply to owner-operators. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 27, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3355 § 1, 2001; prior code § 133-15) 
5.100.160 - Display of license, permit and permit number required. 
    Every driver licensed under this chapter shall have prominently displayed in full view of all passengers: 
A.  The taxicab operator's license. 
B.  The taxicab owner's permit. 
C.  The assigned permit number of each taxicab shall be painted or affixed on the outside of each front door under the word "taxi" and on the rear door, not less than six inches nor more than six inches in height. 
(Prior code § 133-16) 
5.100.170 - License suspension or revocation-Procedure-Notice and hearing. 
A.  The license inspector is given the authority to suspend any driver's license to operate a cab, issued under this chapter, for a driver failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, such suspension to last for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. The license inspector is also given authority to recommend the revocation of the driver's license to operate a cab for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. However, a license to operate a cab may not be recommended for revocation unless the driver has received a five-day notice by certified or registered mail and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his or her behalf. 
B.  The decision of the license inspector to revoke shall be considered a recommendation to the mayor, who shall, within thirty (30) days, approve or disapprove the recommendation of the license inspector. A copy of such recommendation shall be forwarded to the licensee, with the reasons for same included therein. The mayor shall give the licensee an opportunity to be heard prior to reaching his or her decision, provided that the mayor receives a written request for a hearing by the holder. 
(Ord. 3343 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 133-17) 
5.100.180 - Compliance with laws required. 
    Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the license inspector to recommend the suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Prior code § 133-18) 
5.100.190 - Regulations governing inspections, capacity, equipment and maintenance of vehicles. 
A.  Initial Inspection. Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the transportation inspector and found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the central license bureau. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the transportation inspector shall deem necessary therefor. No vehicle shall be presented to the bureau of central license for inspection without first having passed inspection by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, proof of which is required to be submitted to the bureau of central license at the time of inspection. No vehicle covered under this chapter shall be allowed to service passengers in the city without first having passed inspection by both the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and the city bureau of central license. 
B.  Capacity. No taxicab for hire operating on the streets of the city shall carry more passengers than the seating capacity as established by the manufacturer for the vehicle, but in no case shall the seating capacity be greater than the number of manufacturer installed seat belts. 
C.  Periodic Inspections Required. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the transportation inspector at such intervals as shall be established by the central license bureau to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. 
D.  Maintenance in clean and sanitary condition required. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the central license bureau. 
E.  In the event a vehicle governed by the provisions of this chapter fails to pass an inspection for reasons other than mechanical, then, in that event, the use and operation of the vehicle may continue for a period of fourteen (14) days thereafter, at the conclusion of which time the necessary corrections of the noted violations shall be corrected. In the event the violation corrections are not made within the period of fourteen (14) days, then the use and operation of the vehicle shall thereafter be prohibited until such time as corrective action has been taken to the satisfaction of the central license bureau. 
F.  In the event that an existing taxicab is permanently removed from service for any reason, it must be replaced with a taxicab that is no older than sixty (60) months old. 
(Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 10-12-2010; Ord. 3502 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3355 § 2, 2001; prior code § 133-19) 
5.100.200 - Regulations governing designation of taxicab. 
A.  Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters not less than two inches nor more than four inches in height, the name of the owner and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the central license bureau. No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the central license bureau or the transportation inspector, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this chapter in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; and provided further, that if, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the central license bureau or the transportation inspector, in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other person, owner or operator in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicab or taxicabs shall be recommended for suspension or revocation. 
B.  The assigned permit number of each taxicab shall be caused to be painted or affixed above the rear window of the taxicab in numerals not less than two inches in height, clearly visible and so maintained. 
C.  Each taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be equipped with a dome of glass or like material with the word "taxi" painted thereon. The dome shall be illuminated after dark when available for service. 
D.  Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each front door the word "taxi" in painted letters not less than two inches nor more than four inches in height. 
E.  Any taxicab utilizing mobile radio communications equipment to which there is an assigned reference number shall do so in a manner prescribed by the bureau of central licensing. Under all circumstances, this number shall be synchronized with and not different from any other number appearing on or used to identify the taxicab for reference by riders of and inspectors of taxicabs. Numerals so used shall be of a contrasting color to the surface on which they are painted. Use of such radio communication numerals shall be optional but, when used, shall be as above provided for and as provided for assigned permit numbers in Section 5.100.160(C). 
(Prior code § 133-20) 
5.100.210 - Zone map-Possession and display required. 
    A zone map shall be prepared and furnished for each taxicab, illustrating the taxicab fare zones in the city. Each taxicab shall have a zone map at all times, which map shall be produced upon the demand of any passenger or authorized representative of the city. 
(Prior code § 133-21) 
5.100.220 - Regulations governing rates of fare. 
    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with the following rates: 
A.  Additional Destination. Full fare for each destination. 
B.  Schedule of Zones. 
1.  Central Zone No. 1. 
a.  Rate: Seven dollars ($7.00). 
2.  Zone No. 2. 
a.  Rate: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
3.  Zone No. 3. 
a.  Rate: Nine dollars ($9.00). 
4.  Fares that originate within the boundaries of the city shall be governed by the same schedule of rates in effect for fares originating from Terminal A of Newark Liberty International Airport, as set forth in subsection C.11. of this section. This schedule of rates is on file and available in office of the city clerk. 
C.  Schedule Special Areas. 
1.  Bayway area beyond relocated Bayway to South Front Street to Elizabeth River: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
2.  Inside Elizabeth Industrial Park Gate: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
3.  Inside Central Railroad Yards: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
4.  East North Avenue - Jersey Gardens Mall: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
5.  Allied Chemical Dye Corporation: Eleven dollars ($11.00). 
6.  Bay Avenue and McLester Street: Eleven dollars ($11.00). 
7.  Bay Avenue and Terminal Street: Twelve dollars ($12.00). 
8.  End of Terminal Street: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
9.  Elizabeth - Port Authority Piers: Fourteen dollars ($14.00). 
10.  Schedule of fares for service from Newark Liberty International Airport, Terminal A is on file an available in the office of the city clerk. 
D.  Luggage. 
1.  There shall be no charge for the first piece of luggage under twenty-four (24) inches. There shall be a one dollar ($1.00) charge for each additional piece of luggage regardless of size. 
2.  There shall be no charge for shopping bags or packages. 
E.  No extra charge will be allowed for inclement weather. 
F.  No extra charge will be allowed for night rates. 
G.  No extra charge will be allowed for rush hour except when designated per city ordinance. 
H.  Senior Citizens Discount. All senior citizens who have been issued and in possession of a valid senior citizens reduced-fare identification card issued by the State of New Jersey, Department of Transportation, shall be entitled to ride at a two dollar ($2.00) discount. If one or more persons not entitled to the reduced-fare rate accompanies a senior citizens reduced-fare identification card issued by the State of New Jersey, Department of Transportation, shall be entitled to ride at a two dollar ($2.00) discount. If one or more persons not entitled to the reduced-fare rte accompanies a senior citizens reduced-fare identification card, the reduced-fare rate shall not apply. It is unlawful for an owner or a drier of a taxicab to refuse to provide service to senior citizens who are entitled to receive the reduced-fare rate. 
(Ord. No. 4658 , § 3, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 4374, § 1, 5-28-2013; Ord. 3960 §§ 1, 2, 2008; Ord. 3935 § 1, 2007; prior code § 133-22) 
5.100.230 - Receipts-Information-When required. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, license number or motor number, amount of charges, date of transaction and points of pickup and discharge of passengers. 
(Prior code § 133-23) 
5.100.240 - Refusal by passenger to pay legal fare unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and it is unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Prior code § 133-24) 
5.100.250 - Regulations governing solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. 
A.  Solicitation of Passengers by Driver. No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab, except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof at the proper designated stand. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his or her vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that when necessary a driver may be absent from his or her taxicab for not more than ten (10) consecutive minutes, and provided further that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
B.  Prohibited Solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any persons or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
C.  Receipt and Discharge of Passengers on Sidewalk only. Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
D.  Cruising Prohibited. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers. 
E.  Solicitation of other Common-Carrier Passengers Prohibited. No driver, owner or operator shall solicit passengers in the terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established route of any other common carrier. 
F.  Additional Passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in his or her taxicab, unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger, unless more than two, except when the second passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination and then only for the additional distance so traveled as per zone map and rate schedule as herein set forth. 
G.  Number of Passengers Restricted. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his or her taxicab as stated in the license for the vehicle issued by the license inspector. A child seven years of age or less shall not be counted as a passenger. 
H.  Refusal to Carry Orderly Passengers Prohibited. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. 
I.  Prohibitions to Drivers. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, motel, rooming house or place of lodging, or to attempt to divert patronage from one to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his or her vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers. 
J.  Prohibitions to Passengers. It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to permit any person or persons to stand on the running board of such vehicle while the same is in motion, and it is unlawful for any person to ride on the running board of such vehicle when the same is in motion. 
(Prior code § 133-25) 
5.100.260 - Taxicab stands-Designation, establishment and use. 
A.  The license inspector of the city is authorized and empowered to establish stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as he or she deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. The license inspector shall not create a stand without taking into consideration the need for such stand by the operator and the convenience to the general public. The license inspector shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such stands. The license inspector shall not create a stand in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners object to the same or where such stand would tend to create a traffic hazard. 
B.  The driver shall pull up to any taxi stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull away. So as to ensure continuous flow of taxicab service at the airport, the driver must leave the stack area immediately when dispatched for advancement to the airport taxicab stand. In the airport stack area and while a taxicab is queued at any taxi stand, drivers should remain no further than five feet from their taxicabs. At no time, should a driver solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at the stack or queued at a stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the taxicab of his or her choice that is parked at stands. 
(Ord. 3862 § 1, 2006; prior code § 133-26) 
5.100.270 - Call boxes-Establishment and use. 
A.  The license inspector is authorized and empowered to allow call boxes upon the streets of the city in such places as in his or her discretion he or she deems proper. A holder desiring to establish a call box shall make written application to the license inspector. The initial applicant must attach to the application the written approval of the abutting property owners of the space, consenting to the creation of such call box. Upon filing of the application, the transportation inspector shall make an investigation of the traffic conditions at the place and shall thereafter file his or her written recommendation with the central license bureau. The central license bureau shall then either grant or refuse the application. When a call box has been established as herein provided, it shall be used solely by the holder to whom the same was granted, and his or her agents and servants, and no other holder shall be permitted to use the same. 
B.  A holder operating a call box as provided for in this chapter shall be allowed to have on duty at such stand a dispatcher or other employee for the purpose of assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers from cabs, for receiving calls and dispatching cabs and for soliciting passengers at such stand. The words "at such stand" mean that part of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to, and of equal length with, such call-box stand. It is unlawful for any such dispatcher or other employee to go beyond the area herein designated, for the purpose of soliciting passengers or assisting them in boarding such cabs. 
(Prior code § 133-27) 
5.100.280 - Regulations governing two-way radio communication and taxicab dispatchers. 
    Where two-way radio communication is used, or requests for service are received by telephone and a dispatcher is employed, whether or not on a full- or part-time basis, the dispatcher shall file an application for a dispatcher's license with the central license bureau. The granting of which license shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter where applicable. The amount of the fee for the dispatcher shall be five dollars ($5.00), payable annually as herein set forth. In the event that the dispatcher is also either a holder or a licensed driver of a taxicab operating in the city, then no additional fee for his or her use as a dispatcher shall be charged, but the application to act as dispatcher must nevertheless be made. It shall be considered a violation of this chapter if the dispatcher in the course of his or her employment does not identify himself or herself upon request by giving his or her name to anyone seeking services, whether personally or by telephone. All dispatchers must be courteous in their dealings with the public, and shall not use profane language, whether over the two-way radio in dealing with the cab radio or over the telephone when dealing with the public. It is unlawful for a dispatcher to promise services at a given time and destination when in fact adequate facilities are not available at that time to render such services. All taxicab service shall be reasonably prompt and efficient. 
(Prior code § 133-28) 
5.100.290 - Prohibition to other vehicles. 
    Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as stands. 
(Prior code § 133-29) 
5.100.300 - Taxicab services required. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open twenty-four (24) hours a day, or such hours as approved by the central license bureau, for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of Elizabeth as soon as they can do so, and if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of Elizabeth at any time when such holder has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this chapter, and the certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the license inspector, subject to the approval of the mayor. 
(Prior code § 133-30) 
5.100.310 - Obligations of dispatcher. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business as a dispatcher must, in dealing with the public personally or by telephone or other means of communication, refrain from the use of profane language, and must at all times properly identify themselves by their full name upon request of the public. 
(Prior code § 133-31) 
5.100.320 - Manifests. 
A.  Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be re- turned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his or her tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the central license bureau. 
B.  Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall retain and preserve all drivers manifests in a safe place for at least the licensing year next preceding the current licensing year, and such manifests shall be available to the transportation inspector or the license inspector. 
(Prior code § 133-32) 
5.100.330 - Holder's records and reports. 
A.  Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required by the central license bureau. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the transportation inspector or the license inspector. 
B.  Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of operation to the central license bureau for each licensing year, in accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the central license bureau. The reports shall reach the central license bureau on or before the fifteenth day of September of the year following the licensing year for which such reports are prepared. 
C.  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs shall be reported, by the taxicab owner, within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of occurrence to the police department and the bureau of central license. At such time of notification to the bureau of central license, or as soon thereafter as possible, the taxicab owner must furnish the bureau of central license with a copy of the police accident report of the accident. 
D.  Service Contract Reports. It shall be mandatory for all holders to file with the central license bureau copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda or other writings relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any railway station or other place of public gathering, whether such arrangement is made with the holder or any corporation, firm or association with which the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to file such copies within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of a certificate of any offending holder, or the cancellation of any cabstand privileges. 
(Ord. 3504 § 1, 2003; prior code § 133-33) 
5.100.340 - Advertising authorized. 
    Subject to the rules and regulations of the central license bureau, it is lawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire to permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such taxicabs or motor vehicles for hire. 
(Prior code § 133-34) 
5.100.350 - Inquiry as to destination. 
    No driver shall inquire about the destination of a prospective passenger until the passenger has been seated in the taxicab, and no taxicab driver shall refuse service to a passenger to any destination in the city. 
(Ord. 3355 § 3, 2001: prior code § 133-35) 
5.100.360 - Dress and appearance of taxicab drivers. 
    All taxicab drivers while engaged in their employment shall be neat in dress and appearance, and when wearing headgear it must be a regulation chauffeur's cap. 
(Prior code § 133-36) 
5.100.370 - Badge/identification card requirement for taxicab drivers-Replacement fee-Annual renewal. 
A.  A badge and/or identification card shall be issued each licensing year by the central license division to the holder of a taxicab driver's license, which badge and/or identification card shall contain information, including, but not limited to, the identity of the wearer as a taxicab driver licensed by the city and an indication of the licensing year. This badge and/or identification card shall be worn on the person of the driver while he or she is engaged in his or her employment, and this badge and/or identification card shall at all times be conspicuously exhibited on his or her person. 
B.  No taxicab shall be operated except by a duly licensed person wearing such badge and/or identification card, and the badge and/or identification card and the taxicab driver's license shall be returned to the central license division at the end of the licensing year. 
C.  In the event that any badge and/or identification card and/or taxicab driver's license is lost or destroyed, a new badge and/or identification card and/or taxicab driver's license shall be furnished upon of a fee of ninety dollars ($90.00) being paid to the license division. 
D.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in a suspension of the taxicab driver's license for a period not to exceed five days. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 28, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3355 § 4, 2001: prior code § 133-37) 
5.100.380 - Change of address-Report required. 
    The holders of any or all licenses as set forth in this chapter are required to report any change in their home or business address within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Prior code § 133-38) 
5.100.390 - Misleading information prohibited. 
    No owner or driver of any taxicab shall induce any prospective passenger to employ him or her by knowingly giving misinformation or misleading such prospective passenger by false information, including, but not limited to, the time or place of the arrival or departure of any train or bus, or the location of any hotel, public place or private residence within the city. It is unlawful for an owner or driver of any taxicab to convey a passenger to any other place or over any other route other than that to which such passenger may reasonably instruct the driver to follow. 
(Prior code § 133-40) 
5.100.400 - Use for illegal or immoral purposes prohibited. 
    The use of a taxicab for illegal or immoral purposes is prohibited, and any owner or taxicab driver that knowingly permits or allows the use of a taxicab for such purposes shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 133-41) 
5.100.410 - Examination of taxicab after discharge of passengers. 
    Every taxicab driver, immediately after the termination of any hire or employment, must carefully search and examine such taxicab for any property lost or left behind therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the lawful owner, must be reported to and given to the department of police of the city for disposition according to law. 
(Prior code § 133-42) 
5.100.420 - Dispatcher's logbook-Information and maintenance required. 
    Every holder of a taxicab dispatcher license shall keep a logbook solely for the purpose of recording the time of each request for service and the dispatching of the cab, the destination to which a taxicab is dispatched and the number of taxicabs providing the service, and the name of the taxicab driver operating the vehicle on that tour of duty. This logbook shall be available for inspection at all times at the office of the holder, by the license inspector, the transportation inspector and the department of police of the city. The information in the logbook must be in legible print, ink, and the book must be maintained at the business address of the taxicab owner. No book shall be destroyed for a period of three consecutive licensing years. 
(Prior code § 133-43) 
5.100.430 - Rate schedule book. 
A.  All taxicabs licensed in accordance with this chapter are required to have located therein, at all times, a rate schedule book published and furnished by the city. The operator of any taxicab shall, upon request of any passenger, exhibit the rate schedule book for inspection and verification of the rate to be charged for the particular fare in question. 
B.  The central license bureau is authorized to charge a fee of three dollars ($3.00) per rate schedule book to all owners and operators of taxicabs, as well as to any member of the public who wishes to purchase same. 
(Prior code § 133-45) 
5.100.440 - List of employees required. 
    It shall be a mandatory requirement that all city and airport taxicab owners provide the central license division with a list of all full time and part time employees, including dispatchers and all part time and full time drivers, which shall contain their names, addresses, telephone numbers, driver's license numbers and taxicab driver's license numbers. This list must be provided upon renewal of the owner's taxicab applications in March of every year. The list must be updated within five working days of any employee's or driver's employment or termination at all times necessary throughout the year. 
(Ord. 3355 § 5, 2001: prior code § 133-46) 
5.100.450 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
B.  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection A of this section, the license inspector may recommend the suspension or revocation, and the mayor may suspend or revoke the licenses enumerated in this chapter as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 133-44) 
Chapter 5.104 - TEEN-AGE DANCE HALLS 
Sections: 

5.104.010 - Definitions. 
    When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the masculine gender include the feminine or neuter gender, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Licensed premises" means the teenage dance hall, together with the entire premises on which such hall is located and, except where inconsistent with the context, parking facilities used in connection therewith and the sidewalks abutting any of the foregoing. 
    "Licensee" means the person to whom a license to operate a teenage dance hall is issued, and shall include the manager or agent in charge or control of the licensed premises and, where the context so requires, any agent, servant or employee of the licensee. 
    "Teenage dance hall" means any room, hall, building, place or location of assemblage for persons from thirteen (13) years of age through sixteen (16) years of age or for persons from sixteen (16) years of age through twenty (20) years of age where dancing is carried on and to which an admission charge is made by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or by other device, and which is conducted as a place of business for profit. 
(Prior code § 66-15) 
5.104.020 - License requirements-Fee-Nontransferability. 
    No person shall conduct or engage in the business of operating a teenage dance hall within the city without having first obtained a license to do so pursuant to this chapter and without the license being in force and not suspended or revoked. An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be paid to the city, and such license shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of each year. Not more than four (4) of such licenses shall be issued and outstanding within the city, and no such license shall be transferred by the person to whom it is issued to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 29, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 66-16) 
5.104.030 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct or engage in the business of operating a teenage dance hall shall make application for the same, in triplicate, to the chief license inspector, division of licensing, department of health and human services. The application shall state the following: 
1.  The name, home address and business address, if any, and home and business telephone numbers, of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity the same information shall be supplied for each of the stockholders of the corporation or principals of the entity. 
2.  The name, home address and business address, if any, and home and business telephone numbers, of the owner of the premises, if such owner is a person other than the applicant. 
3.  The name, home address and home telephone number of the manager or other agent of the applicant, if any, who shall be in charge of the licensed premises. 
4.  The capacity, stated in a number of persons, of the teenage dance hall for which the license is sought, and the location and capacity, stated in a number of cars, of the off-street parking facility to serve the teenage dance hall for which the license is sought. 
5.  The hours of operation of such teenage dance hall. 
6.  The minimum number of employees that will be on duty at any time in solely a security or policing capacity. 
7.  The amount charged for admission and the manner in which that charge is to be made, whether by fee, ticket, token or other device. 
8.  The amount, if any, charged for parking, and the rate of such charge. 
9.  Whether any minimum purchase will be required over and above the amount of the admission, and the amount of such minimum purchase. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing of the premises, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing its location and size; the location and size of entrances and exits; the location and size of the hall, building or place where dancing will be conducted, together with the location and size of the dance floor itself, any bandstand or similar area, any service area, the number and location of tables, and the number of chairs provided at tables or elsewhere in the dance hall itself; the location and number of toilet facilities; the number, size and location of off-street parking spaces to serve the teenage dance hall; and such other data or information as may be necessary or helpful to show compliance with all the requirements of this chapter or with other pertinent ordinances, regulations or laws. 
C.  Teenage dance halls not licensed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be restricted to street level. 
D.  In addition to the annual license referenced in Section 5.104.020, a license shall also be required for each teenage dance. A license may be issued under this provisions for teenage dances for individuals between the ages of thirteen (13) through sixteen (16) or for individuals between the ages of sixteen (16) through twenty (20). There shall be no commingling of age groups other than as provided herein at a teenage dance. Only one age group as cited hereinabove shall be granted a license for a teenage dance at any one time or location under this section. 
(Prior code § 66-17) 
5.104.040 - Licenses-Standards for issuance. 
A.  The chief license inspector shall promptly forward the application and accompanying materials to the director of the police department, the director of the fire department, and the director of the department of health and human services, for investigation and report. The application, accompanying materials and investigative reports shall be forwarded to the mayor, who, in accordance with the standards set forth herein, may grant or refuse the license. If the mayor grants the license, the chief license inspector shall forthwith issue the license upon payment of the license fee. The mayor shall satisfy himself or herself that the applicant and the manager or other agent of the applicant, if any, are all persons of good moral character and capable of operating the proposed teenage dance hall in a manner consistent with the public safety, good morals, and the general welfare of the community; that the operation of the proposed teenage dance hall will not present a traffic hazard and will not necessarily expose teenagers coming to the licensed premises on foot to the danger of traffic; that the applicant has sufficient contiguous off-street parking facilities in relation to the capacity of the dance hall, or that sufficient off-street parking facilities are available within a reasonable distance of the licensed premises; that the operation of the teenage dance hall will not unnecessarily interfere with the enjoyment of property in the area by the owner or owners thereof; that the charges made for admission and for items of commerce sold on the premises will not represent an unwarranted financial exploitation of the teenage patrons; and that all requirements of this chapter and the applicable provisions of all other pertinent ordinances, regulations and laws have been fully complied with. 
B.  No license shall be granted or renewed unless the licensee meets the standards set forth in this chapter and complies with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws, and in no event shall the license or any renewal thereof become effective until it has been approved by the mayor and the license fee paid. On any application for renewal, the same investigative reports shall be required as for an original application, and the mayor shall grant the renewal upon satisfying himself or herself that the applicant has complied with the standards set forth herein. 
C.  No license shall be issued until a certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the bureau of construction of the department of planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; prior code § 66-18) 
5.104.050 - Duties of licensee-Conduct and operation. 
A.  Hours of Operation. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow the licensed premises to remain open for business or use by patrons at any time during the school week except the day before a holiday and on Friday nights. The permitted hours of operation on Saturday and Sunday shall be 2:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., and on Friday and Saturday nights and the day before a holiday, 7:00 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
B.  Persons Excluded. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow any person who is less than thirteen (13) years of age or more than nineteen (19) years of age, except employees, or any intoxicated or disorderly person, to be admitted to the licensed premises or to remain therein. 
C.  Readmittance. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow any person who, after paying the admission charge, has been admitted to the licensed premises and has left the premises, to be readmitted at any time prior to the next succeeding period, either daytime or evening, when the licensed premises are open for business. 
D.  Good Order. The licensee shall maintain good order in the teenage dance hall, upon the entire licensed premises, and in any off-street parking facility used in connection therewith, and shall not permit loitering in or about the entrances, exits, sidewalks or other portions of the licensed premises. 
E.  Betting or Gambling Prohibited. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow any person to bet or gamble in any form or manner at or in the licensed premises. 
F.  Habit-Forming Drugs and Intoxicating Liquors. No person in the licensed premises shall have in his or her possession or under his or her control, or offer to another, any habit-forming drug or intoxicating liquor, nor shall the licensee permit, suffer or allow such person to be on the licensed premises. No license hereunder shall be granted covering premises licensed to serve intoxicating liquors. 
G.  Employees and Attendants. At all times during business hours, the licensee shall provide an adequate number of qualified security officers continuously on duty, who shall patrol the licensed premises and its entrances and exits to see that order is maintained, that disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the licensed premises and its entrances and exits are kept free from congestion and loitering, and that the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws are complied with. All such security officers and all other persons employed in any capacity in or at the licensed premises, exclusive of performing musicians and persons actually engaged in the service of nonalcoholic beverages, confections or food, shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
H.  Commercial Activity. No items of commerce shall be sold or offered for sale on the licensed premises except nonalcoholic beverages, confections or food prepared for service upon the premises. 
I.  Type of Music Permitted. Only so-called live music, that music produced by musicians performing at the time, shall be permitted on the licensed premises, except that no more than fifteen (15) minutes of so-called taped or recorded music shall be permitted during any one continuous sixty (60) minute period. 
J.  Noise. No loudspeaker or public-address system nor any other manual, mechanical or electrical means or device for amplifying sound shall at any time be used or permitted to be used upon the licensed premises so as to be heard out of doors. Any loud, unnecessary, annoying, offensive or raucous noise which disturbs the public peace, emitted by or emanating from the licensed premises, is declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the public health and general welfare, and is prohibited. 
K.  Lighting in Off-Street Parking Facility. The off-street parking facility used in connection with the teenage dance hall shall be lighted in conformance with directions of the police department. 
L.  Announcement of Location of Exits. Licensee shall announce to patrons publicly the locations of building exits prior to the start of each music set or after breaks, but no less than three separate times during the hours of operations. 
(Prior code § 66-19) 
5.104.060 - Suspension and revocation. 
    When the operation of any teenage dance hall, or the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee, is so inimical to the public health, morals, safety or general welfare as to give rise to an emergency or to constitute a nuisance, the chief license inspector shall have the authority summarily to order the cessation and the closing of the licensed premises or to suspend the license; or the chief license inspector, after hearing, upon a showing of good cause for so doing, may revoke any license issued hereunder. During such suspension and after any such license shall have been revoked, the license shall be inoperative and of no effect. 
(Prior code § 66-20) 
5.104.070 - Exemption-Nonprofit organizations. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any nonprofit organization. 
(Prior code § 66-21) 
Chapter 5.108 - THEATERS 
Sections: 

5.108.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As used or referred to in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Person" means any person, firm, corporation or association of persons, their agents, servants or employees. 
    "Theater" means any place, whether indoors or outdoors, devoted to public amusement wherein dramatic, operatic, vaudeville, motion picture exhibitions or other like forms of amusement are provided for public entertainment. 
(Prior code § 134-1) 
5.108.020 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct a theater without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Prior code § 134-2) 
5.108.030 - Application for license. 
A.  All applications for licenses shall be in writing and filed in triplicate with the supervisor of licenses to whom shall be paid the required fee. 
B.  Such application shall be signed and sworn to by each individual applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation, by all principal officers, before an officer authorized by the laws of New Jersey to administer an oath. 
(Prior code § 134-3) 
5.108.040 - Investigation of applicant. 
    The supervisor of licenses shall transmit one copy of such application to the chief of police of the city, who shall cause an investigation to be made of applicant and report thereon to the supervisor of licenses. No license shall be issued to any applicant who shall have been convicted of a crime. 
(Prior code § 134-4) 
5.108.050 - Compliance with fire or safety standards. 
    The applicant shall also present with his or her application a certificate of approval of the chief of the fire department of the city showing that the building complies with all laws of the state of New Jersey and all local ordinances pertaining to fire or safety. 
(Prior code § 134-5) 
5.108.060 - Issuance of license. 
    The license required by this chapter shall be issued by the supervisor of licenses. 
(Prior code § 134-6) 
5.108.070 - License fees-Renewal-Transferability. 
A.  The annual license fee for each such license for an indoor theater shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). The annual license fee for an open-air automobile drive-in theater shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each such fee shall be payable on or before January 1st in each year. No license shall be issued until the fee has been paid. In the event that the license shall be revoked, no part of the license fee shall be returned to the licensee. 
B.  Each such license shall expire on December 31st of each year, and the license may be renewed from year to year upon the filing of an application for renewal filed in the same manner as the application for an original license. 
C.  No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred by the holder thereof without the approval of the supervisor of licenses. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 30, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 134-7) 
5.108.080 - Hours of operation. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to permit the operation in or on the licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. or before 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Prior code § 134-8) 
5.108.090 - Exits, aisles and fire escapes. 
    The exits and exit doors of each theater shall open directly from the exhibition hall onto a street, alley or public parking area. All aisles shall lead directly to exits. No aisle or passageway shall be less than three feet in width and all aisles and passageways in such theaters shall be kept free from obstructions. No person other than an employee of the licensed premises, a police officer or firefighter shall stand in or occupy any of such aisles or passageways during any performance, exhibition or any public assemblage. The booth enclosing the projection machine shall rest upon a balcony. The theaters shall be provided with fire escapes placed as and where directed by the building inspector and chief of the fire department; provided, however, that where the entire seating capacity of such theater shall be maintained on the ground floor, no balcony or fire escape shall be required. In an outdoor theater, it shall not be necessary to install fire escapes nor shall a balcony be required for the booth; provided, however, that it is required that the booth of such outdoor theater be enclosed, and no exits, as herein set forth, shall be required. 
(Prior code § 134-9) 
5.108.100 - Operation regulations. 
A.  All licensees shall operate the theater premises according to local and state regulations, which may now or which may hereafter be promulgated, and every such theater shall have sufficient attendants to facilitate entrance and exit of persons and cars, from and to the theater, the parking area and adjoining public roads, and to keep order and prevent panic in case of emergency. 
B.  In the operation of such theater, the owner or operator shall provide and enforce such rules and regulations as are necessary to keep order, ensure against unnecessary noise and all forms of disorderly conduct and shall remove promptly from the premises persons who are disorderly. The blowing of car horns or other noise devices shall be prohibited. 
C.  Sufficient fire prevention equipment, as determined by the chief of the fire department, shall be provided at all times during performances at the theater as is necessary to control and extinguish fires occurring upon the theater premises. 
D.  All driveways and all exterior lights must be approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 134-10) 
5.108.110 - Smoking. 
    No smoking shall be permitted in any enclosed theater during hours in which motion pictures or theatrical productions are being shown or conducted. 
(Prior code § 134-11) 
5.108.120 - Right of entry. 
    Any state or municipal officer, police officer or firefighter may enter any theater at any time for the purpose of inspection to enforce obedience of the laws of the state of New Jersey and the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 134-12) 
5.108.130 - Lighting. 
    Every portion of a theater, including seats and corridors, devoted to the public use or the accommodation of the public shall be adequately lighted. 
(Prior code § 134-13) 
5.108.140 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the municipal magistrate. 
(Prior code § 134-15) 
Chapter 5.112 - TRAVELING SHOWS AND KIDDY RIDES 
Sections: 

5.112.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Kiddy ride" means any single ride or collection of rides for the amusement of children which requires an individual to operate and manage same, which is established on a permanent basis at a given location, or mounted or operated on a vehicle or movable trailer. 
    "Traveling show " means any circus, carnival, collection of shows, exhibition performances, rides, merry-go-rounds, carrousels, tricks, juggling, sleight of hand or exhibition of similar nature, any or all of which are grouped together and carried on in the open air or under temporary structures or elsewhere for a short period of time. 
(Prior code § 136-1) 
5.112.020 - General regulations. 
    The following regulations shall, apply to each and every kiddy ride or traveling show to be hereafter conducted in the city: 
A.  Licenses Required. No kiddy ride or traveling show shall be opened or operated in the city unless and until a license has been issued for same by the license inspector in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Applications. No license for kiddy ride or traveling show shall be considered or issued until the person or firm desiring to operate same shall have made out and signed a written application for license and filed same with the license inspector and paid the proper fee for same to the license inspector. 
C.  Application Forms. All such applications shall be made on forms to be provided by the city. 
D.  Fees. The fee for a license to operate a traveling show shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day. The fee for a license to operate a kiddy ride shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year, which shall be known as an operator's license fee, together with one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year per operated ride, and the total amount of the fee shall accompany the application. If the application is denied, fifty dollars ($50.00) of the tendered fee on deposit with the license inspector shall be retained by the city as a processing fee for checking the application, applicant and incidental clerical work. 
E.  Gambling Prohibited. No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, wagering or other violation of the law on any licensed premises. The duty to keep the licensed premises free from such illegal activities is imposed upon the licensee as a condition of any license to be issued. 
F.  Alcoholic Beverages Controlled. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed on any licensed premises unless a proper and legal license therefor is acquired from the state of New Jersey or its proper agency. 
G.  Noise Restricted. No loud noise, talk or music shall be permitted on any licensed premises to the annoyance of any person. 
H.  Profanity Prohibited. No profane or indecent talk shall be permitted on any licensed premises. 
I.  Illegal Operations Prohibited. No business or practice which is in violation of any law of the state of New Jersey or any ordinance of the city shall be permitted on any licensed premises. 
J.  Responsibility of Licensee. Each licensee shall be responsible for any and all acts of his or her agents, employees and servants on the licensed premises. 
K.  Application Information. Each applicant shall set forth in his or her application the name and address of all parties interested in and intended to benefit from the contemplated profits of the venture, and the amount or percentage thereof. If the stated beneficiary of any part of the profits is a charitable, patriotic or religious group, body or corporation of the city, its proper officers shall approve the application and verify the statements made in the application in writing. 
L.  Hours of Operation. The kiddy ride or traveling show shall be operated only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
M.  Insurance Required. Before any license shall be granted, every applicant shall provide and deposit with the city clerk a public liability insurance policy in the amount of one hundred thousand/three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/$300,000.00), moving to the benefit of the general public, the coverage to include the operator, and the city shall be named as an insured. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 31, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 136-2) 
5.112.030 - Suspensions. 
    Any violation of any one or more of the rules set out in this chapter shall be sufficient ground for suspension of any license. The city reserves the right to suspend a license upon reasonable grounds of a probable violation of one or more of the rules by the licensee or his or her agent, employee or servant. 
(Prior code § 136-3) 
5.112.040 - Revocations. 
    The license inspector shall have the right to revoke any license for a violation of any of the rules, after public hearing, upon at least two days' written notice of the hearing to the licensee. Any notice to the licensee shall be considered sufficiently given if left with the licensee or person in charge of the licensed premises, or mailed to the licensee at address given by him or her in his or her application for the license. 
(Prior code § 136-4) 
5.112.050 - Written consent of property owner required. 
    Each application for a license shall contain the written consent of the owner of the site where the kiddy ride or traveling show is proposed to be conducted on his or her property in accordance with such application. 
(Prior code § 136-5) 
5.112.060 - Deposit of cash bond required-Conditions-Exception. 
    Each applicant for a license shall deposit with the license inspector at the time of filing application, a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to guarantee that upon the expiration of the license, the licensed premises and the adjacent public roads and immediate vicinity of the licensed premises will be left in good condition, cleaned up and cleared of all paper, waste material and debris then at the licensed premises, adjacent public roads and in the immediate vicinity of licensed premises; and upon failure to comply with this section within twenty-four (24) hours, the bond shall be forfeited. This section shall not apply to kiddy rides located in a permanent installation. 
(Prior code § 136-6) 
5.112.070 - Enforcement of statutes by city departments. 
    The license inspector shall notify in writing the police department, fire department, building and electrical departments immediately upon application for a license, setting forth in each notice the licensed premises, licensee, type of license and the licensed period. Upon the receipt of such notice, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the police department, fire department, building and electrical departments to see that no provision of the laws of the state of New Jersey or of any ordinance of the city is violated at the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 136-7) 
5.112.080 - Special licenses-Suspension of fees. 
    Where kiddy rides and/or traveling shows are operated and conducted under the supervision and control of an educational, charitable, patriotic or religious organization, and the land upon which the kiddy rides and/or traveling shows are conducted is owned solely by such organizations and the net proceeds of such kiddy rides and/or traveling shows are devoted wholly to educational, charitable, patriotic or religious uses, the following is permitted and allowed by action of the city license inspector: 
A.  A license issued on application and proof, without a fee being charged for the issuance of the license. 
B.  The life of the license shall not extend beyond six days, and no educational, charitable, patriotic or religious organization shall be permitted more than one license without fee per year. 
(Prior code § 136-8) 
5.112.090 - Priority of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be controlling notwithstanding any other ordinance or part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 136-9) 
5.112.100 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any amusement/kiddy ride, or kiddy ride operator that is licensed by the state department of community affairs pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:14A-1 et seq. provided that the following criteria are met: 
A.  The business is licensed and inspected annually by the state and each ride maintains a valid inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 5-28-2013) 
Chapter 5.116 - VENDORS AND PEDDLERS 
Sections: 

5.116.010 - Definitions and applicability. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
    "Foot peddler" means a person going from house to house, or person to person, selling goods, wares and merchandise which is carried and/or delivered to his or her customer by foot. 
    "Motorized vehicle" means a motorized self-propelled or self-powered vehicle, including every device in, upon, or by which any goods, wares and merchandise may be transported for the purpose of sale. 
    "Non-profit-making vendor" means a person who sells goods, the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purpose of a philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he or she acts as agent with or without pay, but excluding those individuals or organizations soliciting for funds or other things of value for which no merchandise, wares or services are given in return and for which licenses are required and control administered in the canvassers ordinance of the city. 
    "Peddler or vendor" means a person, commonly referred to either as a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or salesperson, peddler, vendor or other such person, who goes from place to place by traveling on the streets or from house to house, and carries or transports with him or her foodstuffs, goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering them to consumers, or who, without carrying or transporting merchandise, sells or proposes to sell services of any kind. 
    "Push cart" means any vehicle other than a motorized vehicle, including every device in, upon, or by which any goods, wares and merchandise are transported by human or muscular power for the purpose of sale. 
    "Trailer (hitch trailer)" means a nonmotorized trailer attached to a vehicle for the purpose of showing goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of sale. 
B.  Applicability. This chapter shall not affect any nonprofit making vendor or any person duly licensed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance or the Real Estate Commission of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 146-1) 
5.116.020 - Legislative purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to prevent dishonest business practices, to provide protection to the citizens of the city from unregulated itinerant or transient salespeople and the annoyances consonant thereto, the safety of the residents of this community and the best interests of its welfare. 
(Prior code § 146-2) 
5.116.030 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of, or to offer to sell or dispose of, any foodstuffs, goods, wares or merchandise within the city without first obtaining a license and having paid the license fee prescribed in Section 5.116.080. 
(Prior code § 146-3) 
5.116.040 - Exemptions from license fees. 
    The license fee only shall not apply to any person qualifying under N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 or to any person who conducts a sale pursuant to statute or court order, nor to any person who has an established local business. "Local business" shall be defined to be, within the city, an establishment which displays and offers for sale the same products that the peddler, hawker, vendor or solicitor is offering for sale, and the business of which is not devoted primarily by the nature thereof to house-to-house or itinerant vehicular selling. 
(Prior code § 146-4) 
5.116.050 - Application procedure-Required information. 
A.  Any person desiring a license shall file with the supervisor of licenses, bureau of central licensing, department of health, welfare and housing of the city, an application which shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of applicant, date of birth and Social Security number; 
2.  If a trade name is used, whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, association or corporation; 
3.  Address of applicant and telephone number; 
4.  Names and addresses of the persons from which goods making up the stock were or are to be purchased; 
5.  Three business references; 
6.  The place or places or residence of the applicant for the preceding three years; 
7.  A description of the goods or services to be sold; 
8.  If applicant is a corporation, the state of its character and the registered agents name and address in this state; 
9.  If other than an individual, the names and addresses of the partners, officers and any salespeople to be employed; 
10.  The number and nature of any arrests or convictions against the applicant, officers, partners or any salespeople to be employed; 
11.  To the application there must be appended a letter or, when applicable, a corporate resolution from the firm, authorizing the person signing the application to act as its representative and certifying that the information is correct and accurate; and 
12.  Description of vehicle and state license number. 
B.  1.  Denial of License Application. If the supervisors of licenses is not satisfied, after reviewing all reports as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant, he or she shall so notify the applicant in writing. 
2.  Time for Action on Application. The issuance of the license and permit shall be given by the supervisor of licenses within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. 
3.  Appeal. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the supervisor of licenses, he or she may appeal that decision to the mayor, or designee, by requesting a hearing in writing and filing the request with the mayor's office. 
(Prior code § 146-5) 
5.116.060 - License issuance procedure-Photograph and fingerprinting required. 
    Following the filing of the application, a copy thereof shall be sent by the supervisor of licenses to the director of the department of police of the city, who shall verify the good moral character of the applicant by causing his or her fingerprints to be taken and having the applicant supply his or her photograph. The police department shall ascertain whether the applicant has any criminal record and then report same to the supervisor of licenses. In order to determine the satisfactory moral character of the applicant, the supervisor of licenses shall make any other investigation from which the character and business responsibility of the applicant can be evaluated which he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good before approving the license application. Upon the approval of the application and payment of the fee, the license shall be issued by the supervisor of licenses, who shall keep all necessary records pertaining thereto. For all license classes, the license shall not authorize any person, except the person named in the license, to engage in business thereunder. The license shall not be transferable from the person to whom issued to any other person. A separate license must be obtained by a licensed peddler for every agent or employee working for him or her. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year. 
(Prior code § 146-6) 
5.116.070 - Possession of license-Display required. 
    Every person holding a license under this chapter shall be required to carry the license with him or her while engaged in the business licensed. He or she must produce the license at the request of any person solicited, a police officer or other official of the city. All automobiles, wagons, carts or other vehicles of any kind shall have affixed thereon a plate bearing the words "Peddlers and Solicitors License. City of Elizabeth." together with the number of the license and the year for which it is issued. 
(Prior code § 146-7) 
5.116.080 - Fee schedule. 
A.  Foot Peddlers. A fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) annually shall be charged the applicant, regardless of the type of business, when the nature of the business does not involve the use of a push cart or hitch trailer or motor vehicle. 
B.  Push Carts or Hitch Trailers. For an applicant whose business involves the operation of a nonmotorized vehicle such as a push cart or hitch trailer the fee shall be three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00). 
C.  Motor Vehicles. 
Vegetables or fruit $500.00 Fish  500.00 Ice cream, soft ice cream products and water ices  500.00 Mobile food units  750.00 Mobile units selling merchandise of any other description  750.00  
D.  Nonprofit making vendors shall not be required to pay any license fee. 
E.  Canvassers as defined under the canvassers ordinance shall not be required to pay any license fee under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 32, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3396 § 1, 2002: prior code § 146-8) 
5.116.090 - Regulations governing licensees. 
A.  No person or vehicle shall stand or be parked in a fixed location for the purpose of displaying or selling wares, merchandise or services on any public or private property where to do so causes, or is likely to cause a crowd, impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or produce annoying sounds, noise or disturbances which interfere with the comfort of the residents. It is also unlawful to strew or litter or cause to be strewn or littered the public streets or sidewalks with refuse or waste matter of any kind, or to in anywise interfere with the comfort or convenience of the residents or business of the occupants or owners of adjacent properties. 
B.  No person or vehicle shall stand or be parked for the purpose of displaying or selling wares, merchandise or services on any public or private property within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of the nearest public, parochial or private school in the city during school hours shall mean any time between 6:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on weekdays, exclusive of Saturdays, during such days as the schools may be in session. 
C.  No person covered by this chapter shall sell or attempt to sell in accordance with the terms of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection B of this section, before 6:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., prevailing time. The aforesaid time limitations shall not apply to persons who are expressly invited into the homes or upon the private property by the owners or the occupants thereof. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person covered by this chapter to misrepresent the character or quality of merchandise offered for sale, to importune or otherwise annoy any person for the purpose of effecting a purchase, or to conduct himself or herself otherwise than honestly and courteously. 
E.  No licensee shall park his or her vehicle or dispensing container for a period longer than the time it takes to make a sale to a customer. 
F.  For purposes of this chapter, the ringing of any bell or similar sound, or the making of any noise to attract attention, shall be construed to be an attempt to sell, and any such conduct by the licensee before or after the prescribed hours of sale shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
G.  Push carts or trailer hitch vehicles shall not stand or be parked in a fixed location on public or private property. Such vehicle must remain mobile by moving on after making a sale. 
H.  No peddler of any products of any kind, including foodstuffs, shall have an exclusive right to any location on the public streets or public sidewalks, or shall be permitted to peddle from a fixed location in the city, or in a congested area where his or her operation might impede or inconvenience the public. A peddler operating at one location for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes shall be deemed to be operating at a fixed location. A peddler operating at a fixed location for thirty (30) minutes shall be required to move to a new location at least two hundred (200) feet distant from his or her fixed location. No peddler shall operate at any one fixed location for more than thirty (30) minutes in any twenty-four (24) hour period. 
I.  1.  It is unlawful for any person covered by this chapter to ring any bell or similar sound, or make any noise to attract attention while the vehicle is standing or parked in a fixed position. Noise shall include but not be limited to, the ringing of bells and the amplification of music. Vehicles shall include, but not be limited to, ice cream trucks, push carts, trailer hitch vehicles and other vehicles defined and regulated in this chapter. 
2.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to the fines and penalties set out in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 3182 § 1, 1999; prior code § 146-9) 
5.116.100 - Revocation of license and permit-Appeal. 
A.  The license and permit issued to any person may be revoked at any time by the supervisor of licenses if: 
1.  Any section of this chapter is violated; 
2.  The holder of such license and permit is convicted of any crime; 
3.  The holder of such license and permit conducts himself or herself so as to create a public disturbance; 
4.  The holder of such license and permit is guilty of fraudulent acts; 
5.  The holder of such license and permit has or establishes a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; 
6.  The holder of such license and permit conducts business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and 
7.  The holder of such license is guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the license application. 
B.  The holder of any license and permit to be revoked shall be notified, in writing, by the supervisor of licenses of the revocation and the reasons therefor. 
(Prior code § 146-10) 
5.116.110 - Prohibitions on locations. 
A.  All vendors, peddlers and pushcart vendors licensed under this chapter are prohibited within the city's special improvement district as defined and regulated in Ordinance No. 1896 as same is amended and supplemented. 
B.  Pushcart vendors are prohibited from Exit 13 of the New Jersey Turnpike across Brunswick Avenue to Edgar Road. 
C.  Pushcart vendors and vendors utilizing motorized vehicles and trailers (hitch trailers) are prohibited from operation on Vine Street from Watson Avenue to Warinanco Park. 
(Prior code § 146-11) 
Chapter 5.120 - WINDOW DISPLAY AREAS 
Sections: 

5.120.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm or corporation. 
    "Public view" means any window display area or any part thereof which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, open air parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
    "Window display area" means any area within the corners of a window frame normally used for the display of merchandise for retail sale to the public. 
(Prior code § 152-1) 
5.120.020 - Use of window display areas. 
    No storage of materials, stock or inventories shall be permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view, except when necessary in the course of changing displays and then only temporarily for a reasonable period of time. 
(Prior code § 152-2) 
5.120.030 - Enforcement agency. 
    The department of health, welfare and housing shall be the enforcement agency of the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 152-3) 
Chapter 5.150 - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES 

5.150.010 - Definitions. 
    "Applicant" shall mean a person who completes an application for TNC platform license, TNC vehicle license or TNC driver license. 
    "Bureau" shall mean the central license bureau of the City of Elizabeth. 
    "Certificate of compliance" shall mean a certificate of compliance issued by the clerk of the city upon the filing of the required insurance policy. 
    "City attorney" shall mean the city attorney of the City of Elizabeth. 
    "City clerk" shall mean the clerk of the City of Elizabeth. 
    "Hearing" shall mean a hearing at which the licensee shall be given an opportunity to appear personally and be represented by counsel to present evidence or otherwise answer the charges. 
    "Holder" shall mean a person to whom a TNC owner/software platform license or TNC driver license or TNC vehicle license has been issued. 
    "License inspector" shall mean the chief license inspector of the central license bureau. 
    "Prearranged transportation services" transportation services available by advance request excluding for-hire passenger vehicles soliciting passengers for immediate transportation. No minimum waiting period is required between the advance request and the provision of the transportation services. 
    "Principal place of business" shall mean the place or location where the transportation network company is registered to do business. 
    "Transportation network company (TNC)" shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity that uses an online application program to connect drivers to passengers for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire or for ride-sharing services for a fee. 
    "TNC driver" means an individual that uses a passenger vehicle in connection with a transportation network company's online-enabled application or platform to connect with passengers in exchange for payment of a fee to the transportation network company. 
    "TNC driver license" shall mean a license issued by the central license bureau to persons who meet the bureau's qualifications of a for-hire driver of a TNC vehicle. 
    "TNC platform license" shall mean the license issued to a TNC issued by the City of Elizabeth. 
    "TNC service" means prearranged transportation service provided by a TNC driver in connection with a transportation network company. The TNC service begins when the TNC driver accepts a ride request on the transportation network company's online-enabled application or platform and ends at the later of the following: 
A.  The time that the driver completes the transaction on the online-enabled application or platform. 
B.  The time that all passengers exit the vehicle and complete unloading of the vehicle. 
    "TNC software platform" shall mean the electronic information system that integrates and manages all of the shared components of the software operating system. Components of the software operating system, shall include but not be limited to, the functionality of the database system used, the credit and debit card payment system and the mobile application platform. 
    "TNC vehicle license" shall mean a license issued to the owner of a TNC vehicle who meets the central license bureau's requirements to operate a TNC vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 1, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.020 - Application procedure for TNC owner/software platform license. 
A.  Each transportation network company (TNC) must apply for and obtain an owner/software platform license issued by the central bureau annually by submitting an application on a form prepared by the central license bureau which shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant for a TNC owner/software platform license (individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity authorized by New Jersey Law). 
2.  Address of principal place of business, phone number and email address, names of operating staff available at the principal place of business to maintain a business presence and to address all TNC issues. 
3.  The hours of operation of the principal place of business. 
4.  A copy of the corporate/partnership/LLC documents evidencing with complying with local and state laws. 
5.  A copy of the business registration certificate and certificate evidencing that the business entity is in good standing. 
6.  The make, year, color and registration number of all vehicles operated under the owner/software platform license. 
B.  The central license [bureau] may refuse to issue or renew a TNC owner/software platform license for including but not limited to the following reasons: 
1.  The TNC's name is similar to any other existing TNC. 
2.  All summonses issued during a calendar year have not been disposed of prior to the issuance of a new license or the renewal of a license (all fines or fees must be paid). 
3.  All payroll taxes and any other taxes due have not been paid. 
C.  Any changes in the information submitted by the applicant in its application must be made to the central license bureau within five (5) days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 2, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.030 - Expiration date and fees for the TNC owner/platform license, vehicle license and drivers license. 
A.  The term of each TNC owner/platform license, TNC vehicle license and TNC driver's license issued by the bureau should not exceed one year and shall expire on March 31st annually. 
B.  The annual license fee for the owner/platform license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually and the vehicle license fee shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per vehicle annually operated under the owner/platform license. 
C.  The annual license fee for each TNC driver to operate a TNC vehicle shall be ninety dollars ($90.00) annually. 
D.  The license fees set forth herein shall be payable upon approval of the application to the central license bureau. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 3, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.040 - Insurance required. 
    No TNC vehicle shall be operated unless a certificate of compliance has been issued by the city clerk confirming the following: 
A.  The owner of the TNC vehicle has filed an insurance policy with the city clerk complying with the insurance provisions of N.J.S.A 48:16-3 and simultaneously filing therewith, a power of attorney wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the chief fiscal officer of the city its true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy. 
B.  The holder of a TNC owner/software platform license has filed an insurance policy with the city clerk evidencing insurance combines single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for non-hired and non-owned automobiles and a power of attorney wherein and whereby the holder of the TNC owner/software platform license shall appoint the chief fiscal officer of the city its true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 4, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.050 - TNC driver's license required. 
    No person shall operate a TNC vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a TNC vehicle shall permit it to be driven, and no TNC vehicle licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such TNC vehicle shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a TNC driver license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 5, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.060 - Application procedure for TNC driver's license-Information credentials required. 
A.  An application for a TNC driver license shall be filed with the central license bureau on forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the applicant's name and address and the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of three (3) residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of one year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
2.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers and that he or she has driven a motor vehicle for at least one year. 
3.  The educational background of the applicant. 
4.  A concise history of his or her employment. 
5.  The age of the applicant, which must be at least twenty-one (21) years, and a representation that he or she is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs and an agreement that he or she shall not partake of intoxicating liquors during his or her regular tour of duty. 
6.  Prior criminal record, if any. 
7.  Information as to whether his or her New Jersey state driver's license has ever been revoked or suspended and for what reason. 
8.  Fingerprints. 
B.  Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the licensing year. A license for every licensing year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of ninety dollars ($90.00) unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 6, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.070 - State motor vehicle operator's license required. 
    Before any application is finally passed upon by the central license bureau, the applicant shall be required to show that he or she has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued by the State of New Jersey. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 7, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.080 - Police investigation of applicant required. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a TNC driver's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the central license bureau. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 8, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.090 - Consideration of application-Hearing for reconsideration. 
    The license inspector shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may file an appeal to the business administrator to offer evidence as to why his or her application should be reconsidered. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 9, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.100 - Issuance of license-Duration-Annual fee. 
A.  Upon approval of an application for TNC driver license, the central license bureau shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
B.  Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the licensing year. A license for every licensing year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of ninety dollars ($90.00), unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 10, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.110 - Display of license. 
    Every TNC driver licensed under this chapter shall have prominently displayed in full view of all passengers: 
A.  The TNC driver's license. 
B.  TNC vehicle license. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 11, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.120 - License suspension or revocation-Procedure-Notice and hearing. 
A.  The license inspector is given the authority to suspend any TNC driver license to operate a TNC vehicle, issued under this chapter, for a driver failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, such suspension to last for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. The license inspector is also authorized to recommend the revocation of the driver's license to operate a TNC vehicle for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. However, a license to operate a TNC vehicle may not be recommended for revocation unless the driver has received a five-day notice by certified or registered mail and has had an opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf. 
B.  The decision of the license inspector to revoke shall be considered a recommendation to the business administrator thirty (30) days, approve or disapprove the recommendation of the license inspector. A copy of such recommendation shall be forwarded to the licensee, with the reasons for same included therein. The business administrator shall give the licensee an opportunity to be heard prior to reaching his or her decision, provided that the business administrator receives a written request for a hearing by the holder. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 12, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.130 - Compliance with laws required. 
    Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the license inspector to recommend the suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 13, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.140 - Regulations governing inspections, capacity, equipment and maintenance of vehicles. 
A.  Initial Inspection. Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the transportation inspector and found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations may be prescribed by the central license bureau. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the transportation inspector shall deem necessary therefor. No vehicle shall be presented to the bureau of central license for inspection without first having passed inspection by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, proof of which is required to be submitted to the bureau of central license at the time of inspection. No vehicle covered under this chapter shall be allowed to service passengers in the city without first having passed inspection by both the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and the central license bureau. 
B.  Capacity. No TNC operating on the streets of the city shall carry more passengers than the seating capacity as established by the manufacturer for the vehicle, but in no case shall the seating capacity be greater than the number of manufacturer installed seat belts. 
C.  Periodic Inspections Required. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the transportation inspector at such intervals as shall be established by the central license bureau to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. 
D.  Maintenance in clean and sanitary condition required. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the central license bureau. In the event a vehicle governed by the provisions of this chapter fails to pass an inspection for reasons other than mechanical, then, in that event, the use and operation of the vehicle may continue for a period of fourteen (14) days thereafter, at the conclusion of which time the necessary corrections of the noted violations shall be corrected. In the event the violation corrections are not made within the period of fourteen (14) days, then the use and operation of the vehicle shall thereafter be prohibited until such time as corrective action has been taken to the satisfaction of the central license bureau. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 14, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.150 - Zone map-Possession and display required. 
    A zone map shall be prepared and furnished for each TNC vehicle, illustrating the TNC fare zones in the city. Each TNC vehicle shall have a zone map at all times, which map shall be produced upon the demand of any passenger or authorized representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 15, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.160 - Regulations governing rates of fares. 
    No owner or driver of a TNC vehicle shall charge a greater sum for the use of a TNC vehicle than in accordance with the following rates: 
A.  Additional Destination. Full fare for each destination. 
B.  Schedule of Zones. 
1.  Central Zone No. 1. 
a.  Rate: Seven dollars ($7.00). 
2.  Zone No. 2. 
a.  Rate: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
3.  Zone No. 3. 
a.  Rate: Nine dollars ($9.00). 
4.  Fares that originate within the boundaries of the city shall be governed by the same schedule of rates in effect for fares originating from Terminal A of Newark Liberty International Airport. This schedule of rates is on file and available in office of the city clerk. 
C.  Schedule Special Areas. 
1.  Bayway area beyond relocated Bayway to South Front Street to Elizabeth River: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
2.  Inside Elizabeth Industrial Park Gate: Eight dollars ($8.00). 
3.  Inside Central Railroad. 
4.  East North Avenue-Jersey Gardens-Mall: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
5.  Allied Chemical Dye Corporation: Eleven dollars ($11.00). 
6.  Bay Avenue and McLester Street: Eleven dollars ($11.00). 
7.  Bay Avenue and Terminal Street: Twelve dollars ($12.00). 
8.  End of Terminal Street: Ten dollars ($10.00). 
9.  Elizabeth-Port Authority Piers: Fourteen dollars ($14.00). 
D.  No charge shall be made for shopping bags or packages. 
E.  No extra charge will be allowed for inclement weather. 
F.  No extra charge will be allowed for night rates. 
G.  No extra charge will be allowed for rush hour except when designated per city ordinance. 
H.  Senior Citizens Discount. All senior citizens who have been issued and in possession of a valid senior citizens reduced-fare identification card issued by the state department of transportation, shall be entitled to ride at a two dollar ($2.00) discount. If one or more persons not entitled to the reduced-fare rate accompanies a senior citizens reduced-fare identification card issued by the state department of transportation, shall be entitled to ride at a two dollar ($2.00) discount. If one or more persons not entitled to the reduced-fare rate accompanies a senior citizens reduced-fare identification card, the reduced-fare rate shall not apply. It is unlawful for an owner or a driver of a TNC vehicle to refuse to provide service to senior citizens who are entitled to receive the reduced-fare rate. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 16, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.170 - Receipts-Information when required. 
    The driver of any TNC vehicle shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, license number or motor number, amount of charges, date of transaction and points of pickup and discharge of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 17, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.180 - Refusal by passenger to pay legal fare unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired same and it is unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 18, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.190 - Parking or standing prohibited at certain placed restricted areas. 
A.  Subject to rules and regulations of the license inspector, no TNC vehicle shall park or stand at designated taxicab stands, or in any prohibited areas, or in any area controlled by curb parking meters, or at the curb within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to any railroad station, theatre, arena, hotel, restaurant or similar place of public accommodation or public resort. 
B.  The TNC vehicles are prohibited from picking up passenger at the following locations: 
1.  Terminal A at Newark Liberty International Airport. 
2.  Elizabeth Train Stations. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 19, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.200 - Manifest. 
A.  Every TNC owner/platform license holder shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. 
B.  Every holder of a TNC owner/software platform license shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe place for at least the licensing year next preceding the current licensing year, and such manifests shall be available to the transportation inspector or the license inspector. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 20, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.210 - Holder record's and reports. 
A.  Every TNC owner/platform license holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required by the central license bureau. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the transportation inspector or the license inspector. 
B.  Every TNC owner/platform license holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of operation to the ventral license bureau for each licensing year, in accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the central license bureau. The reports shall reach the central license bureau on or before the 15th day of September of the year following the licensing year for which such reports are prepared. 
C.  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of TNC vehicle shall be reported, by the TNC vehicle owner, within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of occurrence to the police department and the central license bureau. At such time of notification to the bureau of central license, or as soon thereafter as possible, the TNC vehicle owner must furnish the bureau of central license with a copy of the police accident report of the accident. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 21, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.220 - Dress and appearance of TNC driver's. 
    All TNC driver's while engaged in their employment shall be neat in dress and appearance, in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the central license bureau. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 22, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.230 - Badge/identification card requirement for TNC drivers-Replacement fee-Annual renewal. 
A.  A badge and/or identification card shall be issued each licensing year by the central license division to the holder of a TNC driver's license, which badge and/or identification card shall contain information, including, but not limited to, the identity of the wearer as a TNC driver licensed by the city and an indication of the licensing year. This badge and/or identification card shall be worn on the person of the driver while he or she is engaged in his or her employment, and this badge and/or identification card shall at all times be conspicuously exhibited on his or her person. 
B.  No TNC vehicle shall be operated except by a duly licensed person wearing such badge and/or identification card, and the badge and/or identification card and the TNC driver's license shall be returned to the central license division at the end of the licensing year. 
C.  In the event that any badge and/or identification card and/or TNC driver's license is lost or destroyed, a new badge and/or identification card and/or TNC driver's license shall be furnished upon of a fee of ninety dollars ($90.00) being paid to the license division. 
D.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in a suspension of a TNC driver's license for a period not exceed five (5) days. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 23, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.240 - Change of address-Report required. 
    The holders of any or all licenses as set forth in this chapter are required to report any change in their home or business address within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 24, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.250 - Use for illegal or immoral purposes prohibited. 
    The use of a TNC vehicle for illegal or immoral purposes is prohibited, and any TNC driver that knowingly permits or allows the use of a TNC vehicle for such purposes shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 25, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.260 - Examination of a TNC vehicle after discharge of passengers. 
    Every TNC driver, immediately after the termination of any hire or employment, must carefully search or examine such TNC vehicle for any property lost or left behind therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the lawful owner, must be reported to and given to the central license bureau for disposition in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 26, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.270 - Conduct of drivers. 
A.  The TNC driver, while engaged in an operation of a TNC service, shall behave in a courteous manner and shall not use any indecent, profane, or insulting language while engaged in such operations. 
B.  No TNC driver of any TNC vehicle shall induce any passenger to employ them by knowingly misinforming or misleading any respective passenger, either as to time or place of the arrival or departure of any train, motor vehicle, or airplane or as the location of any hotel, public place or private residence or as to the distance of any two (2) points nor shall such TNC driver deceive any perspective passenger or make any false representation. 
C.  No TNC driver shall convey any passenger to any other place or over any route contrary to a passenger's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 27, 5-10-2016) 
5.150.280 - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of any of the provisions in this chapter shall be a minimum of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for the first and each additional offense. 
(Ord. No. 4701 , § 28, 5-10-2016) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated in this section for the purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    "Dog" means any dog, bitch or spayed bitch. 
    "Dog of licensing age" means any dog which has attained the age of six months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth. 
    "Kennel" means any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop. 
    "License inspector" means the supervisor of licenses. 
    "Owner," when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, means and includes every person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has such dog in his or her keeping. 
    "Pet shop" means any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed. 
    "Pound" means an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise. 
    "Shelter" means any establishment where dogs are received, housed and distributed. 
    "Tethering" shall mean the restraining of an animal by the tying to any object or structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post, garage, weight or sled, by any means, including, without limitation, rope, cord, leash or running line, but shall not include the use of a leash used to walk the animal or to forms of restraint used in the transportation of an animal. 
    "Vicious dog" means any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 4700 , § 1, 4-26-2016; prior code § 68-1) 
6.04.020 - License and registration required. 
    No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the city without registering and obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the central license bureau upon application by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee. No person shall keep or harbor any dog in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 68-2) 
6.04.030 - Application information-Issuance of registration numbers. 
    The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog. The information on the application and the registration number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the license inspector. In addition, the license inspector shall forward to the State Department of Health each month, on forms furnished by the department, an accurate account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications. 
(Prior code § 68-3) 
6.04.040 - Registration tag-Annual procurement required. 
    Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall annually, in the month of January, apply for and procure from the license inspector a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto. 
(Prior code § 68-4) 
6.04.050 - License fees-Expiration date. 
    The person applying for the license and registration tag for a dog shall pay an annual fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) for nonspayed or nonneutered dogs and eight dollars ($8.00) for spayed or neutered dogs and also the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for the registration tag for each dog, and for each annual renewal the fee for the license and for the registration tag shall be the same as for the original license tag. The fees shall become effective with the licensing period beginning February 1st, 1995; and the licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of January of the following year. The fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer for general revenue purposes. 
(Prior code § 68-5) 
6.04.060 - Guide dogs for blind and K-9 dogs excepted from fees. 
A.  Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs provided for in this chapter, except that the owner or keeper of such dog will not be required to pay any fee therefor. 
B.  Dogs used as police K-9 dogs by the Elizabeth police department shall be licensed and registered as other dogs provided for in this chapter, except that the owner or keeper of such dog will not be required to pay any fee therefor. 
(Prior code § 68-6) 
6.04.070 - Time limit for licensing. 
    The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag for each dog within ten (10) days after such acquisition or age attainment. 
(Prior code § 68-7) 
6.04.080 - Dogs brought into city-Licensing provisions-Reports required. 
A.  Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the city any dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the city for a period of more than ninety (90) days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed under Section 6.04.100. 
B.  Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the city any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the city for a period of more than ten (10) days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed under Section 6.04.100. 
C.  All persons who keep or operate kennels, pet shops, shelters or dog pounds, as well as all veterinarians and persons who own or operate animal hospitals, shall report all unlicensed dogs brought to their business or establishment to the dog warden of the city. 
(Prior code § 68-8) 
6.04.090 - Tags nontransferable. 
    No person, except an officer in the performance of his or her duties, shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued. 
(Prior code § 68-9) 
6.04.100 - Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds-License required. 
    Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the central license bureau for a license entitling him or her to keep or operate such establishment. 
(Prior code § 68-10) 
6.04.110 - Application procedure. 
    The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the purpose for which it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the dog warden of the city showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at such establishments. 
(Prior code § 68-11) 
6.04.120 - Application information-Expiration date. 
    All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on the last day of January of the following year. 
(Prior code § 68-12) 
6.04.130 - Establishments exempted from individual licensing requirements. 
    Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such establishment. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner or different premises. 
(Prior code § 68-13) 
6.04.140 - Kennels and pet shops-Fees. 
A.  There shall be a license required annually to operate a kennel in the city of Elizabeth. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten (10) or less dogs shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and for a kennel providing accommodations for more than ten (10) dogs, the annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
B.  There shall be a license required annually to operate a pet shop in the city of Elizabeth. The license fee for a pet shop shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). There shall be an additional annual license fee for dogs kenneled for sale on the pet shop premises as follows: 
1-10 dogs $25.00 11-20 dogs  50.00 21 or more dogs  75.00  
(Ord. 3961 § 1, 2008: Ord. 3392 § 1, 2002: prior code § 68-14) 
6.04.150 - Off-premises restraint required. 
    No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off such premises except on leash or in a crate or other safe control. 
(Prior code § 68-15) 
6.04.160 - Dog warden and assistants-Appointment and duties. 
    The city council shall have the power to appoint a dog warden and such assistants as the city council deems necessary, at annual salaries as stipulated in the annual budget, in accordance with the laws of the state of New Jersey. The employees shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and keep and maintain the animal shelter in accordance with the laws of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 68-16) 
6.04.170 - Dog control committee-Appointment and duties. 
A.  The president of the city council shall appoint annually three members of the city council to a committee to be known as the dog control committee. 
B.  The dog control committee of the city council is delegated with the power and authority to promulgate the rules and regulations necessary for the control of the animal shelter. 
(Prior code § 68-17) 
6.04.180 - Dog warden-Reports required-Equipment authorized. 
    The city shall purchase and pay for the maintenance and use of the animal shelter and the truck or trucks utilized by the dog warden in the course of his or her duties, and shall pay for all food, heat, light, water, gas and other essential items used in the operation of the animal shelter. The dog warden shall keep and maintain accurate records of each licensed and unlicensed animal impounded or sheltered by him or her, and such records shall show in detail the time, place and circumstances under which each animal came into the possession, custody or control of the dog warden, and the disposition of all such animals. All such records shall at all times be available and open for inspection by the members of the city council, the dog control committee, the division of housing and inspections and the general public. Money collected by the dog warden for redemption of licensed animals, adoption of animals, euthanasia, boarding of animals and other services performed for the public by the dog warden shall be reported and deposited on the first day of each week with the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall keep a record of such moneys and shall report same monthly to city council, the dog control committee and the division of housing and inspections. 
(Prior code § 68-18) 
6.04.190 - Annual canvass authorized-Information required. 
    The chief of police of the city shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the city, and shall report on or before May 1st of each year to the supervisor of licenses and to the division of housing and inspections and to the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs, the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with a complete description of each of the unlicensed dogs. 
(Prior code § 68-19) 
6.04.200 - Impounding of certain dogs authorized. 
    The dog warden of the city shall take into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in this section: 
A.  Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring the dog, which the warden or his or her agent has reason to believe, is a stray dog; 
B.  Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring the dog, without a current registration tag on his or her collar; 
C.  Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring the dog. 
(Prior code § 68-20) 
6.04.210 - Impoundment of registered dogs-Notice to owner. 
A.  If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any persons or a registration tag or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring the dog is known, the dog warden shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice. 
B.  A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his or her usual or last known place of abode or to the address on the collar. 
(Prior code § 68-21) 
6.04.220 - Impoundment fees-Disposal of dogs. 
    For every dog so seized, there shall be a pound fee of eight dollars ($8.00), which shall not include maintenance for the first calendar day; and there shall be a maintenance charge for each dog so seized at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per day or any fraction thereof. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven (7) days after notice when notice can be given as above set forth or has been detained for seven (7) days after seizure when notice cannot be given as above set forth for lack of proper identification, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog has not claimed the dog and paid expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including the pound fee and maintenance charge at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per day, or if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog has not produced or purchased a license and registration tag for the dog, the dog warden may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 38, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 68-22) 
6.04.230 - Entrance on private premises authorized-Exception. 
    Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter is authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog which he or she may lawfully seize and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the same. 
(Prior code § 68-23) 
6.04.240 - Interference with authorized officials prohibited. 
    No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 68-24) 
6.04.260 - Damage to plant life or property prohibited. 
    No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, ground or property. 
(Prior code § 68-26) 
6.04.270 - Running at large prohibited-Leash required. 
    No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any public park or in any public building or in any other public place within the city, unless such dog is controlled by an adequate leash not more than eight feet long. 
(Prior code § 68-27) 
6.04.280 - Cruel treatment or abandonment of animals prohibited. 
    No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 68-29) 
6.04.290 - Dangerous animals-Control required. 
    It is unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city; exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 68-30) 
6.04.300 - Noises by animals restricted. 
    It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Prior code § 68-31) 
6.04.310 - Animals prohibited running at large or grazing. 
    It is unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the city; any such animal running at large in any public place in the city shall be impounded in the manner provided in the following sections. It is further unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Prior code § 68-32) 
6.04.320 - Dangerous animals-Killing authorized in certain circumstances. 
    The members of the police department or dog warden's personnel are authorized to kill any dangerous animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Prior code § 68-33) 
6.04.330 - Diseased animals-Supervision required for removal-Contagion controlled. 
A.  No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place where the health of human or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the supervision of the chief of police or the dog warden. 
B.  It is the duty of the dog warden to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Prior code § 68-34) 
6.04.340 - Sanitary quarters required-Keeping of swine prohibited. 
    No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, and it is unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs in the city. 
(Prior code § 68-35) 
6.04.350 - Keeping of goats prohibited-Cattle and chickens restricted. 
    It is unlawful to keep or have any goats anywhere in, the city, or any cattle or chickens within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residence other than the residence of the person so keeping or having such animals anywhere in the city. 
(Prior code § 68-36) 
6.04.360 - Stray dog control-Assistance authorized. 
    The dog control committee of the city council is authorized and empowered to retain the services of an independent contractor to assist the dog warden in picking up stray dogs throughout the city at those periods when, in the discretion of the dog control committee, the work load exceeds the normal capacity of city personnel. 
(Prior code § 68-37) 
6.04.370 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4711 , § 1, adopted May 10, 2016, repealed the former section 6.04.370 in its entirety, which pertained to the licensing of pit bull dogs, and derived from the prior code § 68-38. 
6.04.380 - Fees charged by the city animal shelter. 
A.  Adoption Fees Per Animal. 
Dogs $10.00 Puppies 10.00 Cats 10.00 Kittens 10.00  
B.  Ten-Day Quarantine. 
Due to bite (ten-day mandatory quarantine) $50.00  
C.  Euthanasia and Disposal Per Animal. 
Dog $20.00 Cat 20.00  
D.  Animal Micro Chipping. 
Per Animal $10.00  
E.  Trap Damage or Lost. Actual cost of replacement for lost or damaged traps. 
F.  Animal Boarding Per Animal. 
Per day $5.00  
(Ord. No. 4561 , § 1, 4-14-2015) 
6.04.390 - Spaying and neutering of animals. 
A.  All animals adopted from the city shelter must be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days after the date of adoption by a licensed veterinarian. Any animal that is less than four (4) months at the time of its adoption, must be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of the animal reaching four (4) months of age. 
B.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section will result in a summons being issued with the following minimum monetary penalties: 
(1)  1 st offense: $250.00 
(2)  2 nd offense and any additional offenses: $500.00 
(Ord. No. 4561 , § 2, 4-14-2015) 
6.04.400 - Rabies vaccination required. 
A.  Vaccination. Any animal adopted from the city animal shelter shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided for in subsection C below. 
B.  Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state. 
C.  Exemptions. Any dog may be exempted from the requirements of such vaccination for a specified period of time by the director of the department of health and human services or her/his designee upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of the dog shall be deemed inadvisable. 
D.  Penalties. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall result in a summons being issued with the following minimum monetary penalties: 
(1)  1 st offense: $250.00 
(2)  2 nd offense and each additional offenses: $500.00 
(Ord. No. 4561 , § 3, 4-14-2015) 
6.04.410 - Number of dog, cats and other animals permitted in a household. 
    There shall be no more than a total of five (5) dog and/or cat licenses issued to any residential household. Any household seeking to have more than a total of five (5) dog and/or cat licenses, or more than a total of five (5) animals may file a request with the director of health and human services or her/his designee for an exception to that number provided that there is proper and adequate shelter and protection for the dogs, cats and other animals. The director of health and human services or her/his designee in determining whether there is adequate shelter and protection for the dogs, cats and other animals shall examine the size and location of the dwelling, whether increasing the number of dogs, cats or other animals would cause a nuisance, and whether the municipal and state health, building and/or zoning codes would be violated. If a residential household has more than a total of five (5) dog or cat licenses issued by the city prior to the date of the enactment of this section, the household shall be exempt from this requirement. This section shall not apply to a licensed commercial kennel, pet shop or animal hospital. 
(Ord. No. 4561 , § 4, 4-14-2015) 
6.04.420 - Tethering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, tie or restrain an animal unless the tether is attached to the animal by non-choke type collar in a manner which the dog is able to move freely and prevents the tether from becoming entangled around the animal or object as to limit the dog's freedom within the tethered area or to prevent the dog, or any of its appendages, from becoming entangled by the tether. Chains shall be prohibited for any and all uses of a tethering device. 
(Ord. No. 4700 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4700 , §§ 2, 3, adopted April 26, 2016, enacted provisions intended for use as sections 6.04.380 and 6.04.390. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as sections 6.04.420 and 6.04.430. 
6.04.430 - Leaving animals outdoors in certain circumstances prohibited. 
A.  Animals Left Outdoors Without Water or Shelter. It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave any animal outdoors and unattended for a continuous period of two (2) hours or more without water and a suitable shelter. 
B.  Animals Left Outdoors During Inclement Weather. It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave any animal outdoors during any snow storm, ice storm, thunder storm or where the National Weather Service has issued a weather alert or storm warning for any area that includes the city. 
C.  Animals Left Outdoors During Extreme Temperatures. It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave any animal outdoors and unattended for any period of time where the temperature outdoors exceeds 90°F or falls below 32°F, as measured by any city officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, an animal shall be considered outdoors regardless of access to an outdoor doghouse or similar structure, unless such structure is a properly functioning climate-controlled and weather-resistant structure. 
(Ord. No. 4700 , § 3, 4-26-2016) 
Note- See editor's note at section 6.04.420. 
Chapter 6.08 - HUNTING 
Sections: 

6.08.010 - Hunting within city limits prohibited. 
    The hunting for, killing or taking of any game, wild bird, animal or fowl within the limits of the city is banned and prohibited. 
(Prior code § 83-1) 
6.08.020 - Discharge of weapons within limits prohibited. 
    No person shall, for the purpose of hunting, taking or killing any game, wild bird, animal or fowl, discharge any firearm of any kind or character or any crossbow, bow and arrow or similar weapon within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 83-2) 
6.08.030 - Exception to chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons having a hunter's license who pass through the city in going to and coming from places of hunting outside the city limits, provided that these persons do not hunt or discharge their firearms while doing so. 
(Prior code § 83-3) 
Title 7 - SANITATION CODE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 7.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
Article I - Definitions and Administration 

7.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this title: 
    "City," "the city," "this city" or "municipality" means the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    "Department" means the department of health, welfare and housing of the city. 
    "Director" means the director of health, welfare and housing of the city, or authorized agent or representative. 
    "Division" means the health division of the department of health, welfare and housing of the city. 
    "Food court" means an indoor plaza or common area within a facility that is contiguous with the counters of multiple retail food establishments and provides a common area for self-serve dining. 
    "Food-handling establishment" means any factory, store, market, room or other place where food or nonalcoholic drink for consumption is manufactured, processed, prepared, handled, stored, displayed or sold. 
    "Health officer" means the health officer of the city. 
    "Isolation" means the placing apart of a person or persons affected with a communicable disease, for the purpose of preventing contact with other persons, and the establishment of restrictions directly surrounding such person or persons. 
    "Itinerant restaurant" means one operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering; or from a vehicle, wagon, truck or other conveyance. 
    "Mobile food truck" means a retail food establishment that is located upon or within a motorized vehicle and engages in the sale of frozen or prepackaged foods. 
    "Mobile push-cart" means a retail food establishment that is located upon or within a non-motorized, wheeled vehicle such as a cart, wagon, or tricycle. 
    "Mobile step van" means a retail food establishment that is located upon or within a motorized vehicle with sufficient plumbing, electrical and/or gas to prepare food other than frozen or prepackaged food. 
    "Operator" means any person who by contract, agreement or ownership conducts a restaurant, food-handling establishment, itinerant restaurant, or operates a vending machine or apparatus, or who vends any food or food product within the city. 
    "Permit" or "license" means the permission in writing of the director or health officer or the authorized agents thereof, issued in accordance with the provisions of law or ordinance, to carry on a certain activity. 
    "Quarantine" means the placing of restrictions upon households or premises or the persons thereof, for the purpose of preventing the spread of a communicable disease to other persons, households or premises. 
    "Restaurant" means, restaurant, hotel, coffee shop, dining room, cafeteria, luncheonette, soda fountain, sandwich stand or any other place where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored, sold or served for consumption on the premises to the public, organization members or employees, with or without charge. 
(Ord. No. 4376, § 2, 5-28-2013; Prior code § 38-1) 
7.04.020 - Amendments to State Sanitary Code applicable. 
    All amendments, supplements, additions and deletions to the State Sanitary Code of the New Jersey State Department of Health shall be considered part and parcel of this title as if same is in full, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9. 
(Prior code § 38-269) 
7.04.030 - Right of entry to authorized officials. 
    The director, the health officer or their authorized agents shall have the right of entry into and upon any public or private building or premises for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title or determining whether such provisions or the rules and regulations of the director are being complied with and obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry, or hinder or interfere with the director, health officer or other authorized agents in the performance of their duty. The refusal of entry to any authorized representative of the director or health officer by any person licensed or holding a permit under this title shall be sufficient reason for immediate suspension of such license or permit and its revocation after an opportunity for a hearing before the director. 
(Prior code § 38-3) 
7.04.040 - Rules and regulations authorized. 
    The director shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary and proper concerning any matter which involves the protection and promotion of health, and all persons concerned shall comply with the provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 38-4) 
7.04.050 - Director-Powers and duties. 
    In accordance with the provisions of this code, the director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this title, and he or she may delegate this authority to the health officer, division of health of the department of health, welfare and housing, who shall administer the business connected with: 
A.  The enforcement of this title and the rules and regulations of the director and the laws of this state which relate to the public health. 
B.  The investigation into the cause of sickness and death and the institution of protective measures therefor. 
C.  The inspection and protection of the food supply. 
D.  The investigation and abatement of nuisances and conditions affecting the public health. 
E.  The investigation and enforcement of the sanitary conditions of public and private buildings and premises. 
F.  The collection and keeping of vital statistics and the records of the division of health, department of health, welfare and housing. 
G.  The dissemination of information relating to public health matters. 
(Prior code § 38-5) 
7.04.060 - Health officer-Appointment-Powers and duties-Departmental employees. 
A.  The director shall appoint a person, to be known as the health officer of the city, who shall be the executive officer and official representative of the director, and whose duties shall be: 
1.  To conduct the business of this title; 
2.  To enforce all statutes, ordinances and regulations relating to the protection and promotion of health; and 
3.  The health officer shall be the person to whom all reports required by law or by this title shall be made, in the absence of statutory provisions to the contrary. Prior to appointment, a health officer shall be licensed as health officer by the State Department of Health. 
B.  The director shall, within the budget appropriations of the department, employ inspectors, nurses, clerks or other persons as may be deemed necessary to assist the health officer in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Prior code § 38-6) 
7.04.070 - Employee licenses. 
    Employees shall be licensed as may be required by law. 
(Prior code § 38-7) 
Article II - License Suspension and Revocation 

7.04.080 - Suspensions or revocations for cause-Hearing. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this title, or except where otherwise provided by state law, upon proof of violation of any of the provisions of this title, or violation of the rules and regulations authorized by this title, any license issued under this title, after notice and hearing, may be revoked by the director or authorized agent, and any license may be suspended pending such hearing. 
(Prior code § 38-274) 
7.04.090 - Effect of suspension or revocation. 
    Whenever a license is suspended or revoked, the license shall be delivered immediately to the division and all operations in connection therewith shall cease at the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 38-276) 
7.04.100 - Service of notices. 
    All notices with reference to suspensions or revocations shall be either given to the licensee or addressed to the licensed premises or to the licensee's home address as set forth in the application, and sent by regular mail. 
(Prior code § 38-277) 
Chapter 7.08 - AIR POLLUTION 
Sections: 

7.08.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Air pollution" means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the city and in such territories of the city as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationship as the health and safety hazards. 
    "Approved type" means approved by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection. 
    "Auxiliary fuel" means fuel, other than waste materials, used to attain temperatures sufficiently high to: 
1.  Dry and ignite waste materials; 
2.  Maintain ignition thereof; or 
3.  Effect complete combustion of combustible solids, vapors and gases. 
    "Control apparatus" means any device which prevents or controls the emission of any air contaminant from going into the outdoor atmosphere. 
    "Department" means the department of health, welfare and housing. 
    "Direct heat exchanger" means equipment in which heat from the combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the total effluent. 
    "Director" means the director of health, welfare and housing. 
    "Economic poisons" means those chemicals used as insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants. 
    "Existing incinerator" means an incinerator purchased, acquired, constructed or used before August 15, 1968. 
    "Fuel" means solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by burning. 
    "Fuel-burning equipment" means any furnace, marine installation, internal-combustion engine, boiler apparatus, device, mechanism, stack or structure used in the process of burning fuel or other combustible material. 
    "Garbage" means animal and vegetable matter originating in houses, kitchens, restaurants and hotels, produce markets, etc. 
    "Incinerator" means any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance, including, but not limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, trade waste, debris or scrap, or a facility for cremating human or animal remains. 
    "Indirect heat exchanger" means equipment in which heat from the combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conduction material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not contacted by, and adds nothing to, the products of combustion. 
    "Internal cross-sectional dimension" means any maximum linear perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section or the length or width of a rectangular cross section. 
    "Liquid particles" means particles which have volume but are not of rigid shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform homogenous films upon the surface of the collecting media. 
    "Manufacturing process" means any action, operation or treatment embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing, or processing factors, methods, or forms including, but not limited to, furnaces, kettles, ovens, converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters, crushers, grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers, columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers, washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers. 
    "Marine installation" means equipment for propulsion, power or heating on all types of marine craft and floating equipment within the jurisdictional waters of the city. 
    "Mobile source" means equipment designed or constructed to be portable or movable from one location to another, including, but not limited to, aircraft locomotives operating on rails, tractors, earth moving equipment, hoists and mobile power generators. 
    "Motor vehicle" means and includes all vehicles propelled by means other than by muscular power, including those on rails. 
    "Multiple-chamber incinerator" means an incinerator with two or more refractory-lined combustion chambers in series physically separated by refractory walls, interconnected by gas passages, and employing adequate design parameters necessary for maximum combustion of the waste materials. 
    "New incinerator" means an incinerator purchased or constructed after August 15, 1968. 
    "Odor" means the property of a substance which affects or excites the sense of smell. 
    "Opacity" means the property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed as the percentage to which the light is obstructed. 
    "Open air or outdoor atmosphere" means a space outside of buildings or structures, stacks or exterior ducts. 
    "Open burning" means any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney. 
    "Particles" means any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard conditions. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, association, society, joint stock company, partnership, governmental unit and their agents or employees. 
    "Process equipment" means equipment other than fuel-burning equipment and incinerators. 
    "Refuse" means garbage, rubbish and trade waste. 
    "Ringelmann smoke chart" means the Ringelmann scale for grading the density of smoke published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density which is approved by the department as the equivalent of the Ringelmann scale. 
    "Rubbish" means solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, including, but not limited to, rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar material. 
    "Salvage operations" means any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including, but not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums. 
    "Single flue-fed incinerator" means an incinerator provided with a single flue which serves as both the charging chute and the flue to transport products of combustion to the atmosphere. 
    "Smoke" means small gasborne and airborne particles exclusive of water vapor, arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable. 
    "Smoke alarm" means any device that will alert the operator of an incinerator or any fuel-burning equipment that the smoke levels of the equipment have reached such a density as to cause a violation of this chapter. 
    "Solid particles" means particles of rigid shape and definite volume. 
    "Spark arrester" means a screen-like device at the top of a stack or chimney that will prevent sparks, embers or other ignited materials from being expelled into the atmosphere. 
    "Stack" or "chimney" means a flue, conduit or opening permitting particulate or gaseous emissions into the open air, or constructed or arranged for such purpose. 
    "Standard conditions" means seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit and one atmosphere pressure (14.7 psia or seven hundred sixty (760) mm Hg). 
    "Trade waste" means all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other forms of solid or liquid waste material. 
    "Visible smoke" means smoke which obscures light to a degree readily discernible by visual observation. 
(Prior code § 38-280) 
7.08.020 - Prohibition of air pollution from smoke. 
A.  Smoke Emissions From Stationary Indirect Heat Exchanges. 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of less than two hundred million (200,000,000) BTU gross heat input or discharging through a stack or chimney having an internal cross-sectional dimension of less than sixty (60) inches. 
2.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann smoke chart or greater than twenty (20) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of two hundred million (200,000,000) BTU or greater gross heat input or discharging through a stack or chimney having all internal cross-sectional dimensions of sixty (60) inches or greater. 
3.  The provisions of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in any consecutive thirty (30) minute period. 
B.  Smoke Alarm and Recording Devices. 
1.  The director or authorized agent may require the owner of fuel-burning equipment to install a smoke alarm, which is designed to sound an alarm when the smoke emissions exceed those permitted by this chapter. 
2.  Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or use of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the department, provide the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the density or opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air and shall conduct such smoke tests using methods approved by the department. All smoke test data shall be recorded in a permanent log at such time intervals as specified by the department. The data shall be maintained for a period of not less than one year and shall be available for review by the department. 
C.  Soot-Blowing Equipment. 
1.  The installation of soot-blowing equipment for the removal of soot from boilers by causing the soot to be discharged into the outdoor atmosphere shall be prohibited on all new installations. 
2.  Soot-blowing shall be conducted during daylight hours only. 
3.  All boilers and heating equipment shall be maintained in a clean and efficient operating condition through periodic cleaning and maintenance. 
D.  Smoke Emissions From Marine Installations. 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann smoke chart or greater than twenty (20) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in the indirect heat exchanger of any marine installation. 
2.  The provisions of subsection (D)(1) of this section shall not apply to smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in any consecutive thirty (30) minute period. 
E.  Smoke Emissions From the Combustion of Fuel in Mobile Sources. 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann smoke chart or greater than forty (40) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any mobile source for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive seconds. 
F.  Smoke Emissions From Stationary Internal Combustion Engines and Stationary Turbine Engines. 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann smoke chart or greater than twenty (20) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary internal combustion engine or any stationary turbine engine for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive seconds. 
G.  Exceptions. 
1.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to direct heat exchangers, manufacturing processes or any motor vehicle while operating upon public highways. 
H.  Sealing or Shutting Down Equipment. 
1.  Any person owning, operating or in charge of fuel-burning equipment who has been convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this section three times within any consecutive twelve (12) month period may be directed to show cause at a hearing before the director or authorized agent why the fuel-burning equipment causing such violations should not be sealed. The director or authorized agent shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of such hearings. Failure to present evidence that adequate means and methods have been employed to correct the cause of such violations shall be authorization for the director to order sealed or shut down the equipment until such time as satisfactory corrective action shall have been taken. 
2.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any fuel-burning equipment shut down or sealed by the department unless permission is granted in writing by the director or authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 38-281) 
7.08.030 - Prohibition of air pollution from incinerators-Construction standards. 
A.  Multiple Chambers. 
1.  No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any new incinerator unless such is of the multiple-chamber type or of a type approved by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection as being equally effective for the purpose of air pollution control. 
2.  Effective August 15, 1970, no person shall use or cause to be used any existing incinerator unless such incinerator is of the multiple-chamber type or of a type approved by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection as being equally effective for the purpose of air pollution control. 
3.  No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any new single flue-fed incinerator. 
B.  Stacks and Chimneys. 
1.  All stacks or chimneys from incinerators, hereafter installed shall be at least five feet higher than any building within a one hundred fifty (150) foot radius of the stack or chimney of the incinerator. 
2.  All spark arresters on incinerators, stacks or chimneys shall be made of fire-resistant mesh screen or equivalent fire-resistant material with openings no larger than one-fourth by one-fourth inch and must be kept in good repair at all times. 
C.  Automatic Temperature Controls. Effective August 15, 1970, all incinerators shall have automatic temperature control devices and indicators to activate any auxiliary firing devices for proper operation of all incinerators while in operation. An automatic firing device will not be necessary if auxiliary fire is on and at a proper temperature to control pollution emissions all through the burning period of the incinerator. 
D.  Smoke Alarms. 
1.  No person shall construct or install any new incinerator unless such incinerator is provided with an automatic smoke alarm with the sensitive element set at a suitable location in the breeching or stack. The alarm system shall be maintained in good working order at all times. 
2.  The director or authorized agent may require the owner of an existing incinerator to install a smoke alarm, which is designed to sound an alarm when the smoke emissions exceed those permitted by this chapter. 
E.  Emission Standards. 
1.  Particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of any particles from any incinerator which are individually or collectively large enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere. 
2.  Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell in any area of human use or occupancy. 
3.  Smoke. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann smoke chart, to be emitted into the outdoor atmosphere, or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney, to a degree greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann smoke chart. 
F.  Permit to Construct and Certificate to Operate Incinerators. 
1.  No person shall construct or install any new incinerator or any new control apparatus, or alter any existing incinerator or any existing control apparatus, without first having obtained a permit to construct, install or alter control apparatus or equipment from the State Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IX of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code. 
2.  No person shall use or cause to be used any new or altered incinerator or any new altered control apparatus without first having obtained a certificate to operate control apparatus or equipment from the State Department of Environmental Protection, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IX of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code. 
3.  No person shall operate, and no owner or operator of any incinerator shall permit the operation of, any incinerator without first having obtained a duly issued permit to operate an incinerator issued by the director of health, welfare and housing or authorized agent. 
4.  No person shall be issued a permit to operate an incinerator unless a certificate to operate is first obtained by the State Department of Environmental Protection according to Chapter IX of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, where applicable. 
5.  Application for permits to operate an incinerator shall be made to the director of health, welfare and housing or authorized agent on forms provided for this purpose. The applicants shall provide such information as may be deemed necessary to determine the nature of the installation, the exact location, the safety and fire protection devices, a description of the air pollution control equipment; the name, address, and day and night telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the operation and maintenance of the incinerator, and other related information as required. 
6.  A permit shall not be issued for any incinerator unless it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits may be conditioned, at the discretion of the director or authorized agent, on improvements being made within a prescribed time or on certain operating restrictions if necessary to comply with this chapter. 
7.  The director of health, welfare and housing or authorized agent may revoke or suspend the permit for failure to comply with any section of this chapter. 
8.  The director of health, welfare and housing or authorized agent may order an incinerator sealed for operating without a permit pending a hearing in municipal court. 
9.  Each incinerator shall require a permit for which the annual fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) payable to the department of health and human services. 
10.  There shall be an exemption on the payment of fees for necessary permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in the following categories: 
a.  Charitable and nonprofit organizations including hospitals, churches and schools; 
b.  Board of education building; 
c.  Housing authority complexes; 
d.  New York Port Authority; and 
e.  All governmental buildings. 
11.  All permits expire on December 31st of each year and all renewal applications must be obtained on or before this date or incinerators will be in violation of this chapter. 
G.  Operation. 
1.  Any person in possession of a permit and certificate to operate an incinerator shall maintain such permit and certificate readily available on the operating premises as close as practical to the incinerator, in an official permit holder provided for that purpose by the city division of air pollution control. 
2.  All owners, operators or persons responsible for any incinerator shall secure from the manufacturer or builder of the incinerator such maintenance and operational instructions as to the proper operation and maintenance of that particular incinerator. Such instructions shall be at a convenient place as near as practical to the point of operation. The director or authorized agent may require the posting of additional instructions. The applicable local and state regulations shall be distributed by the owner to each person or persons who have responsibility for the maintenance and operation of such incinerator. 
3.  No person shall use or cause to be used any incinerator unless all components connected or attached to or serving the incinerator, including control apparatus, are functioning properly and are in use in accordance with the permit to construct and the permit and certificate to operate. 
4.  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any incinerator prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. and all operations shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including complete extinguishing of the fire and removal of materials from the firebox to a noncombustible container in a safe manner; provided, however, that the director or authorized agent may by special permit, because of exceptional circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such conditions as he or she shall deem necessary for health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons in the vicinity. 
H.  Sealing of Incinerators. 
1.  Where the operation of the incinerator constitutes an immediate and substantial menace to public health and safety or is a source of air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in the vicinity, and the owner or operator fails upon written or oral notice to take immediate corrective measures, the director or authorized agent may take all necessary action to abate the condition, including, but not limited to, ordering the cessation or use of the equipment and sealing the same, pending a hearing in municipal court. 
2.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an incinerator shut down or sealed by the department unless permission is granted in writing by the director or authorized agent. 
3.  Whenever an incinerator has been shut down for any reason whatsoever, other suitable means for disposal of garbage and rubbish must be obtained, and must be disposed of so as not to violate any other city or state codes. 
(Ord. 3726 § 4, 2005; prior code § 38-282) 
7.08.040 - Prohibition of air pollution from open burning. 
A.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of any material, including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, rubbish, plant life, trade wastes, nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning; nor shall open fires be used to supply heat for any purposes, exceptions being: 
1.  For the limited purposes of outdoor cooking where done with equipment or fireplaces designed for such purpose and in a manner as not to become offensive or a nuisance to persons in the vicinity. 
2.  Fires ignited solely for the purposes of training or research in fire prevention at a permanent training site. 
3.  Flares or other signal devices for the prevention of accidents or warning of safety hazards. 
4.  Smokeless flares or safety flares for the combustion of waste gases. 
5.  Oxygen-acetylene welding and cutting, propane brazing and other similar operations. 
B.  Where no other alternative means is available without hazard to health or property, trade waste may be disposed of by open burning upon special permit issued by the director or authorized agent after application is made therefor and it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director or authorized agent that: 
1.  An affidavit has been filed with and approved by the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with Chapter II, Section 1.4 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code. 
2.  Disposition can be made without danger to persons or property, with proper safeguards and supervisions. 
3.  Disposition will be done in a manner, at such a time and in such a place as will minimize the possibility of air pollution. 
4.  The fire department has approved the application. 
    Special permits shall be temporary and shall limit the burning as to character, quantity, time, place and condition of burning. 
C.  Special permits authorizing open-air burning for special events conducted by, for and under supervision of public, charitable, religious or nonprofit civic community organizations may be issued by the director or authorized agent upon application showing the purpose, time, place, date and manner of supervision and control, provided that the activities are not prohibited by the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, that no undue or unnecessary air pollution shall be caused thereby, and that supervision and control thereof is adequate to protect the public safety, health and welfare. Prior approval by the fire department is required in writing. 
(Prior code § 38-283) 
7.08.050 - Prohibition of air pollution from particulates. 
A.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted from any stack or chimney into the outdoor air the shade or appearance of which is greater than twenty (20) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor. 
B.  The above provisions shall not apply to particles, the shade or appearance of which is greater than twenty (20) percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than three minutes in any consecutive thirty (30) minute period. 
(Prior code § 38-284) 
7.08.060 - Prohibition of air pollution. 
A.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the outdoor atmosphere, substances in quantities which shall result in air pollution. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to: 
1.  Any condition or occurrence which is subject to the provisions of existing or future code chapters promulgated by the city council. 
2.  The use of economic poisons unless such economic poisons are used in a manner as to create a nuisance. 
B.  The following shall be for illustrative purposes only, and in no way shall limit the scope of this chapter: 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer or allow solid or liquid particles from, but not limited to, any process, manufacture, altering or repairing, construction or demolition, land clearing, spraying of any type, surface coatings, dippings or coating renewal, sand-blasting, grinding and other similar operations, to be emitted into outdoor atmosphere which will result in air pollution. 
2.  No person shall cause, suffer or allow any particles from, but not limited to, any parking areas, vacant lots, plots of land, rights-of-way, driveways, sidewalks, buildings, porches, steps, etc., to become airborne into the outdoor atmosphere which will result in air pollution. 
3.  No person shall cause, suffer or allow any particles from, but not limited to, any car, truck, bus or any other private or commercial vehicle unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any particles from becoming airborne, which will result in air pollution. 
4.  No person shall drive or move or cause to be moved or driven any, but not limited to, cars, trucks, buses or any other private or commercial vehicles if the vehicles carry onto or deposit or cause to become airborne upon any street, alley, private or public place, particles or substances of any kind which will result in air pollution. 
5.  No person shall cause, suffer or allow any particulate matter to be handled and stored in such a manner which allows or may allow the particulate matter to become airborne and result in air pollution. 
6.  No person shall cause, suffer, permit or allow any odorous matter, vapor, gases, particulates or any combination thereof to cause air pollution. 
7.  It is unlawful to cause, suffer, allow or permit a stationary or mobile internal combustion engine to emit smoke, fumes, volatile matter, vapors or odors in a quantity that would cause air pollution during its operation. 
8.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a motor vehicle to run for more than three consecutive minutes while it is stationary upon, but not limited to, any street, parking area, garage, etc. 
9.  Subsection (B)(8) of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle while it is standing in traffic, or to electric motor vehicles. 
(Prior code § 38-285) 
7.08.070 - Source registration. 
A.  All industrial, manufacturing or commercial operations within the city, when requested by the director or authorized agent, shall submit an emission inventory and such other pertinent information (location of specific sources) as may be requested on forms provided for that purpose by the director or authorized agent. The application forms shall also require the submission of the name, address and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for day and night operation and maintenance of the industrial, manufacturing or commercial operations (if applicable). Any change in name, address or telephone number of such person or persons shall be reported within ten (10) days of the occurrence of such change to the director or authorized agent. 
B.  Confidentiality of Records. Any records or other information which relate to processes or production unique to the owner or operator, or which would tend to adversely affect the competitive position of such owner or operator, shall be only for the confidential use of the department and other departments, agencies and officers of the jurisdiction, unless such owner or operator shall expressly agree to their publication or availability to the general public. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the use of such records or information by any department, agency or officer of the jurisdiction, in compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the general condition of the outdoor atmosphere; provided that such analyses or summaries do not reveal any information otherwise confidential under this section. 
(Prior code § 38-286) 
7.08.080 - Inspections and right of entry. 
A.  All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspection and for the purpose of the collection of any legal sample or samples from time to time by the director or duly authorized representative. All rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such inspection, which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be made at other times if: 
1.  The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for inspection. 
2.  There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the prescribed hours. 
3.  There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and abatement without delay. 
B.  Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the director has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with R.S. 26:2C-26 to 26:2C-36, and all persons within the city shall comply therewith. Whether the director or duly authorized agent is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties under this code. 
C.  The director may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge of the municipal court of the city for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a violation of the code may exist on the premises, including one or more of the following: 
1.  That the premises require inspection according to the cycle established by the city for periodic inspections of premises of the type involved. 
2.  That observation of external conditions (including but not limited to, smoke, ash, soot, odors, etc.) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this chapter exist. 
3.  Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or other factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings necessary in the interest of public health and safety. 
    If the judge of the municipal court of the city is satisfied as to the matters set forth in such affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the violation may exist. 
(Prior code § 38-287) 
Chapter 7.12 - ANIMAL DISEASES AND NUISANCES 
Sections: 

7.12.010 - Report by veterinarian or lay person required. 
    Every veterinarian who shall attend any animal in the city affected with or suspected to be affected with anthrax, glanders, farcy, foot-and-mouth disease, rabies, tuberculosis or any other communicable disease shall file with the department within twelve (12) hours thereafter, a written report stating the name of the disease, the kind of animal, the precise location of such animal, the name and address of the owner or person in charge thereof and any other necessary information regarding the animal so affected. In case no veterinarian shall attend such animal, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge thereof to file such report with the department. 
(Prior code § 38-202) 
7.12.020 - Isolation required-Destruction authorized. 
    The owner or person in charge of any animal affected with or suspected to be affected with any disease mentioned in Section 7.12.010, or with any other communicable disease shall isolate or restrict such animal and follow such precautions in such manner and for such length of time as the health officer may direct. The health officer shall have the power to order the destruction of animals so affected, and it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge thereof to comply immediately with the terms of such order. The health officer shall not be liable for the value of any animal so destroyed. 
(Prior code § 38-203) 
7.12.030 - Bites by rabid animals-Isolation or destruction. 
    Whenever any animal shall be bitten by any animal affected with rabies, the owner or person in charge of the animal so bitten shall, according as the health officer may order, either have such animal destroyed or have it isolated for a period of six months. 
(Prior code § 38-204) 
7.12.040 - Bites by animals-Powers of health officer. 
A.  The health officer or authorized agent shall serve notice upon the owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal which has attacked or bitten a person, to confine the animal for at least ten (10) days after the animal has attacked or bitten a person, at the expense of the owner or person in charge. The designated place of confinement shall be at a place owned, operated, controlled and/or supervised by a licensed veterinarian; or at a designated place of confinement authorized by the health officer or designated agent; or the designated place of confinement for at least ten (10) days after the animal has attacked or bitten a person shall be at the city dog pound for which the city shall bear the expense. 
B.  An animal confined under order of the health officer shall not be released by the health officer or agent designated by the health officer until a certificate of release has been obtained from a licensed veterinarian. This certificate of release must be obtained no later than ten (10) days after the expiration date of confinement of the attacking or biting animal. 
(Prior code § 38-205) 
7.12.050 - Kennels, pet shops and shelters-Approval required for operation. 
    Before establishing or operating a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a pound, an application to the division shall be required in which the premises where the establishment is located is described and the purpose for which it is to be maintained. The application must receive the written approval of the health officer showing compliance with the local and state ordinances and statutes governing sanitation at such establishments. 
(Prior code § 38-209) 
7.12.060 - Nuisances by dogs prohibited. 
    No person owning or having custody of or care of a dog shall knowingly or negligently permit any dog to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk of any public street or other thoroughfare; nor upon any crosswalk of any public street or thoroughfare; nor in or upon any public building or any paved approach to such building from the street; nor in or upon any public park or public playground; nor shall any such person omit to do any reasonable and proper act nor omit to take any reasonable and proper precaution to prevent any such dog from committing a nuisance in, on or upon any of the places or premises herein specified. 
(Prior code § 38-210) 
7.12.070 - Diseased domestic animals-Control required-Duties of health officer. 
A.  No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place where the health of human or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the supervision of the division or the department of police. 
B.  It is the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Prior code § 38-211) 
Chapter 7.16 - BARBERSHOPS 
Sections: 

7.16.010 - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have the meanings stated in this section: 
    "Barbershop" means any premises where one or any combination of the following practices is done upon the scalp, face or neck for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease, and when done for payment, either directly or indirectly, or without payment for the public generally: shaving or trimming the beard or cutting the hair, giving facials and scalp massage or treatment with oils, creams, lotions or other preparations either by hand or mechanical appliances; singeing, shampooing or dying the hair or applying hair tonics; applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, powders, oils, clays or lotions to the scalp, face or neck. 
(Prior code § 38-240) 
7.16.020 - Certificate of registration required. 
    No person shall practice or attempt to practice barbering without a certificate of registration from the New Jersey State Department of Health. 
(Prior code § 38-241) 
7.16.030 - Sanitary regulations. 
    The following sanitary regulations shall apply: 
A.  All barbershops shall be well lighted and ventilated; and all furniture, equipment, tools and utensils therein, and the floors, walls and ceilings thereof, shall at all times be kept clean. 
B.  Suitable and sufficient toilet facilities must be provided in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of the city. 
C.  There shall be provided in each barbershop at least one washbasin constructed of nonabsorbent material provided with suitable fixtures and adequately supplied with running hot and cold water under pressure. 
D.  The use of cuspidors is prohibited in barbershops. 
E.  Before a patron shall be attended by any person in any barbershop, it shall be the duty of the person attending such patron to thoroughly wash and cleanse his or her hands with soap and hot water. 
F.  Any owner, manager, operator or employee suffering from any infectious or communicable disease shall forthwith cease his or her services in or about any barbershop licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Any tool or part thereof which comes into contact with the head, face or neck of the patron, such as razors, scissors, tweezers, combs and parts of vibrators, shall be immersed in boiling water or in alcohol of a strength of seventy (70) percent or higher, or treated by some other equally effective method acceptable to the health officer, before being used on each patron. 
H.  Any shaving mug and shaving brush shall be thoroughly rinsed in hot water immediately before use in serving a patron. 
I.  No towel used directly or indirectly by or for any person shall again be put into use without first having been thoroughly laundered. 
J.  Separate receptacles shall be provided for clean and soiled towels. 
K.  All headrests shall be covered with a clean towel or clean paper covering for each and every patron. 
L.  No styptic pencils, finger bowls, sponge, lump alum or powder puff shall be used except of the individual-applicator type. 
M.  The use of soap in any form other than paste, liquid, cream or powder is prohibited. 
N.  There shall be placed about the neck of each patron served a clean towel or other clean material to prevent the haircloth touching the skin of the patron. 
O.  No room used as a barbershop shall be used as a sleeping room, food store, restaurant or lunchroom unless separated therefrom by a substantial partition extending from floor to ceiling. 
(Prior code § 38-242) 
7.16.040 - Inspections-Interference with authorized officials prohibited. 
    All authorized agents of the director are vested with the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the right to enter upon and inspect any barbershop at any time during business hours; and all persons are forbidden to interfere or obstruct in any way such representatives of the director while making an inspection, examination or survey of a barbershop. 
(Prior code § 38-243) 
Chapter 7.20 - COMMUNICABLE AND REPORTABLE DISEASES 
Sections: 

7.20.010 - Reportable diseases and conditions-Information required. 
    The following diseases and conditions are declared to be reportable, and it shall be the duty of every physician within twelve (12) hours after the disease has been diagnosed, to report the name, age, disease or condition and the precise location of the person so affected to the health officer. 
1.  Amebiasis; 
2.  Anthrax; 
3.  Botulism; 
4.  Brucellosis; 
3.  Cholera; 
6.  Dengue; 
7.  Diarrhea of newborn; 
8.  Diphtheria; 
9.  Epilepsy; 
10.  Dog bite; 
11.  Food poisonings; 
12.  Glanders; 
13.  Infectious encephalitis; 
14.  Infectious hepatitis, including serum hepatitis; 
15.  Leprosy; 
16.  Leptospirosis; 
17.  Malaria; 
18.  Meningococcal meningitis; 
19.  Ophthalmia neonatorum; 
20.  Plague; 
21.  Pneumonia, all forms; 
22.  Poliomyelitis; 
23.  Psittacosis; 
24.  Q fever; 
25.  Rabies; 
26.  Rocky Mountain spotted fever; 
27.  Salmonellosis (other than typhoid fever); 
28.  Shigellosis; 
29.  Smallpox; 
30.  Tetanus; 
31.  Trachoma; 
32.  Trichinosis; 
33.  Tuberculosis, all forms; 
34.  Tularemia; 
35.  Typhoid fever; 
36.  Typhus fever; 
37.  Yellow fever; and 
38.  Lead poisoning. 
(Prior code § 38-11) 
7.20.020 - Designation of communicable diseases. 
    All diseases or conditions except for those in section 7.20.010(3), (9), (10), (15), (30) and (38) are declared to be communicable for the purposes of this chapter. (Amended during 2004 codification; prior code § 38-12) 
7.20.030 - Additional reports by physicians required. 
    Physicians having knowledge of any outbreak of a disease not listed in Section 7.20.010 or of unusual manifestations of disease shall report the facts to the health officer in whose jurisdiction the condition exists, who shall make an investigation and submit a report thereof to the State Department of Health. 
(Prior code § 38-13) 
7.20.040 - Lay person's report required. 
    Every house owner or householder who shall know of, or have reason to suspect the existence of, any person affected with any disease or condition mentioned in Section 7.20.010, who is in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or her and who is not being attended by a physician, shall report immediately to the health officer the existence of such person, making such report as to the name, address, age and sex of the person having or suspected of having such disease or condition. 
(Prior code § 38-14) 
7.20.050 - Report and action by school official required. 
    The principal or person in charge of every school shall immediately exclude from school or isolate any child or person in such school who appears to be affected with any communicable disease mentioned in Section 7.20.010, and shall immediately report such fact to the health officer, together with the name and address of such child or person and the supposed nature of the disease. 
(Prior code § 38-15) 
7.20.060 - Placards for premises authorized. 
    Whenever a communicable disease as listed in Section 7.20.010 exists in any house or upon any premises, the health officer or authorized agent may cause a placard stating the name of the disease to be posted in a conspicuous place upon such house or premises, and no person shall conceal, mutilate, destroy or remove such placard except by authority of the health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-16) 
7.20.070 - Quarantine of persons authorized. 
    Every person affected with, suspected to be affected with or exposed to any communicable disease mentioned in Section 7.20.010 shall, until officially released by the health officer, be quarantined, isolated or restricted according to the rules and regulations of the director, and shall follow such precautions to prevent the spread or transfer of such disease as this chapter may direct. 
(Prior code § 38-17) 
7.20.080 - Regulations governing quarantined premises. 
    No person shall enter or leave the house or premises where any person is quarantined or isolated by reason of being affected with or having been exposed to any communicable disease mentioned in Section 7.20.010, except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the director and by permission granted by the health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-18) 
7.20.090 - Regulations governing identification, treatment and control of venereal diseases. 
A.  Syphilis, gonorrhea, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale and chancroid are declared to be infectious and communicable venereal diseases and dangerous to the public health. Whenever the director or the health officer of the city shall receive a report from any practicing physician, nurse, welfare worker, health inspector or any authorized officer or attache of any court of the city that any person within the jurisdiction of the director or health officer is suffering from or infected with gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or chancroid in a communicable stage, and such person cannot furnish satisfactory evidence that he or she is being treated for the suspected infection by a physician licensed to practice medicine in New Jersey, the director or health officer may cause a medical examination to be made of such person for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such person is in fact infected with any of the abovementioned venereal diseases in a communicable stage; and it shall be the duty of every such person to submit to such examination and to permit such specimens of blood or bodily discharges to be taken for laboratory examinations as may be necessary to establish the presence or absence of such disease or infection in a communicable stage. 
B.  All persons recently convicted on charges involving sex offenses or who are known to have been exposed to infection of any disease designated in subsection A of this section shall be included under the class of "suspected persons" described in subsection A of this section and may be required to submit to examination at any time; but no certificate of freedom from gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or chancroid, except a health certificate required for a marriage license or for working purposes, shall be issued. 
C.  If a person infected with any disease mentioned in this section, in a communicable stage, shall fail to report to his or her physician, for treatment by the physician when directed so to do, such physician shall report such failure on the part of such person to the health officer, giving the name and address of such person and the disease with which he or she is infected, and the health officer may thereupon require the person to be examined as provided for in subsection A of this section 
D.  Any such person described in subsections A, B or C of this section who refuses to submit to the examination provided for in subsection A of this section, or who refuses to supply or permit to be taken the specimens provided for in the section, or who, upon examination, is found to be infected with gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or chancroid in a communicable stage, and not to be regularly treated by a licensed physician, and refuses or neglects to secure such treatment by a private physician or at a clinic provided for such purpose, and to remain under treatment until discharged as being no longer in a communicable stage, shall be isolated at home or in a hospital and shall take such precautions to prevent spread of the disease as the health officer may direct. 
E.  Cases of gonorrheal infection are to be regarded as communicable until adequate treatment, as specified by the State Department of Health, has been received by the patient, and until at least two successive smears, taken not less than forty-eight (48) hours apart, fail to show gonococci. Cases of syphilis shall be regarded as communicable until adequate treatment, as specified by the State Department of Health, has been received by the patient, or until the disease is of at least four years' duration. Cases of lymphogranuloma venereum granuloma inguinale or chancroid shall be regarded as infectious until all lesions have been fully healed. 
F.  All persons known to be, or suspected of being, sources of infection of any disease mentioned in this section, and all persons known to have been, or suspected of having been,, exposed to any such infection from these sources, shall be required to undergo such examination as prescribed in subsection A of this section, and if found infected shall undergo such treatment or isolation as provided for in subsection D of this section. 
G.  No person infected with any of these venereal diseases in a communicable stage shall conduct himself or herself in such a manner as to expose others to infection. No person shall be permitted to conduct a boarding home for children without first being examined as provided for in subsection A of this section. No person infected with gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or chancroid in a communicable stage shall engage in the nursing or care of children or of the sick, or in any other occupation of such nature that his or her infection may be transmitted to others. 
H.  No druggist, pharmacist or other person in the city shall sell, give away, prescribe or administer to any person any drug, medicine or preparation thereof intended to be used for the treatment, relief or cure of any disease mentioned in this section, except upon a written prescription of a physician licensed to practice medicine in New Jersey. 
I.  No person shall publish or distribute, or cause to be published or distributed, in the city, any advertisement concerning gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or chancroid, or any other sexual function, weakness or disorder, or calling attention to a medicine, article or preparation that may be used therefor, or to a person or persons or an office or place at which information, treatment or advice relative to such disease, function, weakness or disorder may be obtained; provided, that this regulation shall not apply to didactic or scientific treatises which do not advertise or call attention to any persons from whom or to any office or place at which information, treatment or advice concerning such disease, function, weakness or disorder may be obtained, nor shall it apply to advertisements or notices issued by a hospital or licensed dispensary, by the division or by the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 38-19) 
7.20.100 - Silver nitrate for eyes of newborn required. 
    Every physician, midwife, nurse or any other person in attendance at the birth of any child shall, for the prevention of ophthalmia neonatorum, use a one percent of silver nitrate in wax ampules or any other solution approved by the health officer, in each eye of such child. 
(Prior code § 38-20) 
7.20.110 - Spread of communicable diseases prohibited. 
    No person shall commit any act which may be liable to cause, contribute or promote the spread of any disease from any person affected with such disease, either by the exposure of any person not affected with such disease or by any negligent act connected with or in respect to the care or custody of the person affected. 
(Prior code § 38-21) 
7.20.120 - Hospitalization of certain infected persons authorized. 
    The health officer shall have the power to remove to a hospital or institution any person affected with scarlet fever (scarlatina), diphtheria, meningococcic (cerebrospinal) meningitis, smallpox, acute anterior poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), typhoid fever, tuberculosis or any other communicable disease which this chapter may so designate, whenever in the opinion of the health officer such removal is necessary to prevent further spread of such disease, or whenever the isolation of such person is not effective or is contrary to the rules and regulations of the director. 
(Prior code § 38-22) 
7.20.130 - Termination of quarantine-Disinfection of premises required. 
    Whenever the quarantine of a public or private building or premises is terminated by the health officer, such disinfection and cleansing as this chapter may require shall be performed immediately by the occupant of the public or private building or premises. 
(Prior code § 38-23) 
7.20.140 - Known exposures prohibited unless permitted. 
    No person shall bring into the city any person affected with any communicable disease mentioned in Section 7.20.010, without previously obtaining a permit from the division for that purpose. 
(Prior code § 38-24) 
7.20.150 - Required examinations-Powers of health officer. 
    Whenever the health officer shall deem it necessary to establish the true nature of any disease which may be communicable, the health officer may require any person or persons who may have been exposed to a communicable disease, to have a medical examination; and it shall be the duty of such person or persons to submit to such examination, and if necessary, to furnish specimens for examination in an approved laboratory. The medical examination may include a chest x-ray, tuberculin test, sputum examination, blood test or any standard or recognized method for determining the presence of communicable diseases that the health officer may prescribe. 
(Prior code § 38-25) 
7.20.160 - Regulations governing carriers of certain diseases. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all persons who harbor or carry the causative germs of diphtheria, typhoid fever or salmonella infections and who are commonly known as "carriers" shall be considered as being affected with such disease, and shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the director which relate to the quarantine, isolation and control of persons affected with such diseases. 
(Prior code § 38-26) 
7.20.170 - Unvaccinated persons-Exclusion from schools authorized. 
    The director or health officer may require and order the person in charge of any school under the jurisdiction of this chapter to exclude any or all unvaccinated children and teachers in such schools, and may specify the length of time for such exclusion; and any person who shall fail to comply with such order shall be subject to the penalty provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 38-27) 
7.20.180 - Powers of health officer in epidemics. 
    The director or health officer, in case of an epidemic or unusual prevalence of any communicable disease, may take such measures, order done and cause to be done such acts as may be deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health, and to that end may cause any and all schools within the territorial jurisdiction of this department, all churches, libraries, theaters, houses, buildings and other places where people are accustomed to congregate, to be closed for a specified period of time or until the epidemic or unusual prevalence of such communicable disease shall have ceased to exist. Any person who violates or neglects or refuses to comply with any measures or orders shall be subject to the penalty as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 38-28) 
7.20.190 - Maximum periods of incubation for certain communicable diseases. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the maximum period of incubation of the following communicable diseases is declared as follows: 
A.  Diphtheria, seven days; 
B.  Measles (rubeola), fourteen (14) days; 
C.  Meningococcal meningitis, seven days; 
D.  Pertussis (whooping cough), fourteen (14) days; 
E.  Poliomyelitis, fourteen (14) days; 
F.  Salmonellosis (other than typhoid fever), fourteen (14) days; 
G.  Smallpox, twenty-one (21) days; and 
H.  Streptococcal sore throat, including scarlet fever, seven days. 
(Prior code § 38-29) 
7.20.200 - Minimum periods of isolation-Quarantine for certain communicable diseases. 
    The minimum period of isolation and quarantine of persons who are isolated or quarantined because of illness or infection with the following communicable diseases shall be as follows: 
Isolation for Patient Quarantine for Contacts Diphtheria Until two successive cultures from the nose and two from the throat, taken not less than twenty-four (24) hours apart beginning at least seven days after cessation of drug therapy, if used, are found to be free from virulent diphtheria bacilli by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. Twenty-four (24) hours after satisfactory isolation of patient has been established, contacts may be released when one culture from the nose and another from the throat are found to be free from virulent diphtheria bacilli by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. 
If satisfactory isolation of patient has not been established, members of household shall be quarantined until the period of isolation of the last case in the household has been terminated and the release culture standards described above have been met. Measles (Rubeola) As soon as fever and catarrhal symptoms of the eyes, nose and throat are detected and until seven days after appearance of rash. Household contacts under eighteen (18) years who have not had measles shall be quarantined from the seventh to the fourteenth day after exposure. Meningococcus Meningitis Until seven days after onset or for the duration of fever, if longer. Household contacts under eighteen (18) years shall be quarantined for seven days. Pertussis (Whooping Cough) Until twenty-one (21) days after onset of the paroxysmal cough. No restrictions. Poliomyelitis (Infantile Paralysis) For seven days after onset or for the duration of fever, if longer. Intimate home contacts under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be quarantined for fourteen (14) days. Scarlet Fever (Including Streptococcal Sore Throat) In uncomplicated cases, until clinical recovery, or not less than seven days. Patients with complications resulting in purulent discharges shall be isolated as long as discharges persist. Home contacts under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be quarantined for seven days. Smallpox (Variola) Until fourteen (14) days after onset of illness and until all lesions are healed. Home contacts and other persons exposed to the risk of contracting smallpox by proximity to a case or suspected case of the disease shall be vaccinated and quarantined until vaccination is successful or until evidence of protection is established to the satisfaction of the local health officer. Persons released from quarantine shall be kept under observation for not less than twenty-one (21) days from the date of last exposure. 
Contacts who refuse to be vaccinated shall be quarantined for at least twenty-one (21) days from the date of last exposure and until discharged by the local health officer. Typhoid Fever Until clinical recovery and until three successive, authentic, fresh specimens of feces and urine, taken at intervals of not less than seven days beginning at least seven days after termination of specific drug therapy, have been reported negative for salmonella typhosa by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. Recovered cases shall submit, commencing ninety (90) days after discharge from isolation, at least four authentic, fresh stool specimens not less than three months apart. If any of the specimens in this period are positive for salmonella typhosa, the individual shall come under the regulations governing carriers. Family contacts need not be quarantined unless employed as food handlers. Family contacts who are food handlers shall not be employed as such during period of contact and until two cultures of authentic, fresh specimens of feces and urine, collected not less than twenty-four (24) hours apart, have been reported negative for salmonella typhosa by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. Salmonellosis (Other than Typhoid) Until clinical recovery and until three successive, authentic, fresh specimens of feces and urine, taken at intervals of not less than seven days beginning at least seven days after termination of specific drug therapy, have been reported negative for salmonella paratyphi, salmonella schottmuelleri and other salmonella organisms by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. Family contacts need not be quarantined unless employed as food handlers. Family contacts who are food handlers shall not be employed as such during period of contact and until two cultures of authentic, fresh specimens of feces and urine, collected not less than twenty-four (24) hours apart, have been reported negative for salmonella paratyphi, salmonella schottmuelleri and other salmonella organisms by a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination.  
(Prior code § 38-30) 
7.20.210 - Typhoid or salmonellosis cases-Duties of health officer. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the health officer when a person is ill or infected with typhoid fever within his or her jurisdiction, to keep such case under supervision until clinical recovery and until three successive, authentic, fresh specimens of the intestinal discharges and urine, taken at intervals of not less than seven days beginning at least seven days after termination of specific drug therapy, have been found to be free from salmonella typhosa, the examination to be made in a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examinations. 
B.  A health officer shall require persons who have been ill with typhoid fever to submit, commencing ninety (90) days after clinical recovery, at least four authentic, fresh specimens of intestinal discharges not less than three months apart, to a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examinations. If any of the specimens in this period are positive for salmonella typhosa, the individual shall be considered a carrier of the causative agent of typhoid fever. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the health officer when a person is ill or infected with salmonellosis (other than typhoid fever) within his or her jurisdiction, to keep such person under supervision until clinical recovery and until three successive, authentic, fresh specimens of intestinal discharges and urine, taken at intervals of not less than seven days beginning at least seven days after termination of specific drug therapy, have been found to be free from salmonella paratyphi and salmonella schottmuelleri and other salmonella organisms, the examination to be made in a laboratory approved by the State Department of Health for such examination. 
(Prior code § 38-31) 
7.20.220 - Food and dairy products-Investigation for contamination-Permit. 
    When a person is ill with any communicable disease which may be transmitted through food, or who is infected with the causative agent of any such disease on any dairy or other premises where food intended for sale or distribution is manufactured, packed, stored or otherwise handled, such food shall not be sold or distributed from such dairy or other premises unless a written permit for the sale or distribution of such foods shall have been issued by the health officer or by a representative of the State Department of Health. 
(Prior code § 38-32) 
7.20.230 - Contaminated foods-Treatment required-Destruction authorized. 
    Food intended for sale or distribution which is manufactured, packed, stored or otherwise handled on any premises upon which a person ill or infected with a disease transmissible by food worked or was permitted to work, visit, board or otherwise frequent may be destroyed or ordered destroyed by the health officer or by the State Department of Health if such food is considered so contaminated as to be liable to cause disease, or the food may be ordered to be treated in a manner that will eliminate contamination. 
(Prior code § 38-33) 
7.20.240 - Regulations governing food handlers-Physical examinations. 
A.  Persons ill or infected with a communicable disease which may be transmitted through food are prohibited from working in any establishment where food intended for sale or distribution is manufactured, packed, stored or otherwise handled. 
B.  Persons who reside, board, lodge or visit in a household where they may come in contact with any person ill or infected with a communicable disease which may be transmitted through food are prohibited from working in any establishment where food intended for sale or distribution is manufactured, packed, stored or otherwise handled unless permission is granted by the health officer or the State Department of Health. 
C.  Persons employed in any establishment where food intended for sale or distribution is manufactured, packed, stored or otherwise handled may be required to submit to a physical examination for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not they are ill or infected with a communicable disease, whenever in the judgment of the health officer or the State Department of Health such examination may be necessary. 
(Prior code § 38-34) 
7.20.250 - Lead poisoning. 
A.  Investigation of Cases of Elevated Blood Lead Levels. 
1.  The health officer shall make an epidemiologic investigation of children showing blood lead levels of forty (40) micrograms per one hundred (100) grams or higher. Other siblings shall be referred for diagnosis and/or treatment if necessary. 
2.  The family of the case shall be notified that a hazard may exist in the dwelling unit, counseled on preventive measures and requested to do their part in preventing children from chewing on painted surfaces and in sweeping up chips and flakes of paint. 
B.  Determination of Lead in Dwelling Units. 
1.  Sampling. A minimum of two paint samples shall be collected from each suspect room which should include a windowsill and door or door frame. In addition, samples should also be collected from other highly suspected areas, such as crib railings, playpen railings, stairs or banisters and surfaces with loose paint. Preferred locations to be sampled should include surfaces which have been chewed or eaten, suspected of having been chewed or eaten or areas which are peeling or flaking. All interior sampling should generally be limited to that part of the surface which may eventually be required to be removed. 
2.  Methods for Determination of Lead in Surface Coverings. 
a.  The chemical determination of the lead content in paint by the quantitative measurements of samples of surface coverings shall be made in laboratories certified by the New Jersey State Department of Health. Lead content in paint in excess of five-hundredths percent by dry weight shall be in violation. 
3.  The physical determination of the lead content of paint may be made by nondestructive measurements using radioisotope X-ray fluorescent analyzers (X-RF) or other instruments approved by the New Jersey State Department of Health. Lead content in paint in excess of two milligrams per square centimeter of paint surface when tested by this method shall be in violation. 
C.  Standards for Repair on Premises Containing Lead Paint. 
1.  Loose lead paint, including cracked, chipped, blistered, peeling or flaking paint, shall be removed to the base surface wherever found. 
2.  Tight lead paint shall be removed to the base surface in the following areas as indicated: 
a.  Windowsills, complete removal; 
b.  Windows and frames below four-foot level, complete removal on exposed surfaces; 
c.  Doors below four-foot level, removal four inches back on hinge and latch edges and other sharp edges; 
d.  Door frames below four-foot level, complete removal; 
e.  Handrails, complete removal; 
f.  Spindles and balusters, removal on surfaces adjacent to walking areas; 
g.  Stair treads, removal four inches back from lip on top of tread and from lip to riser on bottom side; and 
h.  Any other surface presenting a chewable surface below four-foot level, removal four inches back from edge. 
3.  Tight lead paint surfaces not requiring removal: 
a.  Walls in good condition without broken areas; 
b.  Baseboards; 
c.  Skirtboards on staircases; 
d.  Step risers; and 
e.  Any surface below the four-foot level not presenting a chewable surface. 
4.  In lieu of removal of the lead paint as specified above, surfaces shall be covered with plasterboard, wallboard, wood paneling or similar durable material approved by the health officer, to a height of four feet above the floor. 
5.  Any condition, such as a plumbing leak, causing peeling of paint or loosening of plaster shall be repaired prior to any of the repairs specified above. 
6.  Upon completion of the repair and prior to repainting, an inspection shall be made by the health officer to determine if the hazard has been satisfactorily eliminated. All repairs may be finished with a suitable nonlead paint or other hard nonlead surface. 
7.  When an owner has been notified to comply with regulations relating to the removal of lead paint, the health officer shall provide the owner of such dwelling units with safety standards to be used when removing the lead paint. 
D.  Reporting. 
1.  All laboratories shall immediately report results of laboratory examinations indicating blood lead levels in excess of forty (40) micrograms per one hundred (100) milliliters of whole blood to the health officer and to the physician submitting the specimen. 
2.  The health officer shall report monthly to the director all violations under this chapter and the status of enforcement procedures against owners of properties designated as public nuisances. 
(Prior code § 38-35) 
Chapter 7.24 - FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 

7.24.010 - Adoption of code by reference. 
    A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations, is established pursuant to Revised Statutes 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the code is annexed to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 38-60) 
7.24.020 - Title. 
    The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and commonly known as the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961). 
(Prior code § 38-61) 
7.24.030 - Filing. 
    Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the office of the city clerk and the office of the health officer upon the introduction of the ordinance codified in this chapter and will remain on file there until final action is taken on such ordinance, for the use and examination of the public. 
(Prior code § 38-62) 
7.24.040 - Permits-Licenses required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or herself any other person, or for any body corporate or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to: 
A.  Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a permit from the division so to do, or without complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended. 
B.  Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in the city, one or more machines or devices offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for each such machine or device from the division, or without complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended. 
(Prior code § 38-63) 
7.24.050 - Permit and license fees-Expiration date. 
A.  The fees for permits and licenses, as required by Section 7.24.040 of this chapter, for the purpose of raising revenue, for regulation and control, to be paid annually to the city, are fixed as follows: 
1.  Permit fee: Two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per year. 
2.  License fee: Sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per machine, per year. 
B.  All permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of June each year. 
C.  Permit and license fees shall be paid to the division. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 33, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3726 § 1, 2005; prior code § 38-64) 
7.24.060 - Application-Issuance of permits and licenses. 
    Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in Section 7.24.040 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by the city council. Such permits and licenses are not transferable. 
(Prior code § 38-65) 
7.24.070 - Suspension, revocation and reinstatement. 
    Permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter may be suspended, revoked or reinstated by the director or authorized agent of the city, pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended. 
(Prior code § 38-66) 
7.24.080 - Application in regard to interstate commerce. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal government. 
(Prior code § 38-67) 
Chapter 7.26 - FRACKING WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4481 , §§ 1-3, adopted September 23, 2014, enacted provisions intended for use as chapter 7.28. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as chapter 7.26. 

7.26.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Hydraulic fracturing" shall mean the drilling technique of expanding existing fractures or creating new fractures in rock by injecting water, often with chemicals, sand, or other substances, and often under pressure, into or underneath the surface of the rock for purposes including, but not limited to, well drilling and natural gas exploration and production. The term "hydraulic fracturing" shall include "fracking," "hydrofracking," "hydrofracturing," and other colloquial terms for this drilling technique. 
(Ord. No. 4481 , § 1, 9-23-2014) 
7.26.020 - Fracking waste prohibited. 
    No wastewater, wastewater solids, sludge, drill cuttings or other byproducts resulting from hydraulic fracturing for the purpose of natural gas exploration or production may be treated, discharged, disposed of, applied to a roadway or otherwise released into the environment, or stored in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4481 , § 2, 9-23-2014) 
7.26.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction before a municipal court judge of the city, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,00.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
B.  In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, the city attorney, or his or her designee, may commence an action in the Superior Court of New Jersey to enjoin a person or entity that has violated this chapter and for any other appropriate remedies at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 4481 , § 3, 9-23-2014) 
Chapter 7.28 - HUMAN BURIALS AND DISINTERMENTS 
Sections: 

7.28.010 - Acts requiring permits. 
    No person shall bury or deposit in any grave, tomb or vault, cremate or remove from the limits of the city, the body of any person dying in the city or of any child stillborn in the city, without a permit therefor from the bureau of vital statistics of the city. 
(Prior code § 38-215) 
7.28.020 - Deaths from certain infectious causes-Notification required. 
    It shall be the duty of the funeral director in charge of a human body dead from diphtheria, meningococcal meningitis, poliomyelitis, streptococcic sore throat, including scarlet fever or cholera, plague, smallpox, typhus fever or yellow fever, to notify promptly the local health officer of the municipality or district in which the funeral is to be held. Such notice shall include the name of the deceased person, the cause of death and the time and place at which it is proposed to hold the funeral. 
(Prior code § 38-216) 
7.28.030 - Permits required for certain public funerals. 
    No public funeral shall be held of any person who has died of any disease referred to in Section 7.28.020, unless a permit therefor shall first have been secured from the health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-217) 
7.28.040 - Regulations governing disinterment. 
    A dead human body shall only be disinterred or removed from any grave, tomb or burial place by direction of a competent court of the state, or upon permit being given therefor by the department if the body is interred or entombed in the city. 
(Prior code § 38-218) 
7.28.050 - Fees. 
    The bureau of vital statistics shall be paid the following fees in addition to those otherwise required by law: 
A.  Two dollars ($2.00) for all certified copies of vital statistic records involving dead human bodies. 
B.  One dollar ($1.00) for issuance of a transit permit for the transportation of a dead human body out of the state by common carrier. 
(Prior code § 38-219) 
Chapter 7.32 - ICE 
Sections: 

7.32.010 - License requirements-Application-Fee. 
    No person shall manufacture for resale, sell or deliver any ice in the city without having a license so to do issued by the department, and before any such license shall be issued the following conditions shall be complied with: 
A.  The application for the license shall be in writing. 
B.  A true and accurate statement shall be given as to the source of supply or of the water from which the ice is made. 
C.  A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid for each wagon, truck, ice depot, ice-vending machine or plant engaged in the sale, delivery or manufacture for resale of ice, except that no fee shall be charged for those holding a license under the provisions of R.S. 45:24-9 et seq. 
(Prior code § 38-85) 
7.32.020 - License nontransferable-Expiration date. 
    Every such license shall be nontransferable and shall expire on June 30th next ensuing the date thereof. 
(Prior code § 38-86) 
7.32.030 - Compliance required. 
    The director may refuse, or may revoke at any time, any license to sell or manufacture ice, upon failure of the holder to comply with all of the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations regarding ice, or when such refusal or revocation may be deemed necessary by the health officer for the protection of the public health. 
(Prior code § 38-87) 
7.32.040 - Change of source of supply-Notice required. 
    No person engaged in the sale, delivery or manufacture for resale of ice shall change the source of such supply of ice or water without giving immediate notice to that effect to the department. 
(Prior code § 38-88) 
7.32.050 - Prohibited sales. 
    No person shall sell or deliver ice which is unfit for use for domestic purposes, or which has been cut or made from any impure or polluted water, or which is obtained from a source which is not approved by the department. 
(Prior code § 38-89) 
7.32.060 - Regulations governing delivery vehicles. 
    No person shall sell or deliver any ice in wagons or trucks that are used for any other purpose, unless the ice-handling operation is protected from all sources of contamination, and then only with the special permission of the department. 
(Prior code § 38-90) 
7.32.070 - Samples required upon official request. 
    Any person engaged in the sale, delivery or manufacture for resale of ice shall, upon tender or offer of value, deliver to the health officer or authorized representative such samples of ice or water from which it is made, for analysis as may be necessary or requested. 
(Prior code § 38-91) 
Chapter 7.36 - MEAT 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

7.36.010 - License requirements-Inspections-Fee. 
A.  It is unlawful for any meat manufacturer, distributor, jobber or vendor to use vehicles to deliver, sell or offer for sale in the city any fresh or frozen processed meats, meat-containing provisions, poultry and fish products without first making written application for a license to do so, and securing the approval of the director or health officer. 
B.  Before granting such license, for which application is so made, the division shall have the right to inspect all vehicles and other equipment of the applicant, to determine whether or not it is properly constructed and maintained in a sanitary manner to conduct such business of jobbing and vending. 
C.  The division shall also determine whether the products handled by the applicant bear inspection marks of the federal government, or of other sources of inspection approved by the health officer. 
D.  Upon approval of vendor's, jobber's, distributor's or manufacturer's application and payment of the license fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00), the applicant shall be issued a license, which shall expire on June 30th of each year. 
(Ord. 3726 § 3, 2005; prior code § 38-115) 
Article II - Horseflesh 

7.36.020 - Slaughtering prohibited-Permit for sale required-Exceptions. 
    The business of slaughtering horses shall not be conducted in the city. No horseflesh shall be brought into, transported, or held, kept or offered for sale in the city without a permit therefor issued by the division, or otherwise than in accordance with the terms of this chapter, except that no permit shall be required of such establishments as hold, keep or offer for sale horseflesh as animal food when such establishments hold, keep and offer such horseflesh for sale in hermetically sealed cans of conventional retail size. Such permits when issued shall specify "for animal consumption" or "for human consumption." Applications for permits shall be made on forms supplied by the division. 
(Prior code § 38-119) 
7.36.030 - Inspection required. 
    No carcass or part of a carcass of a horse shall be brought into the city, or held, kept, sold, offered for sale or given away in the city, until it shall have been inspected and passed as fit for human food by a duly authorized inspector of the United States Department of Agriculture, or by some other competent public official acceptable to the department; and shall have been marked, stamped or branded as having been so inspected and passed; or in the case of parts of a carcass, unless such parts shall have been cut from a carcass or part of a carcass which had previously been inspected and passed and so marked, stamped or branded as provided in this section. 
(Prior code § 38-120) 
7.36.040 - Admixture prohibited. 
    Horseflesh shall not be used as an ingredient of or in the preparation of any mixed food intended for human consumption. 
(Prior code § 38-121) 
7.36.050 - Treatment required-Exception. 
    Horseflesh, whether alone or combined with other ingredients, intended for animal feed shall not be brought into the city, transported or held, kept, stored or offered for sale or sold unless decharacterized by harmless coloring or otherwise in a manner and with materials satisfactory to the division, except the provisions of this section shall not apply to such establishments as hold, keep or offer for sale horseflesh as animal food when such horseflesh is for sale in hermetically sealed cans of conventional retail size. 
(Prior code § 38-122) 
7.36.060 - Sale of horseflesh restricted. 
    No horseflesh for human consumption shall be held, kept, offered for sale, sold or prepared in any establishment or premises where other meat or meat products intended for human consumption are held, kept, offered for sale, sold or prepared. 
(Prior code § 38-123) 
7.36.070 - Designation of premises required-Exception. 
    A sign bearing the words "Horseflesh Sold Here," printed in block letters not less than three inches in height and one and one-half inches in width, shall be conspicuously displayed in each show window and on the walls of each establishment where horseflesh is kept, held, offered for sale, sold or prepared. This regulation, however, shall not apply where horseflesh (in whole or in part) for animal feed is sold in the original sealed container clearly, legibly and conspicuously labeled to indicate that it is horseflesh (in whole or part) for animal feed and not for human consumption. 
(Prior code § 38-124) 
7.36.080 - Labeling required. 
    Each case, can, package, wrapping material or other container of horseflesh, or horseflesh (in whole or part) for animal feed, brought into the city, or held, kept, offered for sale or sold in the city, shall be clearly, legibly and conspicuously labeled to indicate that it is horseflesh or that it is horseflesh (in whole or part) for animal feed and not for human consumption, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 38-125) 
7.36.090 - Vehicles-Use and designation. 
    No dealer's vehicle used in the transportation of horseflesh may be used in the transportation of any other meat intended for human consumption. Each vehicle transporting horseflesh, other than horseflesh (in whole or part) for animal feed in the original sealed packages of not more than five pounds each, shall be plainly and legibly marked on both sides with the word "Horseflesh," together with the dealer's name, address and permit number in block letters not less than three inches in height. 
(Prior code § 38-126) 
7.36.100 - Bills and delivery slips required. 
    All shipments of horseflesh into the city and all deliveries of horseflesh by vehicles in the city shall be accompanied by bills or delivery slips showing the name and address of the dealer, the amount in pounds shipped or to be delivered and the name and address of the consignee. 
(Prior code § 38-127) 
7.36.110 - Records and information required-Filing. 
    Every wholesaler, distributor, jobber, vendor or dealer located in the city who sells or holds for sale horseflesh shall keep accurate records of the following: 
A.  As to receipt of horseflesh: 
1.  Date of receipt; 
2.  Amount received in pounds; and 
3.  Name and address of person or firm from whom received. 
B.  As to sale of horseflesh: 
1.  Date of sale; 
2.  Amount sold in pounds; and 
3.  Nature of business conducted by purchaser, and purchaser's permit number. 
C.  These records shall be kept on file for at least six months and shall be open for inspection at all times by a representative of the health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-128) 
7.36.120 - Maintenance in sanitary condition required. 
    All horseflesh or animal feed containing horseflesh held, kept, offered for sale or sold shall be sound and wholesome. Every establishment in which horseflesh or horseflesh (in whole or part) for animal feed is held, kept, offered for sale or sold or stored shall be maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. (Added during 2004 codification; prior code § 38-129) 
Chapter 7.40 - MILK 
Sections: 

7.40.010 - Licenses. 
A.  No person, either as principal or through agents or employees, shall deliver or sell any milk, cream or fluid milk products within the city without an official license to do so; provided, that no license shall be required for the proprietor of a public eating establishment to sell or deliver, for consumption on the premises, milk or cream obtained from a person licensed hereunder. 
B.  The license fee for the sale or delivery of milk or cream shall be as follows: 
1.  Retail establishments license fee for selling milk shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per year. 
2.  Vehicles of any kind carrying, distributing, or delivering milk or cream distributor license shall be one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per vehicle per year. 
    Such license shall not be transferable and shall continue in force and effect until the 30th day of June next ensuing the date of granting hereof, unless previously suspended or revoked. 
C.  No person having been granted a license hereunder procure for sale or delivery in the city any milk or cream from a source other than the source specified on the application for a license hereunder, without having obtained an official permit to do so. 
D.  Each application for a license or permit shall be made in writing, upon official forms supplied for that purpose, and shall set forth all information as required by the application. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 34, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3726 § 2, 2005; prior code § 38-80) 
7.40.020 - Suspension or revocation-Powers of director and health officer. 
A.  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked unless the licensee and the person or persons from whom the licensee obtains his or her supplies of milk, cream or milk products shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Whenever, in the opinion of the director, the public health is seriously jeopardized, the health officer shall have the power temporarily to order that any supply of milk, milk products or fluid milk products shall not be sold, delivered or had in possession for sale or delivery in the city. 
(Prior code § 38-81) 
Chapter 7.44 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

7.44.010 - Nuisances prohibited. 
    No person shall create, commit, maintain or permit to be created, committed or maintained any nuisance as defined in Section 7.44.020. 
(Prior code § 38-247) 
7.44.020 - Nuisances defined. 
    Any thing, condition or act which is or may become a detriment or menace to human health, and the following specific things, conditions and acts, are each declared to be and are defined as nuisances. 
1.  Any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae exist. 
2.  Any accumulation of manure or vegetable or animal matter in which fly larvae exist. 
3.  Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household purpose which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed that it may become polluted. 
4.  Permitting ragweed in a flowering state to exist or to grow upon any public or private property, plot of land, lot, highway or right-of-way. 
5.  Any imperfect, defective, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet, urinal, sump pit, slop basin or other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human beings. 
6.  Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property and household, wastewater, sewage, garbage, tin cans, offal or excrement; any decaying fruit, vegetable, fish, meat or bones; any oyster or clam shells; any foul or noxious odors, gases or vapors; or any foul, putrid or obnoxious liquid or substance. 
7.  Permitting any garbage, offal, scraps, waste food or other putrescible material to be held in a container which is not watertight or which is uncovered, in any store, factory or outside of any building or on any public or private property, or in any building of multiple occupancy except in the individual apartment. 
8.  Any person spitting upon any public sidewalk or crossing, or upon the floor of any public building, bus or other public conveyance. 
9.  The shaking of mops, carpets or receptacles and the discarding of household or trade dirt or waste from any roof, window or porch of any building in the city. 
10.  Washing tank trucks or other business vehicles, or the commercial washing of private passenger cars, on public streets or other places which are not properly surfaced, drained and sewer-connected. 
11.  The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any entrance to the open air, of such quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, soot, vapors, mists or gases as to cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this city or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety. 
12.  No person shall burn within the city any matter or substance that shall emit into the air, or cause to produce or cast off, any foul or obnoxious gas, smoke or odor of any kind whatsoever; and shall not be inconsistent with the requirements of the codes adopted by the Air Pollution Control Commission of the state of New Jersey in relation to open burning, smoke, fly ash, odors, dust, gases, vapors, fumes or other contaminants. 
13.  Allowing any building to be occupied as a tenement house, apartment house, dwelling house, rooming house, factory building or food establishment, without a plentiful supply of pure water suitable for domestic purposes or personal requirements, by any person who is responsible for such provision by reason of ownership, possession or agreement, or in which the water supply has been turned off for any reason, except to repair faulty plumbing. 
14.  All sunken lots or lots below grade where stagnant water gathers or is collected are declared nuisances, and any owner or agent of any such lot or lands shall, after notice, fill the same or cause them to be filled with fresh earth, ashes or cinders, and/or properly drained. 
15.  Every proprietor, lessee, tenant and occupant of an oyster house, oyster saloon or other premises where any oysters, clams, lobsters or shellfish or other fish are consumed, used or sold, or where any of the refuse matter, offal or shells thereof accumulate, shall daily cause all such shells, offal and other refuse matter to be removed therefrom to some proper place, and shall keep such house, saloon or premises at all times free from any offensive smells or accumulation. 
16.  Whenever a sewer is available in any street adjoining any lot of land or premises, for the purpose of draining, such lands, cellar, cistern, toilet and household wastes shall be connected into such sewer as soon as practicable after notice shall be given to the owner or person in charge of such lands or premises, and if any owner or person in charge of such land or premises shall neglect or refuse to make such connection for any of the purposes aforesaid as soon as practicable after such notice, the health officer may cause the same to be done at the expense of the owner of the land or premises or person in charge thereof. 
17.  No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house, store, apartment, room or place shall maintain the same or permit the same to be maintained in any state of uncleanliness or filthiness or in an unsanitary manner which may become a detriment to health. 
18.  Whenever any building or part thereof is in such condition as to be a menace or a detriment to the health of human beings occupying the same, it may be ordered by the director to be vacated and to remain vacated until such building or part thereof shall be, in the opinion of the health officer, no longer a menace or a detriment to human health. Any person receiving such an order shall comply with all the provisions and terms thereof. 
19.  No person shall erect, construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, temporary or otherwise, without a permit from the health division; and the person who receives such a permit shall construct and maintain such privy, privy vault or septic tank as directed by the department. 
20.  No new milk-producing dairies shall be established in the city, nor shall the number of cows for private use on any premises in the city be increased after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
21.  No person shall cause or allow any stable, coop, runway or place where any animal or fowl may be kept to become unclean, unsanitary or unwholesome; and it is unlawful to keep any live swine or pig and goats anywhere in the city, or any chickens or fowl, within one hundred fifty (150) feet from any residence other than the residence of the person so keeping or having such animals anywhere in the city. 
22.  No person shall keep within the city a total of more than twenty-five (25) of chickens, pigeons or other fowl without a permit from the health division; provided that nothing herein shall apply to such chickens, pigeons or other fowl confined in coops in regular licensed poultry slaughterhouses. 
23.  The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within twenty (20) feet of any property line on any lot, plot of land or right-of-way, and shall not exist within twenty (20) feet of any highway. 
24.  It is unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat to any building designed to be occupied or occupied as a residence by more than two families, to fail to supply heat from the 15th day of September in each year to the 15th day of May of the succeeding year in such a manner that the temperature of the building where one or more persons reside shall always be kept at a minimum of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit. 
25.  No person being owner, lessee or tenant of any house or building shall allow any water or liquid to run from or out of his or her building or ground upon or across any sidewalk, and if such substance is allowed to pass upon any street, it must reach the same by a passage to be kept at all times adequate and in repair by such person, under or through such flagstone or curbstone. 
26.  No portable toilets or portable chemical toilets shall be emptied into any waste line or sewer line, including the waste or sewerage lines or pipes contained within the city sewerage system, or into any sump pit, either from the portable toilet or portable chemical toilet itself or from any other container or tank into which any portable toilet or portable chemical toilets shall have been emptied. 
(Prior code § 38-248) 
7.44.030 - Certain trades and manufactures-Permits required-Conditions. 
    No person or persons shall carry on any trade, manufacture or business within the city which may be noxious or offensive to the inhabitants of the city or any part thereof, and which may be attended by excessive noise and obnoxious odors, without having first obtained a permit from the health division, such permit to be granted only on such terms and conditions as shall be from time to time prescribed by the department, to which terms and conditions the applicant or applicants for such permit shall subscribe before receiving the permit, and such permit shall not be transferable in case of sale or transfer of the business, in which case a new application must be made in the name of the parties who propose to conduct the business, and the trade, manufacture or business may be at any time summarily abated in case of failure or neglect to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit; and any such trade, manufacture or business which may be established within the city, without having first obtained the permit provided for in this section, shall be summarily abated. 
(Prior code § 38-249) 
7.44.040 - Substances dangerous to health prohibited. 
    No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health shall be permitted to exist in connection with any permitted business or use therein, or to exist in connection with or be used in any work or labor carried on or to be carried on or prosecuted in the city, and no nuisance shall be permitted to exist in connection with any business or in connection with any such work or labor. 
(Prior code § 38-250) 
7.44.050 - Rag and wastepaper business-Permit requirements. 
    No person shall keep any place for the storage, drying, cleaning or sorting of rags or wastepaper without a permit from the health division, which permit shall be for the term of one year from the first day of July of each year, and shall not be granted unless the premises shall be kept in good, sanitary condition. And further, it shall not be granted unless the premises shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling house, factory or other building occupied by human beings, without a special permit from the department. 
(Prior code § 38-251) 
7.44.060 - Inspections authorized-Right of officials. 
A.  All places and premises in the city shall be subject to inspection by the director or authorized agents if the official has reason to believe that any section of this chapter is being violated. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent the director or authorized agents from having full access to any place or premises upon which a violation of this chapter is believed to exist. 
(Prior code § 38-252) 
7.44.070 - Abatement of nuisances. 
    The following regulations shall apply concerning the abatement of nuisances: 
A.  Whenever a nuisance as declared by Section 7.44.020 of this chapter is found on any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or occupant thereof, or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof. 
B.  Whenever a nuisance as declared by Section 7.44.020 of this chapter is found on any public property or on any highway or any other public premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified therein, the director or authorized agents may remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided in this section in the case of a like condition existing on a private premise or place. 
C.  If the owner, tenant or occupant upon being notified as provided by this section shall not comply with such notice within the time specified therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the director or authorized agents shall proceed to abate the nuisance, or may cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as the director shall deem proper. 
D.  No owner, agent or lessee of any such building or any part thereof shall lease or let or hire out the same or any portion thereof, to be occupied by any person, or allow the same to be occupied as a place for anyone to dwell or lodge, except when the buildings or such parts thereof are sufficiently lighted, ventilated, provided and accommodated, and are in all respects in that condition of cleanliness and wholesomeness for which this chapter or any law of the state provides, or in which they, or either of them, require any such premises to be kept. 
E.  Wherever it shall be decided by the department that any building or part thereof is unfit for human habitation by reason of its being so infected with disease, or by reason of its being in a condition dangerous to health or life, or to be likely to cause sickness among the occupants, and notice of such decision shall have been affixed conspicuously on the building or any part thereof so decided to be unfit for human habitation, and personally served upon the owner, agent or lessee, if the same can be found in the state, requiring all persons therein to vacate such building or part thereof for the reasons to be stated therein as set out in this section, such building or part thereof shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, be vacated, or in case of special emergency, within such shorter time as in the notice may be specified. 
(Prior code § 38-253) 
7.44.080 - Legal recourse of department. 
    The department may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by Section 7.44.020 of this chapter, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance to exist, or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice and notification as provided in this chapter, shall fail to remove and abate the same within the time specified in such notice. 
(Prior code § 38-254) 
7.44.090 - Fumigant-Defined-Restrictions. 
A.  Definition. "Fumigant," as used in this section, means and includes any substance which by itself, or in combination with any other substance, emits or liberates a gas, fume or vapor used for the destruction or control of insects, fungi, vermin, rodents or other pests, and shall be distinguished from insecticides and disinfectants, which are essentially effective in the solid or liquid phases. 
B.  Fumigation Restricted-Permit Required. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out any fumigation or disinfection by any dangerous or poisonous gas within the corporate limits of the city unless such person shall have previously obtained from the director permission to do so. 
(Prior code §§ 38-255, 38-256) 
Chapter 7.48 - POULTRY SLAUGHTERHOUSES 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

7.48.010 - Permit required-Fee-Expiration date. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to slaughter poultry in the city without first having obtained a permit from the division for that purpose, which may be issued upon the payment of a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) following approval of an application for such a permit by the health officer. All such permits shall expire on June 30th of each year. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 35, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 38-158) 
7.48.020 - Limitation on number of licenses. 
    The number of poultry slaughterhouse licenses in the city shall be limited in number to five, but licenses outstanding as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to continue and be transferred until the licensee abandons this activity. 
(Prior code § 38-159) 
7.48.030 - Sale of other foods or beverages prohibited. 
    No poultry slaughterhouse shall be permitted to sell any food or beverages other than by-products of such poultry, and provided further that such by-products are kept under proper and adequate refrigeration. 
(Prior code § 38-160) 
Article II - Sanitary Requirements 

7.48.040 - Minimum sanitary requirements to be met. 
    No permit to conduct a poultry slaughterhouse will be issued by the division unless the minimum requirements set out in this article shall have been in each instance fully complied with. 
(Prior code § 38-161) 
7.48.050 - Floors. 
    The floors shall be constructed of cement, concrete or other watertight, nonabsorbent material so graded and drained as to discharge all liquid matter into a properly trapped sewer. 
(Prior code § 38-162) 
7.48.060 - Walls and ceilings. 
    The walls and ceilings shall be of a smooth, hard, impervious material, free from crevices, cracks, ledges or projections. Unless the walls and ceilings are faced with enamel tile, enamel brick or other like material, they shall be painted whenever required by the health officer or duly authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 38-163) 
7.48.070 - Height of ceiling. 
    All ceilings shall be at least ten (10) feet in height, measured from the surface of the floor to the ceiling. 
(Prior code § 38-164) 
7.48.080 - Stands and counters. 
    All stands or counters shall be built substantially and covered with some smooth, hard, impervious material, free from cracks or crevices. They shall be raised from the floor in such manner as to permit cleaning underneath, and shall be so arranged as to allow a clear passageway. 
(Prior code § 38-165) 
7.48.090 - Ventilation-Windows and skylights. 
    Adequate ventilation to the external air by natural or mechanical means shall be furnished for every room in which poultry is stored, killed or which is used in connection with the slaughterhouse, and every such room shall be provided with a window or skylight not less than fifteen (15) square feet in area. 
(Prior code § 38-166) 
7.48.100 - Lighting. 
    Adequate natural or artificial light shall be provided in every room in which poultry is stored or killed. 
(Prior code § 38-167) 
7.48.110 - Killing and plucking room. 
    A separate room shall be provided which shall be used exclusively as a killing and plucking room, the side walls of which shall be faced with enamel brick or other materials impervious to moisture. The width or length of this room shall not be less than six feet. Where a killing trough is provided, it shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material and shall discharge over properly trapped and connected drains. 
(Prior code § 38-168) 
7.48.120 - Dressed poultry. 
    Dressed poultry shall not be placed on the floor but shall be hung on racks to prevent contamination. Only clean baskets or other containers shall be used for transporting dressed poultry. If burlap bags are used, there must be an inside wrapping of clean paper separating the poultry from the container. 
(Prior code § 38-169) 
7.48.130 - Live poultry. 
    A separate room shall be provided for the storage of poultry in crates or cages. Where permanent cages are used, the frames thereof shall be constructed of angle-iron or strap-iron bars; the floor shall be constructed of concrete, cement or other nonabsorbent material, or of such other construction as is acceptable to the division. Cages or crates shall be elevated at least one foot above the floor level and shall not be placed nearer than two feet from the side walls of the buildings. Drop floors shall be removable so as to permit ready cleaning. One-half square foot shall be allowed for each fowl placed therein. 
(Prior code § 38-170) 
7.48.140 - Water supply. 
    Permanent fixtures shall be provided for the furnishing of an adequate supply of fresh water for flushing all parts of the premises. 
(Prior code § 38-171) 
7.48.150 - Poultry-Food storage. 
    The room or receptacle for the storage of food for the poultry shall be of ratproof construction. 
(Prior code § 38-172) 
7.48.160 - Toilet and wash room. 
    An adequate washing and toilet room shall be provided. All toilet, wash and dressing rooms shall be entirely separated from compartments in which poultry is handled, stored or dressed. They shall be sufficient in number, ample in size and fitted with modern lavatory accommodations, including toilet paper, soap, running water and towels. They shall be properly lighted and ventilated. 
(Prior code § 38-173) 
7.48.170 - Clothing of employees. 
    All aprons or other outer clothing of employees who handle poultry shall be clean and of a material that is readily cleaned and made sanitary. 
(Prior code § 38-174) 
7.48.180 - Screening. 
    All doors, windows and other openings to the outer air shall properly and adequately be screened. All doors shall be equipped with self-closing devices. 
(Prior code § 38-175) 
7.48.190 - Hot water supply. 
    Adequate facilities shall be provided to insure a sufficient supply of hot water at all times. 
(Prior code § 38-176) 
7.48.200 - Disposal of odors. 
    Suitable and adequate means shall be provided for the disposal of offensive odors. 
(Prior code § 38-177) 
Article III - Operations and Maintenance 

7.48.210 - Rules and regulations for operation-Compliance required. 
    Every poultry slaughterhouse shall be conducted in strict compliance with the rules set out in this article, which shall govern the maintenance and operation thereof. 
(Prior code § 38-178) 
7.48.220 - Sanitary maintenance of premises. 
    Every poultry slaughterhouse, the yard adjoining same, and all air shafts, courts and open places connected therewith shall be at all times kept in a clean, sanitary condition, free from accumulation of refuse, garbage and offensive material and nuisance of all kinds. 
(Prior code § 38-179) 
7.48.230 - Disposal of wastes. 
    All feathers and refuse material shall be removed from the premises at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours, in metal receptacles which shall be provided with tight-fitting covers, kept closed when not in use and cleaned daily and disinfected when required. 
(Prior code § 38-180) 
7.48.240 - Sanitary maintenance of floors. 
    All floors shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair and free from rubbish and offensive material. 
(Prior code § 38-181) 
7.48.250 - Sanitary maintenance of cages and crates. 
    All cages or crates and parts thereof shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned, flushed with fresh water and disinfected when required. All loading and unloading of poultry and crates must be done in such a manner that no nuisance will be created from noise, odors or dust. 
(Prior code § 38-182) 
7.48.260 - Sanitary maintenance of plumbing fixtures. 
    All plumbing fixtures and toilet facilities shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair. 
(Prior code § 38-183) 
7.48.270 - Inspections-Disposal of sick or unfit poultry. 
    All poultry must be from a source under an inspection system approved by the health officer, and shall be kept in good condition, healthy and clean. Diseased or sick poultry shall be immediately removed from cages or crates and killed; the carcasses shall be disposed of as required in cases of poultry having died otherwise than by slaughter. Any poultry that has died otherwise than by slaughter shall be immediately removed from cages or crates, denatured and placed in covered metallic receptacles and removed from the premises daily, and any poultry that has been slaughtered and which has deteriorated and become unfit for human consumption shall not be kept on the premises unless such poultry be similarly denatured and disposed of in metal receptacles and removed from the premises daily. Failure to denature and render such poultry unfit for human food, and the keeping of same on the premises, shall create a presumption that such poultry is intended for sale and used for human consumption. 
(Prior code § 38-184) 
7.48.280 - Maximum capacity. 
    The quantity of poultry kept and stored shall not exceed the approved capacity of the poultry slaughterhouse, and such poultry shall not under any circumstances be kept in an overcrowded or unhealthy condition. 
(Prior code § 38-185) 
7.48.290 - Receptacles, appliances and equipment-Method of killing. 
    Only receptacles, appliances and equipment as are approved by the division shall be installed in the killing room for the purpose of receiving blood, preventing the spattering of blood upon the walls and accumulation of the same upon the floors. Such receptacles, appliances and equipment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all accumulation of blood removed from same at the conclusion of each day's work. All poultry shall be killed only by the process of bleeding, and the blood discharged into the receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Prior code § 38-186) 
7.48.300 - Plucking-Disposal of feathers. 
    Plucking of poultry shall be performed in such manner that all feathers shall be thrown or placed in the receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Prior code § 38-187) 
7.48.310 - Disinfection of refuse. 
    When required, refuse material, including feathers, shall be disinfected at regular intervals during each day. The disinfectant used for such purpose shall be approved by the division, and an adequate supply thereof shall be at all times kept on the premises. 
(Prior code § 38-188) 
7.48.320 - Sanitary maintenance of crates. 
    All crates shall be kept or stored exclusively in the storage or selling room except where a separate room is provided for the storage of empty crates. No empty crates shall be kept or permitted to remain outside the poultry slaughterhouse. When poultry has been removed from wooden crates, all excrement shall be immediately removed from the floors and the crates cleaned and disinfected. No empty crates shall be permitted to be removed from the premises unless all excrements have been removed from the floors and the crates thoroughly cleaned and rendered inoffensive; nor shall any person receive or have in his or her possession any empty crates from which fowl have been removed, unless the crates have been thoroughly cleaned as required by this section. 
(Prior code § 38-189) 
7.48.330 - Running at large prohibited. 
    No poultry shall be allowed or permitted at large upon the premises, but shall be kept at all times in the cages or crates provided for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 38-190) 
7.48.340 - Screens, windows and doors-Maintenance required. 
    The screens, windows, doors and other openings to the outer air shall be kept clean and in good condition and repair. 
(Prior code § 38-191) 
7.48.350 - Doors to remain closed. 
    Doors shall not be permitted to remain open except for ingress or egress. 
(Prior code § 38-192) 
7.48.360 - Overcropped poultry. 
    Overcropped poultry shall not be offered or displayed for sale or sold. Such poultry shall be kept separate and apart from poultry held for sale. 
(Prior code § 38-193) 
7.48.370 - Sanitary maintenance of equipment. 
    All knives, utensils, trucks and machinery used in the carrying on of the business shall be thoroughly cleansed at the closing of business each day. 
(Prior code § 38-194) 
7.48.380 - Structural change-Approval required. 
    No structural change or alteration shall be made in any poultry slaughterhouse unless the same shall have first been approved by the director or health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-195) 
7.48.390 - License revocation for cause. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the director or health officer, the environment has changed since granting that the maintenance thereof may constitute a nuisance, such permit may be revoked by the director even though the site has been previously approved. 
(Prior code § 38-196) 
Chapter 7.52 - RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

7.52.010 - Adoption of code by reference. 
    A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for violation is established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 to -69.6. A copy of such code is annexed to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 38-40) 
7.52.020 - Title. 
    The code established and adopted by this chapter is commonly known as the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965). 
(Prior code § 38-41) 
7.52.030 - Filing. 
    Ten (10) copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) have been placed on file in the office of the city clerk upon the introduction of the ordinance codified in this chapter and will remain on file there until final action is taken on said ordinance, for the use and examination of the public. 
(Prior code § 38-42) 
7.52.040 - Regulations governing premises. 
A.  No sleeping room nor any other occupied room of a tenement, apartment or other dwelling house shall be directly connected with a room which is used as a restaurant, public dining room, or with any room in which the food is cooked or prepared for consumption in any restaurant, dining room, lunchroom or other place. 
B.  Separate water closets and toilet rooms must be provided for each sex in buildings used as workshops, lofts, office buildings, factories, hotels, restaurants, luncheonettes and all places of public assembly where food or drink is served. 
C.  Soda fountains and bar sinks shall be connected to a water-supplied, trapped and vented slop or deep sink. Hotel, restaurant and cafeteria sinks and dishwashers shall be provided with suitable grease traps, the same to be placed as near to the fixture as possible and in an accessible location. Before any building or part thereof is to be used to serve food or drinks to be consumed on the premises, or to offer food or drink for sale to the public, before such premises can be used for a hairdressing establishment or barbershop, the plumbing and drainage system must be inspected by the authorized plumbing inspector and a certificate of approval be obtained that they conform with the plumbing code of the city before the premises are occupied for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 38-43) 
7.52.050 - Closing of suspected premises authorized. 
    When the director or health officer has reasonable cause to believe that any food establishments or any employee thereof may be a source of foodborne infection, he or she is authorized to require the immediate closure of the eating and drinking establishment concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists, or cause the immediate exclusion of the employee from the eating and drinking establishment, or cause an immediate change of operating procedure to correct those conditions which may be at fault. 
(Prior code § 38-44) 
7.52.060 - Regulations governing food sold outside buildings. 
A.  No person shall place or expose for sale any fruit, berries, vegetable or other food upon the sidewalk or outside of any building in the city unless the same is placed upon stands, tables or other structures having a height of at least twenty (20) inches from the sidewalk or ground. 
B.  No person shall place or expose for sale upon any sidewalk, outside of any building or from any conveyance, any food not securely protected from flies, rodents, dust, dirt and all injurious contamination, by suitable cartons, cases, metal, wood or other approved material. 
(Prior code § 38-45) 
7.52.070 - Common cups and towels prohibited in public places. 
    No person shall keep or offer for use any common drinking cup, glass or other receptacle, or permit the use of any common towel, in any food establishment, railroad station, public or private school, any municipal or government building, office building, any lodging or boarding house, hotel, club, theater, hall, amusement ground, factory, store or any other area of public assembly, except the private home or apartment unit used or occupied as a place of residence. 
(Prior code § 38-46) 
7.52.080 - Unfit food-Embargo authorized-Disposal by operator. 
    Whenever any substance intended as food or drink for human consumption is found being offered or exposed for sale, or held in possession with intent to sell, which is in the opinion of the health officer, unfit for human use or liable to cause or transmit any disease, the director or health officer may embargo or order the same removed and disposed of, and it shall be the duty of the operator of such substance to immediately remove and dispose of it at his or her own expense according to the directions of the director or health officer. In case the operator shall fail to remove immediately and dispose of such substance so ordered, the same may be caused to be removed by the director or health officer at the expense of such operator. 
(Prior code § 38-47) 
7.52.090 - Effect of embargo. 
    No food, drink, milk, meat or their products, or any drug or cosmetic, which has been embargoed in accordance with Section 7.52.080, shall be moved, processed, salvaged or disposed of without first obtaining a written permit from the director or health officer of the city. 
(Prior code § 38-48) 
7.52.100 - Compliance with sanitary regulations required-Power of health officer. 
A.  In case the operator of any activity covered by this chapter shall fail to keep such operation in clean and sanitary condition after being notified so to do by the director or health officer, or in case such operation may be liable to cause or transmit disease, the director or health officer shall have the power to order such operation stopped or place of business closed until it shall be put in a clean and sanitary condition, or until such operation no longer shall be liable to cause or transmit disease. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator immediately to comply with and obey such order and to conduct no further operations until permission thereof or has been granted by the director or health officer. 
B.  In addition, the director or health officer is authorized and empowered to suspend any such license or permit, regulated by this chapter, issued to or held by any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and to revoke any such license or permit upon serious or repeated violations after the opportunity for a hearing. 
(Prior code § 38-49) 
7.52.110 - Salvage of foods or drugs-Permit requirement. 
    No food, devices, drugs or cosmetics, whether in whole, part or broken form of sweepings, floor droppings or contaminated or condemned form of surplus, shall be processed or salvaged or placed in a form intended for human or animal consumption or use unless the responsible person for such operation shall first secure written permission from the department. 
(Prior code § 38-50) 
Article II - Licensing 

7.52.120 - License required-Compliance with Retail Food Establishment Code. 
    It is unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail food establishment, as defined in and governed by the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) established by ordinance of the city council, without first having procured a license from the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city to do so, or without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965). 
(Prior code § 38-53) 
7.52.130 - Licenses-Application-Fees-Term. 
A.  The approval of any application for any license shall require that the applicant comply with the terms of this chapter, the building code and with other city ordinances that shall apply. All such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
1.  The fees for licensure of retail food establishments are hereby fixed as follows: 
a.  A restaurant having a seating or serving capacity of one person to thirty-nine (39) persons, or a retail food establishment located within a food court, two hundred forty dollars ($240.00). 
b.  A restaurant having a seating or serving capacity of forty (40) to fifty-nine (59) persons, four hundred eighty dollars ($480.00). 
c.  A restaurant having a seating or serving capacity of sixty (60) or more persons, eight hundred dollars ($800.00). 
d.  A retail food establishment without seating with a total area of one to five hundred (500) square feet, one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
e.  A retail food establishment without seating with a total area of five hundred one (501) to two thousand four hundred ninety-nine (2,499) square feet, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
f.  A retail food establishment without seating with a total area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) to three thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (3,999) square feet, four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). 
g.  A retail food establishment without seating with a total area of four thousand (4,000) or more square feet, eight hundred dollars ($800.00). 
h.  Mobile retail food establishments and itinerant restaurants shall be licensed according to the type and number of retail food establishments to be licensed by the applicant. 
(i)  Each non-motorized mobile push-cart, one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(ii)  Each mobile food truck, one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00). 
(iii)  Each mobile step van, two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
i.  All retail establishments selling edible arrangements including but not limited to candy and food baskets, one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
j.  All other retail establishments selling packaged goods (candy, gum, pretzels, soda, chips, beverages, etc.) as a convenience, one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
2.  An applicant for a retail food establishment license who files an application (other than the initial application) after June 30 shall be subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee. 
3.  Prior to the issuance of any retail food establishment license, the area to be licensed must pass an inspection by a health inspector. Where an initial inspection reveals that the area to be licensed is in an unsatisfactory condition, an applicant must schedule and pass a re-inspection of the area to be licensed prior to the issuance of a license. An applicant shall be subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for scheduling a first re-inspection. An applicant shall be subject to a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for scheduling a second re-inspection. An applicant shall be subject to a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for scheduling each subsequent re-inspection. 
B.  Each license provided under the provisions of this article shall bear the actual date of issue thereof, the name of the person to whom issued, the legal name of the owner of the business licensed, and the location thereof. No license shall be transferable. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, machine or vehicle. 
C.  The fees provided hereinabove shall not apply to any bona fide charitable or religious group or organization, who is tax exempt pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 501(c)3, who provides food for the homeless and the needy on a regularly scheduled basis. 
(Ord. No. 4376, § 1, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 4149, § 36, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. 3726 § 5, 2005; prior code § 38-54) 
7.52.140 - Suspensions and revocations-Hearings. 
A.  Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965), or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law of the United States, the state of New Jersey or any ordinance of the city, or that the person or persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued. 
B.  A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been had by the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or be deposited in the United States post office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the department concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee. 
C.  If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person acting for him or her, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the city unless the application for such license shall be approved by the department of health, welfare and housing, health division of the city. 
(Prior code § 38-55) 
7.52.150 - Application in regard to interstate commerce. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal government. 
(Prior code § 38-56) 
Chapter 7.54 - SIDEWALK CAFES 
Sections: 

7.54.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    "Applicant" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity making application for a sidewalk cafe license. 
    "Health officer" shall be the health officer of the City of Elizabeth as defined in the Code of the City of Elizabeth or his/her designee. 
    "License holder" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity holding a sidewalk cafe license. 
    "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity. 
    "Retail food establishment" shall mean an establishment whose primary activity is the preparation of food for consumption by the public on its premises. By way of example retail food establishments may include a restaurant, coffee shop, luncheonette or sandwich shop. Pushcart vendors are specifically excluded and are not entitled to a sidewalk cafe license. 
    "Sidewalk" shall mean the paved surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building line to the curb of any street (excluding there from any unpaved surface). 
    "Sidewalk cafe" shall mean a designated outdoor area that is located on the public sidewalk or right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property of an existing retail food establishment, and where food and beverages that are normally offered to the public inside the retail food establishment are offered and served to the public in the designated outdoor area. The area to be used must be unenclosed by fixed walls or ceilings or fences, except for retractable awnings, removable barriers, umbrellas or other non-permanent enclosures. Tables, chairs, temporary railings and/or planters must be readily removable. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.020 - License required. 
    No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe within the city without first having obtained a sidewalk cafe license from the city and satisfying all the requirements of this chapter. The license shall be issued by the health officer in the department of health and human services and may contain conditions that protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The sidewalk cafe license shall be personal to the license holder and may not be sold, leased, moved or transferred and shall be deemed revoked by the sale or transfer of the business or loss of the lease for the business location. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 2, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.030 - Application. 
    An application for a sidewalk license shall be submitted to the health officer together with payment of the appropriate fee. The application shall set forth: 
A.  The name and the address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the owner of the property; 
C.  If the applicant is not the property owner, the applicant must submit written authorization and approval of the property owner; 
D.  A schematic diagram, showing the number and placement of tables and chairs, and the location of all aspects of the sidewalk in front of the cafe, including but not limited to trees, parking meters, fire hydrants, sign posts, light posts, and other physical obstructions. The schematic diagram shall include the measurements between any physical obstructions and the facade of the cafe. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 3, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.040 - License requirements. 
    A license shall be granted only if the proposed sidewalk cafe conforms to the following: 
A.  The sidewalk cafe shall be confined to the area directly in front of the existing retail food establishment. In those situations where the premises is located on a corner, both the front and side street area of the retail food establishment may be utilized, so long as it does not interfere with access to the building entrance or exit; 
B.  The sidewalk cafe shall not interfere with access to the building entrance or exit, any basement entrance or fire hydrant, bus stop, public sign, parking meter or public alleyway; 
C.  The sidewalk cafe shall allow for a minimum of eight (8) feet along Broad Street, and four (4) feet elsewhere, for pedestrian usable, unobstructed sidewalk traffic so as to maintain pedestrian access; except that cafe's in front of a bus stop or taxi stand shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet for pedestrian useable, unobstructed sidewalk traffic; 
D.  Any space dedicated to outdoor sidewalk dining shall be delineated via a "rope system" designed for that purpose; 
E.  The entire sidewalk area in front of the premises shall be kept clean and free of litter. Sidewalks including eighteen (18) inches into the street shall be maintained by sweeping or washed daily or more frequently. Trash receptacles shall be provided if the health officer determines it necessary; 
F.  The furniture to be used in the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall be made of durable material, such as sturdy vinyl/plastic, wrought iron or wood. Upholstered furniture is prohibited; 
G.  No permanent form of space delineation or construction for the sidewalk cafe will be permitted within the public right-of-way. Portable barriers or planters not less than three (3) feet nor more than four (4) feet in height shall be placed on the sidewalk to define the cafe area and the unobstructed passageway. The portable barriers or planters shall be removed when the cafe is not in operation; 
H.  The sidewalk cafe shall be at the same elevation as the sidewalk. Paint, carpet, platforms, or any other surface cover or treatment of any kind shall not be permitted in the area of the sidewalk cafe; 
I.  Signage including advertising signage for the sidewalk cafe is prohibited; 
J.  The sidewalk cafe shall provide only table service; 
K.  There shall be no preparation of food or beverages outdoors; 
L.  All dishes, utensils, containers, tablecloths, napkins, cutlery and other items used in the operation or decoration of the sidewalk cafe shall be made of non-disposable and reusable materials; 
M.  The sidewalk cafe shall open no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and close no later than 10:00 p.m. daily, and shall only be open during operating hours of the eating and drinking establishment. No furniture or other items of the sidewalk cafe shall remain outside of the eating and drinking establishment for more than fifteen (15) minutes after 10:00 p.m. or after the close of operating hours of the eating and drinking establishment, whichever is earlier; 
N.  No music or any sound device shall be played at the sidewalk cafe or so that it may be heard in the outdoor area; 
O.  The license holder shall maintain and repair any damage to the sidewalk area in front of the premises and sidewalk cafe area; 
P.  The license holder shall maintain liability and property damage insurance for the sidewalk cafe at all times, and is required to provide proof of insurance by way of a certificate of insurance and policy endorsement naming the city as an additional insured, by a company duly authorized to transact business under the laws of the state, prior to the license being issued. Liability insurance shall provide for payment of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to satisfy all claims or damage by reason of bodily injuries to, or the death of, any person as a direct or indirect result of the operation of the sidewalk cafe, or for injury to any person occurring on the premises occupied by such cafe, and further providing for the payment of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to satisfy all claims for property damage occurring as a direct or indirect result of the operation of such cafe; 
Q.  Prior to the license being issued, the applicant shall execute and file an indemnification agreement, in the form prepared or approved by the city attorney, in which it shall agree to forever defend, protect, indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from and against any and all claims, causes of action, injuries, losses, damages, expenses, attorney's fees and costs arising out of or which may arise out of, or be alleged to arise out of the operation of the sidewalk cafe; 
R.  All local property taxes and water and sewer charges must be current at the time an application for a sidewalk cafe is received by the city or review of the application will not take place. 
S.  The health officer may establish rules and regulations pursuant to this chapter for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 4, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.050 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    The sidewalk area of an establishment that holds a Class C Plenary Retail Consumption License under the laws of the state upon which a sidewalk cafe license has been granted pursuant to this chapter may constitute premises for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. No retail food establishment may serve, deliver or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises or upon any sidewalk cafe without having first obtained the necessary approval by the city alcohol beverage control board for an expansion of premises to include the sidewalk area in accordance with all applicable state and municipal regulations. Such approval is separate from and must be obtained in addition to a license to operate a sidewalk cafe. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to amend any provision of Chapter 5.08 (alcoholic beverages) of this Code or to amend or change any provision of any alcoholic beverage control license issued by the city. 
    Patrons of a sidewalk cafe that does not have a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to carry onto or consume any alcoholic beverage on the sidewalk cafe. No alcoholic beverages of any kind may be possessed, served or consumed in the public right-of-way outside of the delineated sidewalk dining area. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 5, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.060 - License term. 
    The term of the license shall be for a period of seven (7) months commencing on April 1 and ending on October 31 of a particular year. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 6, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.070 - Fees. 
    The sidewalk cafe license fee shall be as follows: 
1-10 seats-One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
11-25 seats-Two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Over 25 seats-Three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
    A request to waive fees for special events such as restaurant week or sidewalk sales must be submitted in writing, thirty (30) days in advance, to the health officer in the department of health and human services and shall be reviewed and approved by the director of the aforesaid department in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4567 , §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4097, § 7, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.080 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    A sidewalk cafe license may be suspended or revoked by the health officer upon violation of this chapter or a determination by the health officer that continued operation of the sidewalk cafe is inimical to the public health, safety and welfare. Such suspension or revocation shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed by certified mail to the permit holder at the address set forth in the application. Any suspension or revocation issued by the health officer may be appealed to the director of health and human services within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of suspension or revocation. An applicant/establishment which has had its sidewalk cafe license revoked under the terms of this chapter shall be prohibited from operating a sidewalk cafe for a period of two (2) years of the date of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 8, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.090 - Rejection of application for license. 
    In the event that the health officer rejects an application for a sidewalk cafe, the applicant has the right to appeal the rejection to the director of health and human services within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of rejection. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 9, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.100 - Prohibited activities. 
    The granting of a sidewalk cafe license under this chapter shall not be construed to permit any activity otherwise prohibited by this Code or by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 10, 1-26-2010) 
7.54.110 - Violations and penalties. 
    In addition to the suspension or revocation of a sidewalk cafe license, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 11, 1-26-2010) 
Chapter 7.56 - SLAUGHTERHOUSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

7.56.010 - Health of employees-Report required. 
    Persons afflicted with tuberculosis or other communicable diseases shall not be employed in nor shall they be permitted to enter any part of a slaughterhouse where animals are slaughtered, dressed, or where the meat of the same is stored or handled. The operator of every slaughterhouse who has reason to believe that any employee is affected with a diseased condition shall immediately report in writing the facts upon which such belief is based, together with the name and address of the person believed to be affected, to the health officer. 
(Prior code § 38-140) 
7.56.020 - Regulations governing clothing. 
    The outer clothing worn by persons who handle meat or meat food products shall be of material that is readily cleansed, and only clean garments shall be worn. 
(Prior code § 38-141) 
7.56.030 - Toilet and dressing room facilities required. 
    Adequate toilet facilities and dressing rooms shall be provided, which shall be entirely separated from compartments in which carcasses or parts thereof are cured, stored, packed, handled or prepared. When such rooms open into compartments in which meat or meat food products are handled, they shall be provided with properly ventilated vestibules and with automatically closing doors. They shall be properly lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean condition. Adequate hand-washing facilities shall be provided in the slaughterhouse in addition to those in the toilet rooms. 
(Prior code § 38-142) 
7.56.040 - Regulations governing workrooms-Storage temperature. 
A.  The rooms or compartments in which meats or meat food products are prepared, cured, stored, packed or otherwise handled shall be free from odors from toilet rooms, catch basins, casing departments, tank rooms, hide cellars, etc., and shall be kept free from flies and other vermin by screening or other methods. 
B.  All fresh meat held at the slaughterhouse longer than four hours shall be stored at a temperature not to exceed fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Prior code § 38-143) 
7.56.050 - Hides and pelts-Removal and storage. 
    Hides or pelts shall be removed immediately from any room used for slaughtering, storing or preparing meats or meat food products, and if stored on the premises, a separate room shall be provided for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 38-144) 
7.56.060 - Sanitary maintenance of yards, pens and chutes required-Feeding of animals. 
    The yards, fences, pens, chutes, alleys, etc., belonging to the premises, whether they are used or not, shall be maintained in a clean condition. The feeding of hogs or other animals on slaughterhouse refuse will not be permitted unless the refuse has been previously sterilized. No use incompatible with proper sanitation shall be made of any part of the premises. 
(Prior code § 38-145) 
7.56.070 - Disposition of sick, diseased or abnormal animals-Inspection requirements. 
    No person, firm or corporation operating a slaughterhouse shall allow any animal which is known to be diseased, obviously sick, immature or in an abnormal condition, to be brought into a slaughterhouse until proper authorization for the slaughter has been given, after antemortem examination, by an official representative of the Federal Meat Inspection Service, by an inspector of the State Department of Health, by a licensed municipal meat inspector or by a duly licensed veterinarian. Such animals which are found to be abnormal and obviously unfit for food shall not be permitted to enter a slaughterhouse where animals are slaughtered for food purposes, but shall be disposed of in a suitable manner. Abnormal animals which are believed to be satisfactory shall be slaughtered after the slaughter of animals which are apparently normal, and such abnormal animals shall be slaughtered under inspection by an official representative of the Federal Meat Inspection Service, by an inspector of the State Department of Health, by a licensed municipal meat inspector or by a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(Prior code § 38-146) 
7.56.080 - Infected skins or hides-Disinfection and disposal. 
    Skins and hides from animals affected with any disease infectious to humans shall be disinfected, except in case of anthrax or charbon; if infected with either of these diseases, the hide and all other parts of the carcass shall be immediately incinerated. In this case, the killing floor and all implements which have come in contact with the carcass shall be thoroughly disinfected before being used again. 
(Prior code § 38-147) 
7.56.090 - Disinfection procedure for butchers. 
    Butchers who dress or handle diseased carcasses or parts of the same shall cleanse their hands of all grease and then immerse them in disinfectant and rinse them in clear water before dressing or handling healthy carcasses. 
(Prior code § 38-148) 
7.56.100 - Prevention of contamination-Disposal of contaminated meats required. 
    Due care must be taken to prevent any contamination of meats by contact with the floor. Meats which have become contaminated shall be disposed of in the same manner as prescribed for diseased carcasses, and shall not be sold for food. 
(Prior code § 38-149) 
7.56.110 - Inflation of carcasses restricted. 
    Carcasses or parts thereof shall not be inflated with air from the human mouth, and no inflation of carcasses, except by mechanical means, shall be allowed. 
(Prior code § 38-150) 
7.56.120 - Sanitary use of skewers and knives required. 
    Carcasses shall not be dressed with skewers, knives, etc., that have been held in the mouth. Skewers which have been used shall be cleansed before being used again. Spitting on whetstones or steels when sharpening knives shall not be allowed. 
(Prior code § 38-151) 
7.56.130 - Separation of edible and inedible products required. 
    Animals or parts of animals unfit for human food shall not be rendered in rooms where animals intended for use as human foods are killed, dressed, stored or handled, or in rooms directly communicating therewith, and no apparatus for the rendering of inedible products shall be installed in rooms where animals intended for edible use are killed, dressed, stored or handled. 
(Prior code § 38-152) 
Chapter 7.60 - VERMIN CONTROL 
Sections: 

7.60.010 - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context shows another sense to be intended, shall be held to have the meanings hereinafter stated: 
    "Buildings" means any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transacting of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor; including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
    "Occupant" means the individual, partnership or corporation that has the use of or occupies any business building or a part or fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibility of an occupant of a building. 
    "Owner" means the actual owner of the business building, whether individual, partnership or corporation, or the agent of the building, or other person having custody of the building or to whom the rent is paid. In the case of business buildings leased with a clause in the lease specifying that the lessee is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee will be considered in such cases the "owner" for the purpose of this chapter. 
    "Rat eradication" means the elimination or extermination of rats within buildings such that the buildings are completely freed of rats or there is no evidence of rat infestation remaining, by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc. 
    "Rat harborage" means any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside of a structure of any kind. 
    "Ratproofing" applies to a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into buildings from the exterior or from one building or establishment to another. It consists essentially of treating all actual or potential openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roof and foundations, that maybe reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with material impervious to rat gnawing. 
(Prior code § 38-229) 
7.60.020 - Infested premises unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises within the city to maintain such premises in a vermin- or rat-infested condition or permit any such premises to become infested with vermin or rodents. 
(Prior code § 38-230) 
7.60.030 - Inspection authorized. 
    The director may cause an inspection of any premises in the city which the department has good reason to believe is not in a ratproof condition, and shall have the power to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 38-231) 
7.60.040 - Remedy by owner required. 
    After the owner or occupant of any premises has been notified by the director, health officer or their authorized agents that such premises are vermin- or rat-infested, it shall be the duty of such owner or occupant to take immediate measures to remedy the condition. 
(Prior code § 38-232) 
7.60.050 - Ratproofing-Interference prohibited-Exception. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove, damage or destroy any part of any building or other appurtenance of improved real estate premises, intended to protect such premises against ingress of rats, or in any other way to create a condition by which ingress for rats is made possible; provided, that this section shall not apply where the interference with the ratproofing is made necessary in connection with a lawful construction, which shall be promptly restored. 
(Prior code § 38-233) 
7.60.060 - Deposits of filth prohibited-Exception. 
    No person shall throw, place or deposit, or permit any person under his or her control or employment to throw, place or deposit, any putrid substance, night soil, filth of any kind, garbage, rubbish, refuse piles, old lumber or other rat harborage or any unwholesome material, on or upon any vacant lot, alley, lane, yard, sidewalk or street or river or upon any private lot or public ground within the city, without the approval of the health officer or other authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 38-234) 
7.60.070 - Ratproof and inaccessible feed containers required. 
    No person shall place food in the open for the feed of any domesticated fowl, birds or animals, except in such containers as will prevent the scattering of such food upon the ground. After such feeding, such food shall not be allowed to remain where it is accessible to rats. 
(Prior code § 38-235) 
7.60.080 - Demolition of structures-Permit and fumigation required. 
    It shall be the duty of any person engaged in the demolition of any structure in the city to first secure permission from the director before the commencement of such demolition. Any building infested with rodents and insects shall be treated with an effective fumigating compound before such demolition begins. 
(Prior code § 38-236) 
Chapter 7.64 - VITAL STATISTICS 
Sections: 

7.64.010 - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Vital statistics" means statistics concerning births, deaths and marriages. 
(Prior code § 38-262) 
7.64.020 - Bureau-Powers and duties. 
    In accordance with state laws, the bureau of vital statistics is authorized to receive and file the properly executed original birth, stillbirth, marriage and death certificates, such events occurring in the city. 
(Prior code § 38-263) 
7.64.030 - Issuance of burial permits authorized. 
    The registrar, upon the receipt of a death or stillbirth certificate, shall issue a burial or removal permit to the undertaker filing the certificate. 
(Prior code § 38-264) 
7.64.040 - Issuance of marriage licenses authorized. 
    The bureau of vital statistics is authorized to take applications for and issue marriage licenses. 
(Prior code § 38-265) 
7.64.050 - Fees. 
A.  For each birth certificate issued, fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
B.  For each death certificate issued, fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
C.  For each marriage certificate issued, fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
D.  State mandated fees: 
1.  For each disinterment permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
2.  For each burial permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
3.  For each transit permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
4.  For each marriage license, twenty-eight dollars ($28.00). 
5.  For each domestic partnership certificate issued, eight dollars ($8.00). 
6.  For each domestic partnership affidavit, twenty-eight dollars ($28.00). 
E.  No fees are collected for births, marriage, and death certifications when being used for newborns and Social Security pension benefits. 
F.  For corrections to be made to official records, thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 37, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3649 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3609 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3540 § 1, 2003; prior code § 38-266) 
Chapter 7.68 - MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

7.68.010 - Rummage sales-Permission and disinfection required. 
    No rummage sale shall be held without permission of the director, and no secondhand wearing apparel or bed clothing shall be sold or exposed for sale in the city unless they have been previously disinfected to the satisfaction of the health officer or authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 38-260) 
7.68.020 - Hazardous dredging material for landfill. 
A.  Definition. As used in this section: 
    "Hazardous dredging material" means any hazardous waste including any solid waste or combination of solid wastes including toxic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, radioactive, biologically infectious, explosive, or flammable solid waste, which poses a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms or the standards and procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:26-8. 
B.  Prohibited. The use of hazardous dredging material for landfill is prohibited in the city. 
(Prior code §§ 38-289, 38-290) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Abandonment prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Prior code § 43-1) 
8.04.020 - Removal of locks required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device thereunder, without first removing the snap lock or doors from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Prior code § 43-2) 
Chapter 8.08 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as an "ordinance regulating burglar and holdup alarm businesses, systems and users." 
(Prior code § 47-1) 
8.08.020 - Purpose-Definitions. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar and holdup alarm systems, alarm, businesses, alarm agents and alarm users as defined in this chapter. 
B.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    "Alarm business" means any business operated by a person for a profit, which engages in the activity of alter-lug, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar or holdup alarm system or a unit which detects and causes an alarm to sound or annunciate or which causes any of these activities to take place. Those premises alarms classified as fire alarms are outside the scope of this chapter. 
    "Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices (or a single device such as a solid-state unit which plugs directly into a one hundred ten (110) volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police personnel are expected to respond. In this chapter, the term "alarm system" includes the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems" and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition. 
    "Alarm user" means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary systems. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises (other than a proprietary system), the person using such system is an "alarm user." Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this chapter are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of alarm system and shall be subject to this chapter. 
    "Annunciator" means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible signals, shows when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated, or it may also indicate line trouble. 
    "Ansi" means the American National Standards Institute. 
    "Answering service" means a telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees emergency signals from alarm systems and, thereafter, immediately relaying the message by live voice to the communication center of the police department. 
    "Automatic dialing device" means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    "Automatic holdup alarm system" means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
    "Burglar alarm system" means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
    "Central station" means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals. 
    "Central station equipment" means the signal receiving, recording or retransmitting equipment installed in the central station. 
    "Central station system" means a system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times. 
    "Chief" means the chief of the police department of the city or designated representative. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    "Department" means the police department of the city or any authorized agent. 
    "Direct connect" means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the local government, for example, a police communication center. 
    "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions. 
    "Holdup alarm system" means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
    "Interconnect" means to connect an alarm system to a voice-grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
    "Local alarm system" means a signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within which the system is installed. 
    "Manual holdup alarm system" means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Primary trunk line" means a telephone line leading directly into the communication center of the police department, that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company and covering the service area within the police department's jurisdiction. 
    "Remote signaling system" means an alarm signaling system which, when activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal from an alarm signaling device to a central location, other than the department, where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond to the signal. 
    "Subscriber" means a person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and or service the alarm device. 
    "Telephone company" means the utility that furnishes telephone services to the city. 
    "UL" means Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
(Prior code § 47-2) 
8.08.030 - Promulgation of rules. 
    The police director shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for his or her respective department for the implementation of this chapter and for determination of grounds for clerical suspension or revocation of any license or permit required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 47-3) 
8.08.040 - Interconnection of automatic dialing devices to primary trunk lines. 
A.  No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunk line after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all automatic dialing devices interconnected to a primary trunk line shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of such device shall be responsible for having the device disconnected within the twenty (20) day time period. 
C.  Automatic dialing devices designed to transmit signals directly to the department may be interconnected to a special trunk line into the department. Before such a device is interconnected to a special trunk line, the person performing this operation shall first obtain instructions from the department concerning the procedure to be followed. The department shall designate the number to be used for this purpose. 
D.  The owner or lessee of an automatic dialing device which is interconnected to a special trunk line transmitting directly into the department shall pay the city an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover the cost to the city of providing the personnel to monitor the special trunk line and amortize its cost. 
(Prior code § 47-4) 
8.08.050 - Interconnection of automatic dialing devices to intermediary services. 
A.  Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to: 
1.  A central station; 
2.  A modified central station; or 
3.  A licensed answering service. 
B.  The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the department shall be over a special trunk line, except that central stations may relay messages over a direct line. 
C.  Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or more telephone numbers available to the owner or lessee of the devices or their designated representatives at another location. 
D.  This section shall apply only to those automatic dialing devices interconnected to the communication center in the department, other municipal offices or to telephone company operators. 
(Prior code § 47-5) 
8.08.060 - List of installations for certain automatic dialing devices. 
    Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every alarm business which has interconnected any automatic dialing device in the city to a special trunk line in the communication center of the department shall maintain a current list of such installations for inspection by the chief during the course of his official duties and shall include in such list: 
A.  The name, home address and telephone number of the device's owner or lessee; 
B.  The address of the location where the device is installed and the telephone number at that location; 
C.  The name and telephone number of at least one other person who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who is authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by the automatic dialing device and who can open the premises wherein the device is installed. 
(Prior code § 47-6) 
8.08.070 - Standards for automatic dialing devices. 
A.  Automatic dialing devices installed on any premises within the city which are interconnected to a special trunk line transmitting signals into the department or to a telephone line directly serviced by telephone company operators that will be responded to by members of the department shall meet the following minimum standards, as determined by the chief: 
1.  The contents of the recorded message to be transmitted by such device must be intelligible and in a format approved by the chief as appropriate for the type of emergency being reported. 
2.  Upon a single stimulus of the alarm device, an automatic dialing device may place two separate calls to the department via the special trunk line. No such call shall be longer than one minute and fifteen (15) seconds in duration. There must be at least three minutes between the completion of the first call and the initiation of the second, and the second call must be dearly identified as a second call. 
3.  Messages transmitted during such calls, stating the location and nature of the alarm condition, shall not exceed fifteen (15) seconds in length. 
4.  The time gap between delivery of messages must be less than five seconds. 
5.  All such devices shall be capable of transmitting an emergency message to two or more separate locations, so that upon activation any message may be sent not only on a special trunk line or a telephone line serviced directly by telephone company operators, but also to a location where an authorized person is available to respond to the emergency message and to open the premises on which the device is installed. 
6.  The sensory apparatus and hardware comprising such devices shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in such physical condition that false alarms will be minimized. 
B.  This section shall apply only to those automatic dialing devices interconnected to the communication center of the department. 
(Prior code § 47-7) 
8.08.080 - Operating and servicing instructions for automatic dialing devices. 
A.  Every alarm business selling or leasing to any person an automatic dialing device which is installed on such person's premises in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall furnish that person with instructions that provide adequate information to enable persons using such device to operate it properly and, if the device is to be serviced or maintained by another alarm business, shall furnish such other alarm business with a manual or other information necessary to enable it to service or properly maintain such device. 
B.  If the chief reasonably finds such information to be incomplete or unclear or inadequate to explain how the device operates and is constructed, he or she may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet his or her approval and then to distribute the revised information to persons who have had such devices installed as well as to persons subsequently having such devices installed. 
C.  Every alarm business selling or leasing to any person an automatic dialing device which is installed on such person's premises in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall provide or make available at all times service to repair such device should it malfunction and shall furnish to the person buying or leasing such device written information concerning how service may be obtained at any time, including the telephone number to call for service. 
(Prior code § 47-8) 
8.08.090 - Direct connections to police department. 
A.  Upon the favorable recommendation of the chief, alarms from business premises and financial institutions may be connected to the department. 
B.  Any subscriber or alarm user who obtains authority from the chief to connect his alarm system to the department may contract with any licensed alarm business of his or her choice for the sale, installation, maintenance and/or servicing of the alarm system to be installed on his or her premises. 
C.  The alarm subscriber approved for a direct connection to the department or the alarm business contracting for servicing the subscriber's alarm system shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line between the subscriber's premises and the alarm-receiving equipment at the department and for furnishing the appropriate interface equipment, if required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving equipment used to operate the standard annunciator panel. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter contained in Sections 8.08.140 and 8.08.150 concerning alarm user permits and false alarms shall apply to all subscribers or persons having direct connect systems, except municipal, county and state agencies. 
(Prior code § 47-9) 
8.08.100 - Standards for systems-Inspections. 
A.  Within six months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all alarm systems installed in commercial or public buildings shall utilize equipment and methods of installation substantially equivalent to or exceeding the following minimum applicable UL or ANSI standards: UL 609 (ANSI SE2.1-1972), Local Burglar Alarm Units and Systems; UL 636 (ANSI SE2.7-1973), Holdup Alarm Units and Systems; and UL 681 (ANSI SE2.3-1972), Installation and Classification of Mercantile and Bank Burglar Alarm Systems. 
B.  Within six months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all alarm systems installed in residences shall utilize equipment which shall be substantially equivalent to or exceed the minimum applicable UL Standard 1023 (ANSI SE2.4-1972, Household Burglar Alarm Systems Units, and such equipment shall be installed in a safe, reliable and workmanlike manner. 
C.  The equipment or hardware used and/or the manner of installation of the alarm system may correspond to any of the several levels of protection or grades of service listed in the applicable standards; provided, however, that alarm system users shall not be required to provide protection for all of the areas or openings which may be required to be protected by the applicable standards. 
D.  The standards referred to in this section are adopted as part of this chapter, subject to the modifications and qualifications set forth herein, and a copy of such standards shall be kept on file at the department and shall be available for public inspection. 
E.  In those instances where UL and/or ANSI have not established standards for categories of equipment or where new equipment is undergoing field testing, the chief may require that the alarm system be inspected at the expense of the alarm user by a professional electrical engineer who shall certify whether the alarm system appears to be safe and reliable. 
F.  Alarm systems which input into an automatic dialing device are subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 47-10) 
8.08.110 - Inspections-Correction of violations. 
A.  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the chief shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in the city in or upon which alarm systems or alarm businesses subject to this chapter are located to inspect the installation and/or operation of such alarm systems or alarm businesses. 
B.  If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this chapter, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the owner, lessee or other person responsible for the alarm system or business in violation of this chapter. Such report shall require the corrections within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of the violations discovered and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the revocation of the alarm business's license to operate or in the revocation of the alarm user's permit, in accordance with provisions of this chapter relating to revocation of licenses and permits. The alarm user or alarm business shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violations upon good cause shown. 
(Prior code § 47-11) 
8.08.120 - Testing of equipment. 
    No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining permission from the chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to the department unless the messages are to be relayed to the department. 
(Prior code § 47-12) 
8.08.130 - Notice of disruption in service. 
    When an alarm business's service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instructions. 
(Prior code § 47-13) 
8.08.140 - Alarm user permit required-Fees. 
A.  Permit. Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm system he or she operates within this city from the chief. 
B.  Alarm User Permit Application. 
1.  The alarm user applying for the permit shall state on a permit application form to be prepared by the department his or her name, the address of the residence or business or businesses in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, his or her telephone number, the type of alarm system (local, direct connect, central station, etc.), the alarm business or businesses selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system and the name and telephone number of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which the system is installed. 
2.  An alarm user permit application may be filed for business and residential premises. In those instances where a residence is to be the protected premises, i.e., a burglar alarm, the alarm business installing same and the residential alarm user are required to interconnect any such device through a central station screening unit. Thus the central station is able to intercept the initial signal, then verify its accuracy, prior to transmitting it to the police department. Such intercept shall be so stated on the application. 
3.  Any alarm user who installs a system ninety (90) days or more after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must submit with the application a certificate of a licensed alarm business stating that, in the opinion of such business, the alarm system complies with Section 8.08.100. Such certificate shall satisfy the requirements of subsection (D)(1) of this section for the year in which the alarm permit is first obtained. 
C.  Alarm User Permit Fee. 
1.  There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) permit fee. 
2.  There shall be an annual renewal fee of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) payable January 1st of each year. For connections made on or after July 1st, a fifty-five dollar ($55.00) fee will be charged for the balance of the year. 
D.  Every alarm user licensed under this section shall be required to have his or her alarm system inspected at least once a year by a licensed alarm business and shall post a certificate of such inspection of the premises where the alarm system is maintained. The certificate shall state that in the opinion of the alarm business: 
1.  The alarm system complies with the applicable provisions of Section 8.08.100 of this chapter if the system was installed ninety (90) days or more after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
2.  The alarm system is safe and reliable if it was installed prior to ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
E.  An applicant for an alarm user permit may file a request with the chief, requesting that he or she temporarily waive the requirements of subsections (B)(2) and (D)(1) of this section in circumstances in which the public's safety, health or welfare is involved. 
F.  Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required by this section or who, after having a permit revoked or suspended and after exhausting his or her rights to hearing and appeal, fails to disconnect his alarm system shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 47-14) 
8.08.150 - Revocation or suspension of permit following false alarms. 
A.  More than three false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm system for which an alarm user permit has been obtained may constitute grounds for revocation of such permit, subject to the provisions of this section. 
B.  After the department has recorded three false alarms within a calendar year from any alarm user permit holder, it shall notify the permit holder in writing by first-class mail of such fact and shall require that the permit holder submit a report to the police chief, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such notice, describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of the false alarms. If, however, the alarm user, by reason of absence from the city or on any other reasonable basis, requests an extension of time to file the report, the chief shall extend the fifteen (15) day period for a reasonable period. If the permit holder fails to submit such a report within fifteen (15) days or within any such extended period, the chief may revoke the user's permit; and under such circumstances, the user shall not be entitled to a hearing or appeal under this section. 
C.  If the alarm user submits a report as required by subsection B of this section but the chief determines that the report is unsatisfactory or that the alarm user has failed to show by the report that he or she had taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the chief may issue written notice by first-class mail of his or her intent to revoke or suspend the alarm user's permit. 
D.  If, after submission of a report required by subsection B of this section which is satisfactory to the chief, the alarm system of the permit holder incurs one or more false alarms during the same calendar year, the chief may issue written notice by first-class mail of his or her intention to revoke or suspend the alarm user's permit. 
E.  Upon receipt of a notice of intent to revoke or suspend an alarm user's permit pursuant to subsections C and D of this section, the alarm permit holder may, within ten (10) days of such receipt, submit a written request by first-class mail, return receipt requested, for a hearing before the chief, setting forth the reasons that his or her permit should not be revoked or suspended. 
F.  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the holder of the permit by the chief by first-class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
G.  At the hearing before the chief, the holder of the permit or his or her authorized representative shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses and to present evidence on his or her own behalf. After the hearing, the chief may either issue an order of revocation, withdraw the notice of revocation or suspend the permit until such time that he or she is satisfied that the cause or causes of the false alarms have been eliminated. 
H.  Any person whose permit has been revoked or suspended pursuant to this section shall have the right, within ten (10) days after receiving notice of revocation from the chief, to file a written appeal by first-class mail or hand delivery with the director, and no alarm user shall be required to discontinue use of his or her alarm system prior to the expiration of such ten (10) day period. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The respective director shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt by the city and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or designated representative shall have the right to present written or oral argument, or both, in support of his or her appeal. The respective director shall issue his or her decision within ten (10) days after the hearing. 
I.  If a permit holder files an appeal pursuant to subsection H of this section, he or she shall not be required to discontinue the alarm system until a final decision is made on his or her appeal. 
J.  An alarm system user whose permit has been revoked is not precluded under this section from applying for a new permit. The chief, however, is not required to issue a new permit unless he or she is satisfied that the alarm user's system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The chief may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon issuing a new permit to an alarm user with respect to the particular system for which the permit was revoked. 
(Prior code § 47-15) 
8.08.160 - Service by mail. 
    When a person or the city or the chief has the right or is required to act or take some proceeding within a prescribed period pursuant to this chapter and service is made by mail, two days shall be added to the prescribed period. Whenever a person, the chief or any city official or employee is required to make delivery by first-class mail, delivery in lieu thereof may be made by hand by any person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Prior code § 47-16) 
8.08.170 - Limitations of city's obligations. 
    The city of Elizabeth shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee hereunder. Any individual permit issued hereunder may be revoked at any time by the director upon recommendation of the chief provided that thirty (30) days notice is given in writing to the permittee. Any permit granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express condition that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the city's operation or failure of alarm console of the city, interconnect system and associated items, or the permittee's alarm device, or termination or disruption of interconnect services. 
(Prior code § 47-17) 
8.08.180 - Violations and penalties. 
    The failure of any person to obtain an alarm system user permit as required in Section 8.08.140, to make the corrections to alarm systems as required by Section 8.08.110(B) or to obey any order of the chief of suspension or revocation of an alarm user permit after such person has exhausted his or her rights to hearings or appeals constitutes an offense punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that such violation continues after the expiration of the period allowed for compliance under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 47-18) 
8.08.190 - False alarms-Prevention and payment of costs. 
A.  When emergency messages are received by the department that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of such device, or his or her representative, disconnect such device until it is made to comply with the requirements. 
B.  In the case of false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the proper department in accordance with procedure established by the department and consistent with the requirements of this chapter. In addition, in the case of false alarms, the chief shall cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of the alarms on file. For such false alarms the following penalties are prescribed: for the first, second and third false alarm in any give a calendar year a warning shall be issued; for the fourth and fifth false alarm in the same calendar year a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the city and. for each subsequent false alarm a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city. Where the investigation of the department discloses continued abuse of the privilege or connection to the alarm console and a disregard of the alarm user for taking remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the chief reserves the right to require disconnection from the alarm console for a limited or permanent time provided that no such permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause before the police director or his or her designee why such action should not be taken. 
(Prior code § 47-19) 
Chapter 8.12 - COLLECTION OF LEAVES, BRANCHES AND UNDERBRUSH 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Collection and placement at curbline. 
    Material such as leaves, trees, branches, shrubbery, underbrush and pruning waste shall be gathered by the respective residents and property owners of the city and placed at the curbline or within a reasonable distance of the curbline. No material shall be placed in the street, alleyway, roadway or any other area where vehicular traffic operates. 
(Prior code § 58-18) 
8.12.020 - Specifications for containers. 
    The respective residents and property owners of the city shall place the materials which they desire to be collected in biodegradable paper bags, in accordance with the following specifications: 
A.  The paper leaf bags shall be of double sheath type and shall be biodegradable. Plastic bags are not permitted. 
B.  All paper bags shall be securely tied or fastened at the top. 
(Prior code § 58-19) 
8.12.030 - Size limits on bundled materials. 
    Materials such as branches, small trees and brush shall be tied in bundles not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight or over eighteen (18) inches in diameter or six feet in length. 
(Prior code § 58-20) 
8.12.040 - Compliance required. 
    Loose leaves and other materials described in this chapter shall not be deposited in or on the curb or street other than as herein provided, under penalty of law. All leaves are to be placed at the curb on the first pickup day of the twice weekly pickup schedule. Properly bagged leaves will be picked up by city forces and disposed of at New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved composting sites. 
(Prior code § 58-21) 
8.12.050 - Enforcement officer designated. 
    For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the director of the department of public works or designated agents are granted the power and authority to serve as the chapter enforcement officers, including the authority to sign necessary summonses returnable in the Elizabeth Municipal Court. 
(Prior code § 58-22) 
Chapter 8.16 - DEMOLITION CONTAINERS, DUMPSTERS AND ROLL-OFF SHIPPING CONTAINERS 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Definitions. 
    "Demolition container" means a watertight roll-off container with an open top used for the purpose of depositing debris as the result of demolition activities. 
    "Dumpster" means a watertight container usually equipped with a tight-fitting lid used for the disposal of refuse other than building materials. 
    "Roll-off shipping container" means a watertight roll-off container used for the purpose of shipping goods and cargo. 
(Prior code § 27-1) 
8.16.020 - Demolition containers. 
A.  No person shall place or use a demolition container on a city street without first obtaining a demolition container permit from the bureau of construction. Prior to the issuance of a demolition container permit, approval must be obtained from the Elizabeth police department division of traffic. 
B.  Areas beneath and surrounding a demolition container shall be kept clean at all times and shall be cleaned immediately after the removal of such container. 
C.  The demolition container shall not be filled higher than twelve (12) inches above the top edge. 
D.  All demolition containers placed in the city street shall display the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the responsible person for the demolition container; 
2.  The demolition container permit number. 
E.  The demolition container shall be marked at each end with at least one reflector and with at least one iridescent stripe measuring four feet by four inches. 
F.  Demolition containers shall be placed on the street no more than five consecutive days and may not be renewed without written permission from the construction official. The construction official may for good cause extend the time period except the total time including extensions shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Each extension shall be requested in writing. The determination of the extension shall be in writing. 
(Prior code § 27-2) 
8.16.030 - Roll-off shipping containers. 
A.  No person shall place or use a roll-off shipping container on the sidewalk or street without first obtaining a permit from the central licensing bureau. Prior to the issuance of a roll-off shipping container permit, approval must be obtained from the Elizabeth police department division of traffic. 
B.  The roll-off shipping container shall be placed on the street no more than three days and may not be renewed. 
C.  No person shall be permitted to obtain a roll-off shipping container permit more than twice in any calendar year or more than two permits at any given address in any calendar year. 
D.  All roll-off shipping containers placed in the city street shall bear the following: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the responsible person for the roll-off shipping container; and 
2.  The roll-off shipping container permit number. 
E.  The container shall be marked at each end with at least one reflector and with at least one iridescent stripe measuring four feet by four inches. 
(Prior code § 27-3) 
8.16.040 - Dumpsters. 
A.  No persons shall place or use a dumpster on any city street without first obtaining a dumpster permit from the bureau of construction. Prior to the issuance of a dumpster permit, approval must be obtained from the Elizabeth police department, division of traffic. 
B.  Area beneath and surrounding a dumpster container shall be kept clean at all times and shall be cleaned immediately after removal of such container. 
C.  The dumpster shall not be filled higher than four inches above the top edge. 
D.  All dumpsters placed in the city street shall bear the following: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the responsible person for the container; and 
2.  The dumpster permit number. 
E.  The dumpster shall be marked at each end with at least one reflector and with at least one iridescent stripe measuring four feet by four inches. 
F.  Dumpster containers shall be placed on the street no more than three days and may not be renewed. 
(Prior code § 27-4) 
8.16.050 - Fees. 
    The fees for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per permit. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 39, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 27-5) 
8.16.060 - Containers to be covered at all times; leaking/discharging prohibited. 
A.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the city of Elizabeth or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    "Refuse container" means any waste container that a person controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags. 
    "Stormwater" means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
    "Waters of the state" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the state of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction. 
B.  Prohibited Conduct. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing. 
    Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the city. 
C.  Exceptions to Prohibition. 
a.  Permitted temporary demolition containers; 
b.  Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers); 
c.  Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers; 
d.  Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater under a valid NJPDES permit; 
e.  Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white goods placed curbside for pickup). 
D.  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the construction official and health officer of the city. 
E.  Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the general penalty provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4042, §§ I-V, 5-26-2009) 
Chapter 8.20 - EMERGENCY FUEL OIL DELIVERIES 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - City officer to act as agent for landlord in certain cases. 
    The city council of the city, pursuant to the Emergency Fuel Oil Delivery Act, P.L. 1980, c. 170, of the state of New Jersey, does provide that the director of health, welfare and housing or the health officer of this city is designated, whenever necessary to protect the health and safety of residential tenants, to act as an agent for a landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner to restore the proper heating of any residential property rented by said landlord; provided, however, that at least twelve (12) hours have elapsed if the outside air temperature is between thirty-three (33) degrees and fifty-five (55) degrees Fahrenheit, inclusive, or at least four hours have elapsed if the outside air temperature is thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or less, since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or agency, prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made by the tenant or his or her representative to notify the landlord of the lack of heat, and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action. "Lack of heat" means maintaining less heat than required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31. 
(Prior code § 77-27) 
8.20.020 - Payment for deliveries. 
    Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance with Section 8.20.010 of this chapter may bill the landlord directly, or the city may issue a voucher to the fuel oil dealer who delivered the fuel oil for the money amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the service charge for refiring the burner, if any. The voucher shall be paid in the manner provided for the approval and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17. 
(Prior code § 77-28) 
8.20.030 - Civil penalty. 
    Any landlord or his or her agent whose negligence or failure to act results in municipal action pursuant to Section 8.20.010 shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each affected dwelling unit in the residential property. Such penalty shall be recoverable by the city in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any action to collect or enforce any such penalty shall be brought in the Superior Court, County District Court or municipal court. The amount of such penalty shall be paid to the city to be used for general municipal purposes. 
(Prior code § 77-29) 
8.20.040 - Reimbursement for costs incurred. 
    In any penalty enforcement proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter, the court shall also order the landlord or his or her agent to reimburse the city for the actual costs incurred for any fuel oil delivered and the service charge for refiring the burner, if any, and for reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The court shall further be empowered to issue any appropriate injunctive orders and to authorize immediate collection of reimbursable costs due the city out of the goods and chattels of the landlord, including all sums due or which may come due as present or future rents. Any landlord who prevails in such an action shall be entitled to reimbursement by the city for all reasonable costs and expenses. Such landlord, however, shall still remain responsible for the cost of any fuel oil delivered and any charge for refiring the burner incurred by the city. 
(Prior code § 77-30) 
8.20.050 - Liability for damages. 
    The city or its employees shall not be liable for any damages to any person or property in enforcing this chapter except for the gross negligence or malfeasance of any municipal official, officer or employee, and under no circumstances shall the city be held liable for damages from the lack of heat in the residential property. 
(Prior code § 77-31) 
8.20.060 - Exception to provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner-occupied residential rental properties containing five units or less. 
(Prior code § 77-32) 
8.20.070 - Landlord to file registration statement. 
A.  Every landlord shall, within thirty (30) days following the effective date of P.L. 1980, c. 170, of the laws of the state of New Jersey, or at the time of the creation of the first tenancy in any newly constructed or reconstructed building, file with the city clerk of the city a statement which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises and the record owner or owners of the rental business, if not the same persons; 
2.  If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and corporate officers of the corporation; 
3.  If the address of any record owner is not located in the county in which the premises are located, the name and address of a person who resides in or has an office in the county in which the premises are located and who is authorized to accept notice from a tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on behalf of the record owner; 
4.  The name and address of the managing agent of the premises, if any; 
5.  The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment or room number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the record owner or managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any; 
6.  The name, address and telephone number of an individual representative of the record owner or managing agent who may be reached or contacted at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith; 
7.  The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the premises; and 
8.  If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil used. 
B.  Every landlord is required to file a registration statement as described in this section hereinabove shall file an amended registration statement within seven days after any change in the foregoing information required to be included thereon with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 77-33) 
Chapter 8.24 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Disposal by Dumping 

8.24.010 - Deposit of wastes-Permission of owner required. 
    No person shall transport any animal or vegetable substance, nor shall any street sweepings, nor dirt gathered in cleaning yards, buildings, docks or cellars, nor waste of mills or factories, nor any material which tends by decay to become putrid or to render the atmosphere unpure or unwholesome, be deposited or used, to fill up or raise the surface or level of any lot, grounds, docks, wharves or piers or designated garbage areas within the city, without first having obtained written permission from the owner of such grounds where the garbage is to be dumped; the written permission shall be filed with the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 80-1) 
8.24.020 - Dumping of wastes-Permit required. 
    An application shall be made to the director of public works for a permit allowing the dumping of such garbage, animal and vegetable matter, sweepings, muck or dirt. 
(Prior code § 80-2) 
8.24.030 - Compliance with Sanitary Code required. 
    The director of public works shall not issue a permit to any person which shall be in violation of any ordinance of the city. 
(Prior code § 80-3) 
8.24.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
    There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner of any vehicle used for dumping in contravention of the provisions of this chapter has knowledge of the illegal dumping and is subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 80-4) 
8.24.050 - Fee for dumping at Elizabeth City yard convenience center-Senior citizen discount. 
    Any citizen or individual who is authorized by an existing ordinance of the city to dump or drop off debris at the city of Elizabeth city yard convenience center shall now be charged the amount of one hundred thirty-six dollars ($136.00) per ton for each deposit. Senior citizens, defined as those citizens aged sixty-two (62) or over, shall be entitled to a discount of twenty-five (25) percent for such service. 
(Prior code § 80-5) 
Article II - Collections and Handling 

8.24.060 - Refuse for collection-Closed containers required. 
    All garbage, trash or refuse placed along the curb for collection by the city's scavenger services shall be put in metal and/or plastic containers with regulation covers. No garbage, trash or refuse shall be placed in loose bags, open boxes or baskets. All cardboard boxes and newspapers, as that term is defined in Section 8.32.020, must be separated from all other garbage, trash or refuse, securely tied in bundles and placed along the curb for collection by the city's scavenger services, all cardboard boxes which are bundled with newspaper must be broken down to the approximate size of the newspaper to which it is tied. 
(Prior code § 80-12) 
8.24.070 - Placement for collection-Hours. 
    All persons disposing of garbage, trash, refuse, or recyclables for collection shall only place same along the curb directly in front of his or her property. No garbage, trash, refuse, or recyclables shall be placed along the curb for collection before 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled collection in that ward. In the event that the garbage, trash, refuse, or recyclables placed along the curb is not collected on the scheduled collection day in that ward, it must be removed from the curb after the scheduled collection has taken place and may not be placed at the curb again until after 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the next scheduled collection day in that ward. 
(Ord. No. 4113, § 1, 2-23-2010; Ord. 3181 § 1, 1999: prior code § 80-13) 
Article III - Separate collection of Cardboard and Used Newspapers 

8.24.080 - Collection program established. 
    There is established a program for the separate collection of cardboard and used newspapers from the residences of the city for recycling purposes. Such collections shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 80-14) 
8.24.090 - Regulations authorized. 
    The director is authorized and directed to establish and promulgate regulations as to the manner, days and times of such collections and the bundling, handling, location and time of placement of all materials for collection. 
(Prior code § 80-15) 
8.24.100 - Separation of cardboard and used newspapers from household solid waste. 
    Cardboard and uncontaminated newspapers shall be kept separate from and not mixed with trash and household solid waste. Used cardboard and newspapers shall be considered clean and uncontaminated if they have not been exposed to substances or conditions rendering them unusable for recycling. 
(Prior code § 80-16) 
8.24.110 - Ownership of cardboard and used newspapers-Offenses. 
    From the time of placement at the curb by any resident of cardboard and used newspapers for collection by the city or its authorized agent pursuant to the program established and the rules and regulations issued hereunder, such materials shall become and be the property of the city and it shall be a violation of this article for any person other than authorized personnel of the city or the contributing resident to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up, such materials. Each such collection in violation from one or more residences during the period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code § 80-17) 
8.24.120 - Additional methods of disposal. 
    Any resident may donate or sell cardboard and used newspapers to any person, partnership or corporation whether operating for profit or not for profit. The person, partnership or corporation may not, however, under any circumstances pick up the cardboard and used newspapers from the curbside in the city. 
(Prior code § 80-18) 
8.24.130 - Private organization's quarterly reports. 
    Any private organization collecting recyclable materials as set forth in this article shall provide the city with such timely reports as to the volume of material (tonnage) collected by such organization. These reports will be utilized by the city in qualifying for credits to the city which may be authorized by the state of New Jersey pursuant to any statutes or administrative rules and regulations. 
(Prior code § 80-19) 
8.24.140 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this article or any regulation promulgates pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less that one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. 3181 § 2, 1999: prior code § 80-20) 
Chapter 8.28 - HEDGES 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Authority to legislate-Cutting required-Height specified-Notice. 
    Pursuant to the authority of R. S. 40:48-2.26 et seq., P. L. 1949, Chapter 152, the city council of the city requires the owner or owners, tenant or tenants of any lands within the city, wherever necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public safety, to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within ten (10) feet of any roadway and within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a height of not more than two and one-half feet, and within ten (10) days after written notice sent to the last known post office address of the owner or tenant, by registered mail, to cut the same, setting forth in the notice the reasons therefor and providing an opportunity therein to the owners or tenant within five days of the receipt of the notice, to show cause before the director of public works why the demands made therein should not be complied with. 
(Prior code § 58-1) 
8.28.020 - Cutting by municipal authority authorized. 
    In case any owner or tenant fails or neglects to show cause why such cutting should not be done after proper notice as hereinabove set forth, or cut the same within ten (10) days as herein provided, the director of public works or its agent may, on behalf of the city, cause such brush, hedges and other plant life to be cut. 
(Prior code § 58-2) 
8.28.030 - Procedure for assessment of cost. 
    In every case in which by force of this chapter the cutting of the foregoing by reason of the refusal or neglect of the tenant or owner to cut the same is done under direction of the director of public works, the cost thereof shall be certified to the city council of the city, which shall examine the certificate of cost, and if found correct shall cause the same as shown thereon to be charged against the lands, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as payment of taxes. 
(Prior code § 58-3) 
Chapter 8.32 - LITTER CONTROL 
Sections: 

8.32.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "city of Elizabeth anti-litter ordinance." 
(Prior code § 89-1) 
8.32.020 - Definitions. 
    "Aircraft" means any contrivance, now known or here-after invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. Aircraft includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    "Authorized private receptacle" means a litter storage and collection receptacle weighing not more than seventy-five (75) pounds when filled, constructed of galvanized metal or plastic of equivalent strength,) leak-proof not more than thirty-four (34) inches in height and having a tight-fitting cover or lid. 
    "Commercial handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
1.  Advertises any merchandise, product, commodity or thing for sale; 
2.  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
3.  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of gain or profit. The terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when it is held, is given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which does not violate the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by a law of this state or chapter of this city; and 
4.  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    "Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    "Handbill" means and includes both commercial handbills and noncommercial handbills as such terms are defined in this section. 
    "Litter" means garbage, refuse and rubbish as such are defined in this section, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    "Newspaper" means any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by general law. In addition thereto, "newspaper" means and includes any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    "Noncommercial handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, dodger, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    "Park" means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public areas in the city owned or used by any public agency and devoted to recreation purposes. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    "Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walks, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house or building or other structure. 
    "Public place" means and includes all streets, side-walks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned auto-mobiles and solid market and industrial wastes, specifically including abandoned furniture, household equipment and scrap building materials. 
    "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cigars and tobacco wastes, cardboard, tin cans, yard, garden or lawn clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 3759 § 1, 2005; prior code § 89-2) 
8.32.030 - Littering in public places prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, except in authorized receptacles for collection or in official municipal disposal areas. 
(Prior code § 89-3) 
8.32.040 - Procedures for disposal of litter-Receptacles required. 
A.  Litter shall be placed in authorized private receptacles in such a manner as to prevent it from being scattered, carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or private premises. 
B.  Litter, other than garbage, shall be placed in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles. Commercial or manufacturing establishments shall flatten all cans, cartons, crates, boxes, etc., and prepare such litter for convenient loading and removal. Such establishments may use cardboard boxes to contain such litter, but such boxes must be of sufficient strength and securely tied so as to prevent the contents from being scattered, carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or any public place or private premises. 
C.  Branches, clippings, shrubs, etc., in excess of twenty-four (24) inches in length but not greater than six feet in length and not in excess of seventy-five (75) pounds in weight, may be placed at the curb for pickup if securely tied in bundles so as to prevent their being scattered, carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public or private place or premises. 
(Prior code § 89-4) 
8.32.050 - Deposit in gutters, streets, sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. 
    Every business or commercial property owner shall, at the close of business each day, clean up or clear off all litter and debris on or about their sidewalks. 
(Prior code § 89-5) 
8.32.060 - Mercantile litter-Prohibited deposits. 
    No person who owns or occupies a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies a place of business shall keep the sidewalk and/or public way in front of his or her business premises free of litter. 
(Prior code § 89-6) 
8.32.070 - Littering from vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter from a vehicle upon any street or other public place or any private premises. 
(Prior code § 89-7) 
8.32.080 - Regulations governing trucks and other vehicles. 
A.  No person shall drive or move any truck or other commercial vehicle unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place or other private premises. No person shall drive or move any commercial vehicle or truck if the wheels or tires carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. 
B.  No person shall drive or move a truck or other vehicle, which vehicle is carrying cargo or material of such a nature as could be caused to fall or be blown upon the streets, alleys or other public or private premises, unless the vehicle shall be so constructed as to prevent such falling or being blown upon the streets, alleys or other public or private premises, including proper covering of such cargo or material with a roof or tarpaulin or other material sufficient to prevent such falling or being blown from the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 89-8) 
8.32.090 - Disposal of litter in public parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in public receptacles and in such a manner as to prevent such litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter shall be carried from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Prior code § 89-9) 
8.32.100 - Littering in lakes and fountains prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water. 
(Prior code § 89-10) 
8.32.110 - Distribution of handbills in public places. 
A.  No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place. 
B.  No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, it shall not be deemed unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, in any sidewalk, street or other public place, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Prior code § 89-11) 
8.32.120 - Handbills on vehicles prohibited-Exception. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it is not unlawful for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, in any public place, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Prior code § 89-12) 
8.32.130 - Deposit of handbills on vacant premises prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Prior code § 89-13) 
8.32.140 - Distribution of handbills on posted premises prohibited. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon any private premises: 
A.  If requested by anyone in or upon such premises not to do so; and 
B.  If there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice indicating that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Prior code § 89-14) 
8.32.150 - Distribution of handbills at inhabited private premises prohibited-Exceptions. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present, except as hereinafter provided. A person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon inhabited private premises if the premises are not posted as provided in Section 8.32.140(B) above and the handbill is placed or deposited so as to secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places or private premises. Mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in Section 8.32.020 hereof; however, newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or any other public place or upon private property. 
(Prior code § 89-15) 
8.32.160 - Littering from aircraft prohibited. 
    No person while in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit upon or within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Prior code § 89-16) 
8.32.170 - Posting of notices-Prohibited sites-Exception. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public-utility pole, shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, or upon any official traffic control devices as defined in R.S. 39:1-1, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Prior code § 89-17) 
8.32.180 - Litter on occupied private property prohibited-Exception. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property, whether owned by him or her or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property shall maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements upon any other public place or private premises. 
(Prior code § 89-18) 
8.32.190 - Maintenance of litter-free premises required. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Prior code § 89-18) 
8.32.200 - Littering on vacant lots prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property, whether owned by such person or not, nor in or upon any public-owned open vacant property. 
(Prior code § 89-20) 
8.32.210 - Procedure for clearance by city. 
A.  Notice to Remove. The director of public works or duly designated agent, or the director of health, welfare and housing or duly designated agent, or the health inspector, is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property, or the tenant or agent of such owner, to dispose properly of litter located on such property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Notice shall be by registered or certified mail, addressed to the tenant or owner or his or her agent at the last known address, or served personally upon the tenant, owner or his or her agent. 
B.  Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any tenant, owner or agent so notified to dispose properly of the litter within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice specified in subsection A of this section, or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event it is returned to the city by the Post Office Department because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the notice was properly addressed to the last known address of the tenant, owner or agent, the director of public works or duly designated agent, or the director of health, welfare and housing or duly designated agent is authorized and empowered to pay for disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. 
C.  Charge Included in Tax Bill. When the city has effected the removal of dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall, unless paid by the owner prior thereto, be charged to the owner of the property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to the owner by the city. The charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time set for payment of the tax bill. 
D.  Recorded statement Constitutes Lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by the owner within thirty (30) days after the disposal of such litter, as specified in subsections A and B of this section, then and in that case, the director of public works or duly designated agent, or the director of health, welfare and housing or duly designated agent, shall cause to be recorded in the city clerk's office a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which the work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the same rate of taxes in the event they are not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Prior code § 89-21) 
8.32.220 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter, it is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this ordinance imposes more stringent restrictions the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Prior code § 89-22) 
8.32.230 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon: 
A.  A public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public parking place, park, playground or recreational area, or any other public place; 
B.  A public conveyance; 
C.  A private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked on any public street, land, public parking lot or public place; or 
D.  Any private property, not his or her own, without the express permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such permission. 
(Prior code § 89-23) 
8.32.240 - Discarding of alcoholic beverage containers. 
    No person shall discard alcoholic beverage containers, cans or bottles upon any public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public parking lot, any other public place or upon private property not his or her own without the express permission of the owner. 
(Prior code § 89-24) 
8.32.250 - Violators deemed disorderly persons. 
    Any person who engages in any conduct proscribed by either Sections 8.32.230 or 8.32.240 shall be deemed a disorderly person. 
(Prior code § 89-25) 
8.32.260 - Authorization from city for possession or consumption in certain cases. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section 8.32.230 or 8.32.240, the city council of the city may, by further ordinance or resolution, permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a designated park, playground or recreational area, or other public place, at a designated time or times in connection with any purpose or event which has been authorized by the city council of the city. 
(Prior code § 89-26) 
8.32.270 - Application for permit. 
    Application for a permit to consume alcoholic beverages in a public park, playground, recreational area or other public place shall be made to the Elizabeth recreation department or as otherwise provided by ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 89-27) 
8.32.280 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 8.32.230 through 8.32.270 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 3153 § 1, 1999: prior code § 89-28) 
8.32.290 - Spillage from vehicles prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to haul or transport dirt, stone, ashes or any other material in the city in such a manner as to spill or drop any such material on any of the sidewalks, streets or public places of the city. It is unlawful to overload any vehicle or to fill it to such an extent that any of its contents shall spill from the vehicle to any sidewalk, street or public place in the city. Any vehicle used for the hauling or transporting of materials shall be constructed of sufficient strength, compactness and tightness to prevent seeping or dropping of any material through cracks, crevices or openings therein. 
(Prior code § 89-31) 
8.32.300 - Littering prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to litter any street, sidewalk or public place in the city with any material, papers, dirt, dust, sand, cinders, ashes or any other product. 
(Prior code § 89-32) 
8.32.310 - Deposits of dirt from vehicles prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to haul or transport dirt or any material in the city in such a manner as to cause laying or accumulating of dust or dirt in any street, sidewalk or public place in the city. 
(Prior code § 89-33) 
8.32.320 - Use of streets regulated. 
    Whenever dirt is being hauled or transported from any excavation or from or to any place in the city or whenever cinders, ashes, cement or other material is being transported to or from any place in the city in quantities or in a manner that may occasion the accumulation of dust or dirt or other products on any sidewalk, street or public place in the city, the person transporting the dirt or material shall, on direction or notice from the director of public works, transport and haul such material only over such streets as may be designated by the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 89-34) 
Chapter 8.36 - MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM 
Sections: 

8.36.010 - Definitions. 
    "Clean and uncontaminated." The recycling coordinator shall determine what constitutes "clean and uncontaminated." 
    "Construction and demolition debris" means components resulting from the construction and/or demolition of a building or structure, both residential and commercial, including but not limited to brick, cement, asphalt roofing, scrap metals, window glass, wood, tree stumps, logs, branches, and other like materials. 
    "Food waste." The recycling coordinator shall determine what constitutes "food waste." 
    "Mixed paper" means magazines, direct mails, glossy catalogs, coupon inserts, envelopes, color news inserts, sweepstakes forms, undelivered postal mail, colored notebook paper, school construction paper, real estate listings, color letterhead paper, color office paper, computer paper, photocopy paper, fax paper, mimeograph paper, catalogs and ledger paper. 
    "Roofing material" means asphalt roof shingles, tarpaper, fiberglass insulation associated with a roof system and all other asphaltic materials generated in roof construction, roof removal, or roof reconstruction. 
(Prior code § 80-21) 
8.36.020 - Program established. 
A.  Residential Separations and Collection Program Established. There is established a program for the mandatory separation and collection of the following clean and uncontaminated recyclable materials from residential solid waste by the owners or occupants of premises within the city: 
1.  Aluminum cans; 
2.  Ferrous cans; 
3.  Pourable glass containers; 
4.  Plastic; all pourable #1 and #2 beverage and laundry detergent containers; 
5.  Newspapers; 
6.  Corrugated cardboard; 
7.  Mixed paper; 
8.  Grass; 
9.  Leaves; 
10.  Vegetative waste; 
11.  Roofing materials; 
12.  Used motor oil; 
13.  Antifreeze; 
14.  Vehicle batteries; 
15.  Consumer batteries; 
16.  White goods; 
17.  Other heavy irons; 
18.  Construction and demolition materials; 
19.  Tires; 
20.  Cinder block, stone, concrete and brick; 
21.  Motor oil filter; 
22.  Wood; and 
23.  Electronics (electronic devices such as TV's, monitors, computers, VCR's and desktop fax machines). 
B.  Nonresidential Separations and Collection Program Established. There is established a program for mandatory separation of the following clean and uncontaminated recyclable materials from nonresidential solid waste by the owners or occupants of nonresidential premises, including but not limited to offices, commercial businesses, industries or institutions as well as fairs, parks, concerts, streets and other outdoor events within the city and the separate disposal of same. 
1.  Corrugated paper products; 
2.  Newspapers; 
3.  Mixed paper; 
4.  Glass containers, aluminum and ferrous cans; 
5.  Plastic; all pourable #1 and #2 beverage and laundry detergent containers; 
6.  Vehicle batteries; 
7.  Consumer batteries; 
8.  Used motor oil; 
9.  Antifreeze; 
10.  Uncontaminated food waste in all in institutional, commercial and industrial facilities serving five hundred (500) or more meals per day and major food processors; 
11.  Roofing material; 
12.  Asphalt and concrete; 
13.  Construction and/or demolition debris; 
14.  White goods; 
15.  Other heavy iron; 
16.  Wood; 
17.  Tires; 
18.  Electronics (electronic devices such as TV's, monitors, computers, VCR's and desktop fax machines); 
19.  Fluorescent bulbs; 
20.  Grass; 
21.  Leaves; 
22.  Brush; and 
23.  Motor oil filters. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 1, 2-22-2011; prior code § 80-22) 
8.36.030 - Supervision of collection. 
    The collection of recyclable materials shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 80-23) 
8.36.040 - Regulations authorized. 
    The director of public works is authorized and directed to establish and promulgate regulations as to the manner, days, and time of collection of the above named materials, and the binding, handling, location, and time of placement of all materials for collection. The director of public works shall establish and promulgate further regulations as may be required by this chapter or the county solid waste management plan. 
(Prior code § 80-24) 
8.36.050 - Residential separation and collection of certain recyclable materials. 
    There is established a program for the separate collection and disposition of certain recyclable materials from the residences of the city. Aluminum cans, ferrous cans, glass containers, plastic containers (polyethylene teraphthalate (PET) bottles and high density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles), newspapers, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper, grass and brush shall be kept separate from and not mixed with trash and household solid waste and will be collected under the supervision of the director of public works or designee. 
(Prior code § 80-25) 
8.36.055 - Prohibition of the collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that is mixed with, or contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a warning notice sticker or some other devise indicating that the load of solid waste contains designated recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 2, 2-22-2011) 
8.36.060 - Ownership of recyclable materials-Offenses. 
    From the time of placement at the curb by any resident of recyclable materials by the city or its authorized agent pursuant to the program established in this chapter and the rules and regulations issued hereunder, such materials shall become and be the property of the city and it shall be a violation of this section for any person other than authorized personnel of the city or the contributing resident to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up, such materials. Each such collection in violation from one or more residences during the period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code § 80-26) 
8.36.070 - Additional methods of disposal. 
    Any occupant of residential or nonresidential premises may donate or sell recyclable materials as designated in Section 8.36.020 to any person, partnership or corporation whether operating for profit or not for profit. The person, partnership or corporation may not, however, under any circumstances pick up or collect any of the above described materials from the curbside in the city. 
(Prior code § 80-27) 
8.36.080 - Multi-family dwelling over three units. 
    Owners of multifamily dwellings with four (4) units or more shall provide and maintain a clearly marked area for occupants to recycle glass, metal, plastic cans, bottles, newspapers and cardboard. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 3, 2-22-2011; prior code § 80-28) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4189, § 3, adopted February 22, 2011, changed the title of section 8.36.080 from "Multifamily dwellings over four units" to "Multi-family dwelling over three units." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
8.36.085 - New developments of multi-family residential units or commercial, institutional, or industrial and properties (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c). 
    Any application to the planning board of the municipality of Elizabeth, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of twenty-five (25) or more units of multi-family residential housing, single-family developments of fifty (50) or more units, or any commercial, institutional or industrial development proposal for the utilization of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan to be reviewed and approved by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 4, 2-22-2011) 
8.36.086 - Compliance requirements for fairs, parks, concerts, street and other outdoor events. 
A.  The organizer/owner/contractor of the location must provide a recycling system that is operated in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The recycling system must provide for any mandated recyclables generated at the event. It must be clear to any inspector that the system is being serviced: i.e., containers must be clearly marked and they are neatly maintained; there must not be garbage in the recyclables or recyclables in the garbage; container capacity must be adequate to hold materials between pick-ups. There must be sufficient recycling containers for any mandated recyclables generated at the event. 
C.  The organizer/owner/contractor of the location is responsible for arranging for recyclables to be removed from the premises and for ensuring that they are taken to an approved recyclables market. The owner/operator/contractor may make arrangements to deliver the recyclables to the municipal collection system (drop-off center or curbside collection) if permitted by the municipality. Otherwise, the owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging to have recyclables collected and transported and for resolving any problems with the transporter of recyclables. 
D.  The recycling system must be made accessible and available to all patrons, customers and employees. Notice/sign must be provided to ensure all are aware of their responsibilities. 
E.  The owner/operator/contractor of the location is responsible for obtaining pertinent documentation in order to report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per year or else he/she must arrange to have the collector provide that documentation directly to the municipality. 
F.  Dual Stream Recycling. The recycling system must utilize separate containers for each recyclable material. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 5, 2-22-2011) 
8.36.090 - Recycling of consumer batteries. 
    Any person, partnership, or corporation which is engaged in the retail sale of consumer batteries shall have a clearly marked container for customers to recycle used consumer batteries. All used consumer batteries must be properly disposed of every sixty (60) days. 
(Prior code § 80-29) 
8.36.100 - Recycling documentation. 
    All government, commercial, institutional and industrial facilities shall provide the city with documentation for all mandated materials and any materials recycled which have not been mandated. Such documentation shall in-dude the following information: 
A.  Type of material recycled; 
B.  Location where materials were marketed or disposed; 
C.  Weight of material; and 
D.  Name and address of the transporter(s) used. Such documentation shall be reported to the city on an annual basis at dates to be established and promulgated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 4189, § 6, 2-22-2011; prior code § 80-30) 
8.36.110 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, partnership or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this section or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Prior code § 80-31) 
8.36.120 - Waste generation/disposition permit. 
A.  All construction, demolition, sidewalk and/or driveway permits shall include information on the types of materials which will be generated, and will require re-cycling or disposal. Documentation of recycling or disposal shall be submitted to the permitting agency prior to approval of final inspection. Documentation shall be submitted by the permitting agency to the municipal recycling coordinator on a quarterly basis. 
B.  Any and all recyclable materials generated by a commercial person, partnership, or corporation shall not be disposed of at the curbside, but instead shall be taken to the appropriate recycling facility designated by the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 80-32) 
8.36.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  The recycling coordinator, police department, department of public works, department of health, welfare and housing, or designees, the Union County regional environmental health commission or designee, and the Union County utilities authority are empowered and authorized to enforce this chapter. 
B.  The director of public works or designee is authorized to develop and implement a program whereby all nonresidential premises are visited and inspected for compliance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 80-33) 
Chapter 8.40 - MEAT SALES 
Sections: 

8.40.010 - Definition. 
    "Food dealer," as used in this chapter, means and includes every person, firm or corporation, his, her, its or their agents, servants or employees, engaged in the business of selling, offering or exposing for sale, food at retail for human consumption either on or off the premises where sold. 
(Prior code § 99-1) 
8.40.020 - Packaging and labeling specifications. 
    It is unlawful for any food dealer in the city, as defined in Section 8.40.010 of this chapter, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail, any sealed, prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh cut meat or frozen meat unless the packaging thereof is colorless and transparent on all sides, exclusive of labeling, which labeling shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of one side of the package; or which fresh cut meat of frozen meat is layered or shingled making the entire contents of the package not wholly visible. This section shall not apply to meat commonly designated or known as "chopped meat" or "ground meat." 
(Prior code § 99-2) 
Chapter 8.44 - MILK VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 

8.44.010 - License required. 
    No person, as hereinafter defined, shall distribute, locate or place, or continue to have located or placed, in the possession of any person, owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee or licensee of any premises located in the city, for the purpose of operation and use thereof by residents of the city or other members of the public at large, any coin-operated milk vending machine, as defined herein, without first having obtained from the license inspector of the city a license permitting such distribution. 
(Prior code § 92-1) 
8.44.020 - Definition. 
    "Coin-operated vending machine" means and be defined as any device or piece of mechanical or electrical equipment which, upon the insertion of a designates piece or pieces of metallic or other currency of the United States of America into a slot or place on the machine, device or equipment, activates certain mechanisms and results in the dispensing of, or making available to the person or persons inserting the currency into the machine, device or equipment, a sealed container of milk and/or cream. 
(Prior code § 92-2) 
8.44.030 - Application procedure-Information required. 
    A separate application for each coin-operated vending machine as defined shall be filed with the central license bureau, department of finance of the city, showing the name of the applicant, post office address, consent of the owner of the premises if the applicant is not the owner, specific location of the proposed vending machine, full description of the device, including sealer number and make, nature of the perishable food or beverage and such other answers as required by the applicant. The application shall be on forms furnished by the central license bureau, department of finance of the city. 
(Prior code § 92-3) 
8.44.040 - Condition for issuance-Inspection, certificates required. 
    Before any applicant shall be entitled to a license: 
A.  The health officer of the city shall certify that the granting of a license for a coin-operated vending machine at the location applied for will not violate any health regulation or ordinance pertaining to the distribution of perishable food or beverage in the city, or any laws of the state of New Jersey having application to or in the city, and further that the machine has been inspected by the division of health, department of health, welfare and housing, and is unobjectionable from the viewpoint of health and sanitation. 
B.  The chief of police and chief of the fire department of the city shall each certify that the placing of the coin-operated vending machine at the location mentioned in the application is unobjectionable from the viewpoint of welfare, safety or traffic considerations. 
C.  The city inspector of the city shall certify that the location of the machine complies with existing ordinances. 
D.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of each machine must be conspicuously displayed on each machine at all times in such a manner that the information may not be easily obliterated or removed. 
(Prior code § 92-4) 
8.44.050 - Locations restricted. 
    No coin-operated milk-vending machine shall be located in a zone designated R-1, 2 or 3, but shall only be located in zones set forth as C-1 through C-4 as per the zoning ordinance of the city as amended. It shall be permissible, however, for a milk-vending machine to be located in industrial zones M-1 through M-3 inclusive. 
(Prior code § 92-5) 
8.44.060 - License term, fee. 
    A license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each machine applied for is fixed. The license fee is for the purpose of both regulation and revenue and shall be payable with the filing of the application. If the application is rejected, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. The license shall be for a period of one year or any part thereof, commencing the first day of September in the year in which the license is granted. The license shall not be transferable. The fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Prior code § 92-6) 
8.44.070 - Cooperation with city officials required-Suspension procedure-Enforcement. 
    The licensee of a license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall cooperate at all times with the person in charge of the central license bureau, the health officer, the chief of police and chief of the fire department and the city inspector of the city and their authorized representatives, when required or requested so to do, to obtain information or knowledge which will enable them or any of them to safeguard the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city as the same may be affected in anywise by the coin-operated vending machine. Failure to render such cooperation shall permit the license inspector of the city to immediately temporarily suspend such license, and, after a hearing on two days' written notice to the licensee at the address stated in the application, giving the time and place of hearing, to revoke the license. Enforcement of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of the department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 92-7) 
8.44.080 - License revocation-Hearing. 
    In addition to the circumstances described in Section 8.44.070 as furnishing a basis of the revocation of a license, any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the license inspector upon proof of circumstances or conditions which are inimical to the health, welfare, morals or safety of the residents of the city; provided, however, that two days' written notice of a hearing is sent to the licensee at the address stated in the application, designating the time and place of the hearing. 
(Prior code § 92-8) 
Chapter 8.48 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 

8.48.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "noise control ordinance of the city of Elizabeth." 
(Prior code § 97A-1) 
8.48.020 - Enumeration of prohibited noises. 
A.  General Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. Non-commercial public speaking or public assembly activities legally conducted on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section. 
B.  Specific Prohibitions. The following acts and the causing thereof, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, excessive or unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
1.  Horns and Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or other signaling device on any motor vehicle, except as a danger warning or as is required by the Motor Vehicle Act of the state of New Jersey; 
2.  Radios, television sets, sound amplifiers and similar devices; 
a.  Operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, drum, phonograph or other device for the production or reproduction of sound, except as provided for in subsection (B)(3) of this section hereafter set forth, 
b.  Operating any such device on weekdays between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day and, in the event the following day is a Sunday or legal holiday, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible or to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or through partitions common to two parties within the same building, 
c.  Operating any such device in such a manner as to be plainly audible or to create a noise disturbance at fifty (50) feet from such device when operated in a public space or public right-of-way, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public space or public right-of-way or in such a manner as to be audible to any person other than the operator when operated on a common carrier by any passenger; 
3.  Loudspeakers. Using or operating any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device for commercial advertising or for noncommercial purposes in a fixed or movable position, in the interior or exterior of any building or mounted upon any aircraft, motor vehicle or motorboat in such a manner that the sound therefrom is plainly audible or creates a noise disturbance between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day and, in the event the following day is a Sunday or legal holiday, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. the following day; 
4.  Street Sales, Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or other outcry within any residential, industrial or business area of the city and hooting, whistling, shouting, yelling or singing in the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on a weekday or 9:00 a.m. on Sundays or legal holidays, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity; 
5.  Animals and Birds. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog, cat, bird or other animals which, by frequent, continual or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking or other noise-making, cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this subsection shall also apply to all public and private facilities, including animal pounds, shelters or kennels which hold or treat animals or pet shops, menageries or other establishments that own, hold, harbor, sell or display animals; 
6.  Loading and Unloading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening, closing and other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day or to 9:00 a.m. if the following day is a Sunday or a legal holiday; 
7.  Domestic Power Tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawnmower or garden tool, snowblower or similar devices used outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. if the following day is a Sunday or legal holiday; 
8.  Powered Models. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model boats, vehicles or airplanes so as to create a noise disturbance between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day if it is a weekday and to 9:00 a.m. on Sundays and legal holidays; 
9.  Motor Vehicles, Motorboat or Aircraft Repair and Testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorboat, boat motor, aircraft or portable or stationary motor in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary; 
10.  Tampering. 
a.  The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other than for the purpose of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device or element of device or noise label, 
b.  The alteration or modification of any noise control device or sound muffling element on any motor vehicle or motorcycle; 
11.  Noisy Vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, trailer or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, rattling, grinding, clanging or other annoying noises; 
12.  Racing. Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle racing events at any place except an authorized track and in a manner approved by the city to minimize noise disturbances, unless preempted by state regulations dealing with motor vehicle racing events; 
13.  Standing Motor Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of the motor of any motor vehicle whose manufacturer's gross weight is in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or any attached auxiliary equipment for a period longer than three minutes in any hour while such vehicle is stationary on a public right-of-way in a residential district or in any designated quiet zone or on private property in a residential, industrial or business zone and is not within a completely enclosed structure or not adequately baffled; 
14.  Noise-Sensitive Zones. 
a.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any quiet zone designated pursuant to Section 8.48.030 of this chapter, so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the zone, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone, 
b.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any quiet zone so designated pursuant to Section 8.48.030 of this chapter, containing a hospital, nursing home or similar activity, so as to interfere with the functions of such activity or disturb or annoy patients in the activity, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone; 
15.  Construction. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work, between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound therefrom is audible across a residential real property boundary or within a quiet zone, except for emergency work for public service utilities or by permit issued by proper authority. There shall be no such construction on Sundays or legal holidays, with the exception of emergency work for public service utilities or by permit issued by proper authority; 
16.  Advertising. Using or operating or causing the use or operation of any sound device or apparatus in, on or near or adjacent to any public street, park or place for advertising purposes. The use of any trade, business or corporate name or the name of any person, proprietor or vendor in such advertising shall be presumptive evidence that such advertising was conducted by that person, business or corporation; 
17.  Outdoor Loudspeakers. The use of any radio apparatus, talking machine, loudspeaker or amplifier attached thereto in such a manner that the loudspeaker shall cause sound from such radio apparatus or talking machine to be projected directly therefrom outside any building or out of doors, or the use of any radio apparatus, talking machine, loudspeaker or amplifier which is in any way fastened to or connected with any outside wall or window in any building or structure so that the sound therefrom is projected outside such wall or window for the purpose of harassment or for attracting attention. Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to prevent the operation of a radio apparatus or talking machine used in a reasonable manner by any person within any building or structure, provided that the radio apparatus or talking machine or loudspeaker is not so arranged that such loudspeaker shall project the sound therefrom directly outside of any building or out of doors; 
18.  Stationary Signaling Devices. 
a.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling devices, except for emergency purposes or for testing, 
b.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes in any hourly period. Houses of religious worship shall be exempted from the operation of this provision. Sounding or permitting the sound of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, unless such alarm is automatically terminated after ten (10) minutes of activation; 
19.  Places of Public Entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which reproduces or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level that creates excessive or unusually loud noise within or without such place of public entertainment; and 
20.  Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property, or at fifty (50) feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. For purposes of this section, "vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(Ord. 3721 § 1, 2005; prior code § 97A-2) 
8.48.030 - Quiet zones. 
    Streets within the city that pass through zones which contain noise-sensitive activities may be designated as quiet zones and may be so identified by appropriate signs. Noise-sensitive zones shall include, but are not limited to, operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches during services, hospitals, nursing homes and courts in session. 
(Prior code § 97A-3) 
8.48.040 - Exceptions to provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Noises caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the community or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity. 
B.  Noises caused by law enforcement, ambulance, fire or other emergency personnel in the performance of their duties or for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
C.  Sounds from church bells, chimes or organs. 
(Prior code § 97A-4) 
8.48.050 - Terminology. 
    All terminology used in this chapter not otherwise defined shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
(Prior code § 97A-7) 
8.48.060 - Enforcement. 
    Violations of the terms of this chapter occurring on any street, highway or public way by a motor vehicle, as defined in Title 30 of the Revised Statutes of the state of New Jersey, shall be enforced by the police department of the city. The enforcement of all other types of violations shall be the concurrent jurisdiction of the department of health, welfare and housing (bureau of health) and the police department of the city. 
(Prior code § 97A-8) 
Chapter 8.52 - NUISANCE CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 

8.52.010 - Code adopted by reference. 
    A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts, and each of them, as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds, requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the department of health, welfare and housing in removing or abating such nuisances, and prescribing penalties for violations, is established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein. 
(Prior code § 34-1) 
8.52.020 - Title. 
    The code established and adopted in this chapter is described and commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)." 
(Prior code § 34-2) 
8.52.030 - Filing. 
    Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have been placed on file in the office of the health officer of the department of health, welfare and housing upon the introduction of the ordinance codified in this chapter and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public. 
(Prior code § 34-3) 
Chapter 8.56 - OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS 
Sections: 

8.56.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Chlorofluorocarbons" or "CFCs" means the family of substances containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine, and having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds, and which includes, without limitation, CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, CFC-114 and CFC-115. Examples of products containing or utilizing chlorofluorocarbons are "freon" used in air conditioning and refrigeration units, degreasers and solvents used in the cleaning of metals and electronic components and rigid and flexible foam used as packaging material and insulating material, and flexible foam used in car seats, bedding and furniture. 
    "Halon" means any fully halogenated carbon compound containing bromine, chlorine, or fluorine, and includes, without limitation, Halon-1301, Halon-1211 and Halon-2402. 
    "Ozone-depleting compound" means any CFC, halon, the chemical compounds of methyl chloroform and carbon tetrachloride or any other chemical compound hereafter designated by the city council by amendment to this chapter, as being an "ozone-depleting compound". 
    "CFC food packaging" means any container, carton, box, cup, lid, plate, bowl, tray or wrapping of any kind, which is or may be used to contain, package, store, insulate or serve any food and/or beverage, where any CFC has been used in the manufacturing and production of such item. 
    "Rigid or flexible foam containing or utilizing an ozone-depleting compound" means any rigid or flexible foam, such as styrofoam or thermoplastic foam, building insulation, or any other rigid or flexible foam that contains within any closed cell any ozone-depleting compound or that was produced by using an ozone-depleting compound in any manner during the manufacturing process. 
    "City" means all territory within the corporate limits of the city of Elizabeth, county of Union, state of New Jersey. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Person" includes any natural person, firm, associations, partnership or corporation, whether acting as a principal agent, employee or otherwise, and includes any governmental entity or charitable organization. 
    "Establishment" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, common law trust, society or individual engages in any profession, trade occupation and any end every kind of calling carried on for profit or otherwise within the city, including any governmental entity or charitable organization. 
    "Licensed health care facility" means any health care facility licensed either by the state of New Jersey, Department of Health, pursuant to the provisions of the Health and Safety Code, or by the United States Department of Health and Human Services. 
(Prior code § 98A-1) 
8.56.020 - Prohibition on the manufacture, sale or distribution of products utilizing ozone-depleting compounds. 
A.  Within the city, no person shall use any ozone-depleting compound in any process or activity involving the manufacture, production, cleansing, degreasing or sterilization of any substance or product, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
B.  Within the city, no establishment shall package any product with rigid or flexible foam con taming or utilizing an ozone-depleting compound, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
C.  Within the city, no establishment shall purchase, obtain, store, sell, distribute or otherwise provide to any person any CFC food packaging material, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
D.  Exemptions. 
1.  This section shall not apply to the study and/or research of the effects of the release of ozone-depleting compounds into the environment and/or the development of alternative technologies, where such compounds are necessary for conducting such study and research. 
2.  This section shall not apply to any ozone-depleting compound used as a coolant in any refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system. 
3.  Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any licensed health care facility operated either for profit or not for profit, including any medical research conducted at such facility. 
4.  This section shall not apply to any person manufacturing a product or component product under contract with any branch of the United States Armed Forces where applicable military specifications requires the use of an ozone-depleting compound. 
(Prior code § 98A-2) 
8.56.030 - Prohibition on the use of ozone-depleting compounds in building insulation. 
    In the construction of any building or structure (commercial, industrial, residential or other), no person shall install any building insulation which contains or utilizes an ozone-depleting compound. 
(Prior code § 98A-3) 
8.56.040 - Disposal of ozone-depleting compounds contained in building insulation. 
    No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, renovate or demolish any building or structure which requires removal of existing insulation that contains an ozone-depleting compound without recovering and properly disposing of such insulation in accordance with the products adopted by the director, department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 98A-4) 
8.56.050 - Recycling of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units. 
    All establishments that repair, service or maintain any refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system, shall adopt and implement a recycling system whereby the ozone-depicting compound used as a coolant in such refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system will not be released into the environment, but will be recaptured and recycled in accordance with a recycling system approved by the director, department of health, welfare and housing. Such approval shall be evidenced by a certificate issued by the director, department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 98A-5) 
8.56.060 - Restriction on sale of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units. 
    No person shall sell any ozone-depleting compound for use as a coolant in refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system to any person who does not possess and provide evidence of a certificate of possession and operation of a recycling system. 
(Prior code § 98A-6) 
8.56.070 - Disposal of refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system. 
    No recycling firm, scrap yard, business or establishment which recycles or disposes of any refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system either in conjunction with the disposal of another product, or in any other manner, shall do so without first recapturing and recycling any ozone-depleting compound used as a coolant in such unit or system, or without first ensuring such coolant will be recaptured and recycled, in accordance with a recycling program approved by the director, department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 98A-7) 
8.56.080 - Permit required for testing fire extinguishing systems or units which utilize halon. 
    Other than testing or training as may be required by any statute, rule or regulation mandating the release of halon, no person shall release halon in the training of personnel or in the testing of any fire extinguishing system unless the owner or lessee of the premises has obtained a testing permit from the director, department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 98A-8) 
8.56.090 - Reclamation of halon from portable fire extinguishing systems or units. 
    All establishments that repair, service or perform maintenance on any portable fire extinguishing system or unit shall adopt and implement a reclamation system whereby any halon used as the extinguishing agent in any such system or unit shall not be released in to the environment, but shall be recaptured and recycled or properly disposed of in accordance with a reclamation system approved by the director, department of health, welfare and housing. 
(Prior code § 98A-9) 
8.56.100 - Administration. 
    The director of health, welfare and housing shall oversee and be responsible for: (i) the enforcement and administration of this chapter; (ii) establishing rules and regulations governing the recycling of ozone-depleting compounds from refrigeration and/or air conditioning units or systems; (iii) providing informational assistance to persons seeking to implement a recycling program for ozone-depleting compounds used in air conditioning and refrigeration systems; (iv) creating and implementing an educational program to provide information to local establishments, industry and residents regarding the dangers and hazards associated with products made from or utilizing ozone-depleting compounds;(v) establishing a program to encourage the development of alternative chemicals and technologies to replace the use of ozone-depleting compounds in existing products; (vi) consulting and cooperating with other local, state and federal governmental agencies regarding the regulation of ozone-depleting compounds and other matters affecting the environment and the health, safety and general welfare of the public; (vii) coordinating and consulting with other agencies and departments within the city to facilitate the administration, application and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to address any other environmental issues which affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; and (viii) such other duties and responsibilities as may be directed. Upon a showing by any person that no technically feasible alternative for such use of an ozone-depleting compound is current available, the director of health, welfare and housing, upon finding that this is no technically feasible alternative for such use, may grant an exemption from any section or subsection of this chapter. The director, department of health, welfare and housing is authorized to draft regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited, to inspection of any establishment's premises to verify compliance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 98A-10) 
8.56.110 - Science advisory committee. 
    The city council establishes the science advisory committee for the purpose of assisting and providing in-formation to the director of health, welfare and housing concerning the effects of ozone-depleting compounds and other matters regarding the environment and the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The director of health, welfare and housing shall nominate individuals to serve as members of the science advisory committee, whereafter such nominees shall be approved by the city council. The director of health, welfare and housing shall serve as chairperson of the committee and shall formulate policies and procedures to govern the operations of the committee. 
(Prior code § 98A-11) 
8.56.120 - Enforcement. 
    The director of the department of health, welfare and housing and office of recycling, as well as the departments of public works, community development, health and construction; all municipal elected officials and all law enforcement officers and all investigators, the division of alcoholic beverage control, the director of the department of fire and all employees so authorized by the director of the department of fire, are authorized and empowered to perform a slaw enforcement officers solely with respect to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter by being empowered to issue summonses for any violations thereof in accordance with the rules governing the courts of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 98A-12) 
8.56.130 - Penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by the fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). There shall be a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation of the provisions of this chapter when such violation involves a commercial source or trade waste. Each violation and each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code § 98A-13) 
Chapter 8.60 - PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Health Standards 

8.60.010 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context requires a different meaning, the words, term or phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be defined and interpreted as follows: 
    "Administrative authority" means the division of health of the department of health, welfare and housing. 
    "Alter" means and includes any major replacement or repair to any portion or unit of an existing private swimming pool, within the sole discretion of the administrative authority. 
    "Approved" means accepted or acceptable under applicable specifications stated or cited in this chapter, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and powers of administration delegated in this chapter. 
    "Authorized agent" means a licensed health officer, sanitary inspector or any other properly qualified person who is delegated to function within specified limits as the agent of the administrative authority. 
    "Construct" means and includes building or installing a new private swimming pool or enlarging an existing private swimming pool or any of its facilities. 
    "Locate" means designating the site or place of a private swimming pool. 
    "Operate" means to conduct, maintain or otherwise provide facilities for bathing at private swimming pools. 
    "Portable or temporary pools," for purposes of this chapter, shall not include portable pools of a temporary nature where such pools do not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area and/or thirty-six (36) inches in depth at the deepest point. 
    "Private swimming pool" means recirculation pools, outdoor and indoor, which are artificially constructed to provide recreational facilities or swimming, bathing or wading, and all buildings, equipment and appurtenances thereto established or maintained upon any premises owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the owner of the private swimming pool or an individual for his or her own or his of her family's use or the use of guests of his or her household. 
(Prior code § 131-1) 
8.60.020 - Location, construction, alteration-Approval, license required. 
    Private swimming pools shall not be located and constructed or altered by any person until the administrative authority has given formal approval therefor by issuance of a license or permit pursuant to the chapters of the governing body of the city regulating fences, safety and other features therein contained. 
(Prior code § 131-2) 
8.60.030 - Approval, licensing procedure-Specifications, plans, reports required. 
    Licenses or permits shall not be issued until the administrative authority has received and approved a letter of application therefor, together with final plans, specifications and reports, fully describing and setting forth all data as hereinafter required or as may otherwise be required by the administrative authority or its authorized agent; such final plans, specifications and reports shall comply with and meet the requirements of the Plumbing and Sanitary Codes of the administrative authority. 
(Prior code § 131-3) 
8.60.040 - Final plans, specifications-Information required. 
    Such final plans, specifications and reports shall include: 
A.  The plans shall indicate all dimensions, including the length, width and depth, of the pool, and the profile will show the same information, where applicable; 
B.  Water volume; 
C.  A description of the water inlet system; 
D.  A description of the method of disinfection and treatment of the water to be used; 
E.  A description of the method for disposal of the water to be used; 
F.  A statement of the maximum number of persons who will be allowed to use the pool at any one time; 
G.  Source of water to be used shall be a public potable water supply; 
H.  A cross section of scum gutters and skimmers; 
I.  Pipe diagrams showing size of all pipes, inlets, outlets, makeup water lines, vacuum lines, waste and discharge lines, circulation and other piping; 
J.  The pool equipment-room layout, showing filters, their location, pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders, flow meter gauges, site glass, strainers, hair and line interceptors, dimensions of filter room, its location, floor drain, sumps and other pertinent information; 
K.  The kind, number and size of filter, including the square footage of the filter area in each unit; 
L.  The Water Supply System. The overflow gutters shall be shown extending completely around the pool for an adequate drainage of overflow water away from the pool; 
M.  A description of auxiliary building or buildings, if any, as regards their sanitary aspects; and 
N.  Any other information deemed necessary by the administrative authority. 
(Prior code § 131-4) 
8.60.050 - License issuance. 
    Upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter and the ordinances of the governing body, and approval of the final plans, specifications and report, together with the data contained herein, and upon payment of fees as hereinafter specified, a license or permit shall be issued for the location and construction so requested. 
(Prior code § 131-5) 
8.60.060 - Existing pools exempted-Exception. 
    Sections 8.60.020 through 8.60.160 inclusive of this chapter relative to location and construction shall not apply to private swimming pools in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except that any alteration of any portion or any unit or units of such private swimming pools shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 131-6) 
8.60.070 - Operation or use-Approval required. 
    Private swimming pools shall not be operated or used by any person until the administrative authority has given formal approval therefor by issuance of an appropriate license or permit. No person shall operate or use a private swimming pool, the license of which therefor is suspended. 
(Prior code § 131-7) 
8.60.080 - Responsibility placed with owners. 
    Full responsibility for the construction, maintenance and operation of private swimming pools as defined in this chapter shall be placed with the owners thereof. 
(Prior code § 131-8) 
8.60.090 - Denial of license-Notification of applicant required. 
    Persons denied a license or permit shall be notified in writing accordingly by the administrative authority. Such notice shall specify the reason for such action and the remedial action necessary to obtain approval for issuance of a license or permit. 
(Prior code § 131-9) 
8.60.100 - Suspension of license-Service of notice-Procedure. 
    The license or permit of any person to operate a private swimming pool may be suspended at any time when in the opinion of the administrative authority or its authorized agent such action is deemed necessary to abate a present or threatened menace to public health. Notice of such suspension, in writing, shall be served upon the operator of the offending private swimming pool, except that service shall be deemed to have been made either by delivery in person upon the person whose name shall be registered upon the last tax map, or, if no service can be so made, then upon the posting of the notice of suspension in a prominent place at the site of the offending private swimming pool. Such notice shall include the reason for such action and the remedial action deemed necessary to be taken before the suspension may be lifted. 
(Prior code § 131-10) 
8.60.110 - Hearings authorized-Procedure. 
    Persons whose licenses or permits have been suspended or denied shall be afforded a hearing before the administrative authority at such person's option and at a time appointed by the administrative authority to show cause why the suspension or denial should not be rescinded. The authority shall, after due consideration, render a written decision confirming or rescinding the suspension or denial, and shall so notify the appellant in writing. 
(Prior code § 131-11) 
8.60.120 - Inspections authorized-Access to inspectors. 
    The owner and operator of any private swimming pool shall allow free access to the pool to the administrative authority or its authorized agent at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, testing of the purity of water or for any other reason connected with the sanitary aspects of the pool operation. 
(Prior code § 131-12) 
8.60.130 - Construction standards-Filtration specifications. 
    All private swimming pools shall be so constructed. installed and maintained as to provide necessary equipment for chlorination and other disinfection and filtering to comply with the latest recommendations made by the American Public Health Association and the New Jersey state Department of Health. All filtration equipment shall have a maximum filtration rate of four gallons per minute per square foot, and a backwash rate of at least fifteen (15) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area and the recirculation or turnover rate of the pool shall not exceed eighteen (18) hours. 
(Prior code § 131-13) 
8.60.140 - Public potable water supply protected. 
    There shall be no possible interconnection between a public potable water supply system and the water in the pool, and it shall be so constructed as to prevent contamination by ground or surface waters. 
(Prior code § 131-14) 
8.60.150 - Disposal system-Construction standards-Drainage regulations. 
    All private swimming pools shall be filled by a method of a gooseneck which will fill the pool from above the rim thereof, maintaining a sufficient air gap. Upon completion of filling of the pool, any hose or pipe used in connection therewith must be removed and stored away from the enclosed pool area. All private swimming pools other than those draining into the combined sewer system shall be provided with not more than one two-inch galvanized iron pipe with gravity drain; the drainpipe on those draining into the combined sewer system shall comply with the Plumbing Code of the city. In the instance of pools not draining into the combined sewer system, the drainpipe may enter into an open watercourse or storm sewer, if either is available. It is unlawful to drain any pool into the combined sewer system, open watercourse or storm sewer during those periods of precipitation and for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the cessation of precipitation. If the drain is connected into the combined sewer system, it shall be unlawful to drain any such pool between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Prior code § 131-15) 
8.60.160 - Additional construction standards-Cleaning-Groundwater. 
    All private swimming pools shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning. The pools shall be so constructed as to prevent seepage of groundwater or flow of surface water into the pool. 
(Prior code § 131-16) 
8.60.170 - Sanitary operation required. 
    Private swimming pools shall be operated and maintained in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. Failure to operate and maintain any private swimming pool in a sanitary manner or to restore the pool to the required standards within the time specified by the administrative authority or its authorized agent shall be deemed sufficient cause for summary suspension of the pool license or permit. 
(Prior code § 131-17) 
8.60.180 - Water quality-Standards and tests. 
A.  All chemical and bacteriological analysis of swimming pool waters shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," published jointly by the American Public Health Association and the American Water Works Association. 
B.  The standard test for the coliform group shall consist of the presumptive and confirmed tests, the latter being required when presumptive evidence of coliform organisms indicated. 
C.  The standard test for total bacteria shall consist of thirty-seven (37) degrees centigrade standard agar-plate count. 
(Prior code § 131-18) 
8.60.190 - Water samples-Collection procedures. 
    All samples of swimming pool water shall be collected in bottles containing sodium thiosulfate. In freeing samples of chlorine, the procedure given in "Standard Methods" shall be followed. 
(Prior code § 131-19) 
8.60.200 - Bacterial quality standards. 
A.  General. The bacterial quality of swimming pool waters shall be judged on the basis of plate counts and coliform densities as hereafter prescribed. 
B.  Standard Portion. A standard portion shall consist of ten (10) milliliters. 
C.  Standard Sample. A standard sample of pool water shall consist of five standard portions. 
D.  Standard Sampling. A standard sampling shall consist of ten (10) standard portions obtained from the two samples taken from the pool. 
E.  Maximum Coliform Densities. Of all ten (10) standard portions obtained from a standard sampling, not more than one portion shall show the presence of organisms of the coliform group at any time. 
F.  Maximum Plate Counts. The total plate count of a sample taken at either end of the pool shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) bacteria per milliliter at any time. 
(Prior code § 131-20) 
8.60.210 - Additional samples authorized. 
    The administrative authority or its authorized agent shall obtain and have additional samples analyzed if those taken pursuant to Section 8.60.200(C) do not meet standards established by Section 8.60.200. 
(Prior code § 131-21) 
8.60.220 - Free chlorine residuals, pH values-Tests, permissible ranges. 
    Free chlorine, residuals and pH values shall be determined not less than two times during any day the pool is in operation. Free chlorine residuals and pH values shall be maintained within ranges indicated below: 
pH Free Chlorine Residual 7.0-7.6 0.4-0.6 p.p.m. 8.0-8.4 2.0-5.0 p.p.m.  
(Prior code § 131-22) 
8.60.230 - Water clarity-Standards, test. 
    The water of a pool, when in use, shall be sufficiently clear to permit a black disk six inches in diameter superimposed upon a white field placed at the bottom of the deepest end of the pool to be dearly visible from the pool sidewalk at all distances tip to ten (10) yards measured in a horizontal distance from the projection of the disk onto the pool surface. 
(Prior code § 131-23) 
8.60.240 - Pollution prohibited. 
    Urinating, defecating, expectorating or blowing the nose in any private swimming pool is prohibited and declared unlawful. 
(Prior code § 131-24) 
8.60.250 - Use by infected persons prohibited. 
    Use of any private swimming pool by a person having communicable skin lesions, sore or inflamed eyes, mouth, nose or ear discharges, or who knowingly is the carrier of any communicable disease, is prohibited and declared unlawful. 
(Prior code § 131-25) 
8.60.260 - Records required. 
    The owner or operator shall keep records in permanent form of all maintenance, tests, corrective actions of other manipulations affecting the sanitary condition of any private swimming pool, as well as records of all bacterial, physical and chemical quality standards, and such records shall be open to inspectors of administrative authority or authorized agent thereof. 
(Prior code § 131-26) 
8.60.270 - Nuisances. 
    A swimming pool constructed, altered or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the public health. 
(Prior code § 131-27) 
8.60.280 - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the administrative authority or its authorized agent to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Bacterial, physical and chemical quality test may be made by the administrative authority or its agent to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 131-28) 
8.60.290 - Schedule of fees. 
    The following charges are established under this chapter: 
A.  License to Construct. Upon issuance of license to construct any private swimming pool in accordance with requirements of the Sanitary Code and the Plumbing Code of the administrative authority, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the administrative authority or its authorized agent upon receipt thereto acknowledged. 
B.  License to Operate. License to operate any swimming pool shall be issued yearly by the administrative authority or its authorized agent upon receipt thereto acknowledged. The license shall expire on the last day of April in each year. 
(Prior code § 131-29) 
Article II - Installation and Operation 

8.60.300 - Definition. 
    "Private swimming pool" means any pool designed, used and maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his or her household and guests, and located on property owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the owner of the swimming pool. The term "private swimming poo1" covers permanent pools either above surface or subsurface and also portable pools so indicated. 
(Prior code § 131-39) 
8.60.310 - Permit application procedure-Plans and specifications required. 
A.  Before application is made for a permit for a permanent private swimming pool, the plans and specifications therefor, together with pertinent explanatory data, shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval insofar as the same pertains to the safety and drainage, which the approval shall be endorsed upon the plans and specifications. Upon such approval, the application shall be accompanied by two sets of the plans and specifications and the plot plan of the property, which plot plan shall show the accurate location of the proposed swimming pool and the location, height and type of all fencing or walls. 
B.  Plans and specifications to be submitted with the application for the construction or installing of a permanent private swimming pool or any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to the same shall, where appropriate to the particular application, show the following: 
1.  A cross section of scum, gutters and/or skimmers; 
2.  Pipe diagrams showing size of all pipes, inlets, outlets, makeup water lines, vacuum lines, waste and discharge lines, circulation and other piping; 
3.  The pool equipment-room layout, showing filters, their location, pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders, flow meter gauges, site glass, strainers, hair and lint interceptors, dimensions of filter room, its location, floor drain, sumps and other pertinent information; 
4.  The liquid capacity of the pool; 
5.  The kind, number and size of filter, including the square footage of the filter area in each unit; and 
6.  A water supply system. 
C.  The plans shall be drawn to scale indicating all dimensions, including the length, width and depth, of the pool, and the profile will show the same information, where applicable. 
(Prior code § 131-40) 
8.60.320 - Overflow gutters required. 
    Overflow gutters shall be provided extending completely around the pool, having adequate drainage of overflow water away from the pool. 
(Prior code § 131-41) 
8.60.330 - Construction standards-Maintenance. 
    All material used in the construction or installation of permanent private swimming pools as herein defined shall be waterproof, light in color and easily cleaned, except that aluminum paint shall not be used as a finish. Construction, installation and design of the pools shall be such that the same shall be watertight and be maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. Sand or dirt bottoms are prohibited. The owner of every permanent private swimming pool shall be responsible to maintain the pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis so that water from pool does not overflow into adjacent public or private property. 
(Prior code § 131-42) 
8.60.340 - Filling and drainage. 
    All private swimming pools shall be filled by a method of a gooseneck which will fill the pool from above the rim thereof, maintaining a sufficient air gap. Upon completion of filling of the pool, any hose or pipe used in connection therewith must be removed and stored away from the enclosed pool area. All private swimming pools, including portable pools of a size over twenty-four (24) inches deep and eighty (80) square feet, other than those draining into the combined sewer system, shall be provided with not more than a two-inch approved-type pipe drain. The drainpipe on those draining into the combined sewer system, shall comply with the Plumbing Code of the city. In the instance of pools not draining into the combined sewer system, the drainpipe may enter into an open watercourse or storm sewer, if either is available. It is unlawful to drain any pool into the combined sewer system, open watercourse or storm sewer during periods of precipitation and for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the cessation of precipitation. If the drain is connected into the combined sewer system, it shall be unlawful to drain any such pool between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. If it is impossible to drain a pool through any of the foregoing methods, then and in that event no pool can be drained without the method thereof having been approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 131-43) 
8.60.350 - Enclosures, equipment required. 
    Permanent swimming pools covered by the terms of this chapter shall be completely enclosed by a substantial fence four feet in height. The fence shall be so constructed as to prevent any person from gaining access beneath or through or over the fence, and shall have similarly substantial gates or doors of the same height as the fence, with facilities for locking the gates or doors at all times when the pool is unguarded, unattended or not in actual use. Portable pools with ladders, steps and/or ramps used for climbing into the pools shall have such ladders, steps and/or ramps removed when pool is not in use to prevent children from entering pool. 
(Prior code § 131-44) 
8.60.360 - Safety precautions required. 
    All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the users of and bathers in private swimming pools from injury or accident. Convenient means of ingress and egress shall be provided, and the depth of water and any irregularities of the bottom shall be clearly indicated on permanent pools. 
(Prior code § 131-45) 
8.60.370 - Abutting owners-Property rights protected. 
    No private swimming pool shall be so located, designed, operated or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of their property rights by owners of property adjoining the swimming pool. 
(Prior code § 131-47) 
8.60.380 - Regulations governing lights, electrical appliances. 
    Lights used to illuminate any private swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. No conductors carrying electrical current shall cross the pool either overhead or underground. In the use of any electrical appliance in or about the pool area, compliance shall be had within the regulations of the Elizabeth Electrical Code. 
(Prior code § 131-48) 
8.60.390 - Noise restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued at any private swimming pool, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. In the operation of such swimming pool, the use or permitting the use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person or persons who are in the swimming pool, shall be unlawful. 
(Prior code § 131-49) 
8.60.400 - Compliance with sanitary regulations required. 
    In the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any private swimming pool, state laws and the rules, regulations and requirements of the state Department of Health shall be observed. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any provision of state law, requirement, rule or regulation of the state Department of Public Health, the provision imposing the higher standard or the more stringent requirement shall be controlling. 
(Prior code § 131-50) 
8.60.410 - Indecent exposure prohibited. 
    Every person using a private swimming pool must wear a bathing suit or other suitable garment to protect his or her person from indecent exposure. 
(Prior code § 131-51) 
8.60.420 - Use restricted in water shortage. 
    In the event, by proclamation of the governing body of the city, the use of water is curtailed by reason of a water shortage, no such swimming pool may be filled during the existence of such proclamation. 
(Prior code § 131-52) 
8.60.430 - Legal hours of use. 
    No such swimming pool may be used between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on each day of the week except Sunday, and on Sunday no such pool may be used before 8:00 a.m. 
(Prior code § 131-53) 
8.60.440 - Permit issuance-Fee. 
    A permit for a permanent private swimming pool shall be issued by the building inspector to the owner or agent of any residence property in the city, upon the compliance with the requirements of permanent private swimming pool as set forth in this chapter and upon payment of a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 40, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 131-54) 
Chapter 8.64 - SHOPPING CARTS 
Sections: 

8.64.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Cart" means a hand-drawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled container made of metal, wood or other material such as is generally provided by merchants for the use of their customers in carting or carrying goods, wares and merchandise to automobiles or other vehicles. 
    "Person" means a person of either sex, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, society and other entity capable of being sued. 
    "Street" means a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, public parking lot, public parking area and public places used by the general public. 
(Prior code § 119-1) 
8.64.020 - Owner not to permit removal of shopping carts. 
    Owners of shopping carts shall not permit shopping carts to be removed from their buildings or premises. 
(Prior code § 119-2) 
8.64.030 - Owners to post signs regarding removal. 
    It shall be the duty of all owners of premises which make shopping carts available to its customers to post signs at all entrances and exits advising the public that if they remove said shopping carts from the premises, the owners and the general public are subject to a fine or imprisonment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 119-3) 
8.64.040 - Abandonment on public thoroughfare or private property prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or suffer or permit to be left any cart, either owned by him or her in his or her possession, custody or control upon any public thorough-fare or upon any private property not his or her own. 
(Prior code § 119-4) 
8.64.050 - Identification tags required. 
    Any cart provided or made available for use by any person, agent or employee shall have securely attached thereto a plainly visible metal or plastic identification tag to indicate the owner of the cart. 
(Prior code § 119-5) 
8.64.060 - Removal of carts in violation. 
    Any unattended shopping cart found more than fifteen (15) feet outside the perimeter of a business establishment or its parking lot may be removed and impounded by the department of public works where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided. The enforcement personnel removing the cart shall make a written report that identifies himself or herself as well as the date, time, and location of the cart at the time of the removal; this report may take the form of a tag attached to the cart; a copy of the report shall be immediately forwarded to the director of the department of public works. 
    It is unlawful for any shopping cart to be located on or in a public right-of-way. Any person who shall push, pull or guide a shopping cart in or on a public right-of-way shall be in violation of this chapter, shall have the cart seized and shall be subject to the violations and penalties set forth in Section 8.64.110 hereinbelow. 
(Ord. 3974 § 1, 2008: prior code § 119-6) 
8.64.070 - Notice to be sent to owner-Fee. 
    Whenever the department of public works, or any person authorized by the department, shall take any cart into his or her possession bearing identification of ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such person advising him, her or it that such cart is being held by the department of public works, or a duly authorized person, and that the cart may be redeemed upon payment to the city of a fee or charge of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Prior code § 119-7) 
8.64.080 - Redemption by owner. 
    Such cart may be redeemed by the owner thereof as shown by the identification of ownership or right to possession at any time prior to a sale, dismantling, destruction or disposal thereof, and he, she or it shall be entitled to receive such cart upon payment of the fee or charge of the sum of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Prior code § 119-8) 
8.64.090 - Public auction. 
    When any cart remains in the custody of the department of public works, or a duly authorized person, for six months after coming into possession and with respect to which no person has presented to the city proof establishing to its satisfaction such person's ownership or right to possession, the city shall give public notice in a newspaper circulating in the city that, at a specified time and place, such cart will be sold at public auction. The sale shall be conducted by the purchasing agent or by such other person as the purchasing agent shall designate. If, after such notice of sale is given, an owner or other person entitled to redeem any cart prior to the sale may redeem the cart and pay the city or its duly authorized agent the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Prior code § 119-9) 
8.64.100 - Proceeds to go to city. 
    Upon redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(Prior code § 119-10) 
8.64.110 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 119-11) 
Chapter 8.66 - SMOKING 

8.66.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
A.  "Smoke" or "smoking" means the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from or the possession of a lit cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking device, cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe. 
B.  "Electronic smoking device" means any electric device that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe. This definition shall not include any medically prescribed inhalation devices including, but not limited to, inhalers, respirators, or oxygen tanks. 
(Ord. No. 4455, § 1, 3-25-2014) 
8.66.020 - Smoking on city property prohibited. 
A.  No person shall smoke while on the outdoor grounds of any city building including adjacent parking lots and in any and all of the city parks, recreational areas, and adjacent parking lots whether owned, leased or utilized by the city. 
B.  No person shall smoke in any vehicle owned or leased by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4455, § 2, 3-25-2014) 
8.66.030 - Enforcement. 
    Whenever the health officer or his or her designee or a law enforcement officer or a city code enforcement officer observes or reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this chapter, he or she may issue a summons and complaint to the violator. The complaint shall be written and served upon the violator. 
(Ord. No. 4455, § 3, 3-25-2014) 
8.66.040 - Penalty. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be issued a summons and complaint for a violation. Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, except that any person found guilty of or pleading guilty to a first violation of this chapter may be sentenced to not less than ten (10) hours of community service. 
(Ord. No. 4455, § 4, 3-25-2014) 
Chapter 8.68 - SOLID FUEL DELIVERIES 
Sections: 

8.68.010 - Hours for legal delivery restricted-Exceptions. 
    No solid fuel may be delivered in this city to anyone before 6:30 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., official time for the city, nor at any time on Sunday without a permit issued by the city department of weights and measures, except when it can be definitely shown by affidavit of the consignor and the consignee that an emergency exists. 
(Prior code § 77-1) 
8.68.020 - Permits-Filing requirements. 
    Such permit shall be drawn in triplicate, one copy to be retained by the sealer of weights and measures; two copies to be given to the applicant, who shall immediately present the two copies to the officer in charge at police headquarters of this city. One of the copies shall thereupon be signed by the police officer in charge and retained by the applicant; the other such copy shall be filed at police headquarters, and no permit for the emergency delivery of solid fuel shall be valid without the signature of the police officer. 
(Prior code § 77-2) 
8.68.030 - Definitions. 
    "Delivery," as used in this chapter, means and applies to all deliveries of solid fuel while in transit between the place of loading and the point of delivery, including the actual process of removing the solid fuel from the vehicle into the storage place of the receiver. 
    "Emergency," as used in this chapter, means for the protection of health and property as and when deliveries cannot be made within the regular specified time limit as set forth herein, or when it causes unemployment. 
    "Solid fuel," as used in this chapter, means all anthracite and bituminous coal, coke, charcoal, coal briquettes or other patent fuel. 
(Prior code § 77-3) 
Chapter 8.72 - WEEDS AND DEBRIS 
Sections: 

8.72.010 - Prohibited accumulations. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, tenant or person to gather, accumulate, keep, dump, or permit the gathering, accumulation or keeping of, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris or any of the articles, on any land or in any place in the city, in the county of Union, in such a manner as to constitute a menace to public health, safety or general welfare or to create a fire hazard. 
(Prior code § 58-9) 
8.72.020 - Removal required. 
    Whenever brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris or any of the articles shall be gathered or shall accumulate or be dumped, or are permitted to gather or accumulate, on any land or at any place within the limits of the city, in the county of Union, in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or general welfare, and when it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, to remove such articles, then the owner, tenant or person having charge or control over the premises where any such material has accumulated in the manner shall remove or cause the removal of the articles as provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 58-10) 
8.72.030 - Enforcement-Inspection-Notice to remove. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the director of public works of the city, in collaboration with the chief of the fire department and the health officer, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The officers shall make inspection from time to time to ascertain whether or not violations exist, or upon receipt of information that a violation exists, shall make an investigation accordingly. If a violation is deemed to exist, the health officer or the chief of the fire department shall present in writing a report to the director of public works, setting forth the location of the premises where the violation is alleged to exist, the nature of the complaint, the kinds of articles assembled and any other particulars applicable to the subject matter, and specifying whether there is a fire hazard or danger to public health, safety or general welfare. The director of public works shall thereupon give written notice of the complaint to the owner of the premises or to the tenant therein or the person having charge or control thereof, and shall specify a time and place when the owner, tenant or person in charge may have an opportunity to be heard with respect to the complaint, the notice to be at least five days before the time set for hearing. If at the hearing the director of public works shall determine that the complaint is well founded and that there is such a gathering or accumulation of any of the articles above mentioned to constitute a danger to public health, safety or general welfare, or to create a fire hazard, and that it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, to remove the articles, the director of public works shall then give written notice to the owner of the premises or the tenant therein or the person having charge or control thereof, requiring the removal of the articles within ten (10) days after the service of the notice. Any notice mentioned herein may be served in person or by mailing to the last known address of the respective owner, tenant or person in charge. When the owner or person in charge does not reside in the city and when service is by mailing, then a copy of the notice shall be posted on the same day as the mailing at the premises where the violation exists. 
(Prior code § 58-11) 
8.72.040 - Removal by municipal authority authorized-Assessment for removal. 
    If the owner, tenant or person in charge shall fail to remove the brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris or other articles within the time required by the notice, then the director of public works may remove or cause or arrange for the removal of the articles. The director of public works shall keep an accurate account of the cost of any such removal and shall certify such cost and expense to the city council, who shall examine the certificate; and if the city council shall find the same correct, the cost shall be charged against the lands upon which the articles were located and from which they were removed. The cost shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands where the violation existed and shall be added to, become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, to bear interest at the same rate as taxes; and the lien shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes, pursuant to the statutes governing the subject matter. 
(Prior code § 58-12) 
Chapter 8.76 - VITAL STATISTICS 
Sections: 

8.76.010 - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Vital statistics" means statistics concerning births, deaths and marriages. 
(Prior code § 38-262) 
8.76.020 - Bureau-Powers and duties. 
    In accordance with state laws, the bureau of vital statistics is authorized to receive and file the properly executed original birth, stillbirth, marriage and death certificates, such events occurring in the city. 
(Prior code § 38-263) 
8.76.030 - Issuance of burial permits authorized. 
    The registrar, upon the receipt of a death or stillbirth certificate, shall issue a burial or removal permit to the undertaker filing the certificate. 
(Prior code § 38-264) 
8.76.040 - Issuance of marriage licenses authorized. 
    The bureau of vital statistics is authorized to take applications for and issue marriage licenses. 
(Prior code § 38-265) 
8.76.050 - Fees. 
A.  For each birth certificate issued, eight dollars ($8.00). 
B.  For each death certificate issued, eight dollars ($8.00). 
C.  For each marriage certificate issued, eight dollars ($8.00). 
D.  state mandated fees: 
1.  For each disinterment permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
2.  For each burial permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
3.  For each transit permit, five dollars ($5.00). 
4.  For each marriage license, twenty-eight dollars ($28.00). 
5.  For each domestic partnership certificate issued, eight dollars ($8.00). 
6.  For each domestic partnership affidavit, twenty-eight dollars ($28.00). 
E.  No fees are collected for births, marriage, and death certifications when being used for newborns and Social Security pension benefits. 
(Ord. 3649 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3609 § 1, 2004; prior code § 38-266) 
Chapter 8.80 - VACANT AND FORECLOSING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
Sections: 

8.80.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare and security and quiet enjoyment of residents and neighborhoods by (i) requiring all residential property owners, including lenders, trustees and service companies to properly maintain vacant and/or foreclosing properties, and (ii) regulating the maintenance of vacant and/or foreclosing residential properties in order to prevent blighted and unsecured residences. 
    In addition to any other remedies in law or equity not set forth herein, enforcement authority shall be vested in the department of planning and community services and the department of health and human services and their respective inspectors, including, but not limited to the bureaus of construction, health and housing. The police department and department of public works shall also have enforcement authority with respect to this chapter. The mayor, may also designate, when necessary, additional enforcement duties for other city departments. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 4002, § 1, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Days" mean consecutive calendar days. 
    "Director" means the director of planning and community development, the director of health and human services, the director of public works and/or the police director and/or his or her designee(s) and their respective inspectors, including, but not limited to the bureaus of construction, health, and housing. 
    "Enforcement authority" means the department of planning and divisions of community development, the department of public works, the department of health and human services and the police department and any other department designated as such by the mayor. 
    "Foreclosing" means the process by which property, placed as security for a real estate loan to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults. 
    "Initiation of the foreclosure process" means any of the following actions taken by a mortgagee against the borrower or mortgagee of a property: 
1.  Delivering a mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose to the borrower; 
2.  Commencing a foreclosure action by filing a lis pendens in the Superior Court of New Jersey; 
3.  Taking legal possession of the property. 
    "Mortgagee" means the creditor, including but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant or employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. 
    "Owner" means every person, entity, service company, property manager or real estate agency, who alone or with others: 
1.  Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; 
2.  Has care, charge, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; 
3.  Is a mortgagee who has filed a notice of intent to foreclose or has filed a foreclosure complaint; 
4.  Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control of any such property; 
5.  Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium. Each such person is bound to comply as if he were the owner. However, this chapter shall not apply to any condominium association or co-op that forecloses or initiates the foreclosure process for unpaid assessments due or owing the association; 
6.  Every person who operates a rooming house; or 
7.  Is a trustee who holds, owns, or controls mortgage loans for mortgage backed securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure process. 
    "Property" means any real estate, residential property, or portion thereof, located in the city, including buildings or structures situated on the property. For the purposes of this section only, property does not include property owned or subject to the control of the city, or any of its governmental bodies, or agencies including, but not limited to, property, owned or controlled by the housing authority of the city. 
    "Residential property" means any property that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living purposes. 
    "Securing" means taking measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons. 
    "Vacant" means any property not currently legally occupied and/or not properly maintained or secured. 
(Ord. No. 4515 , § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4175, § 2, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 4002, § 2, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.030 - Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing properties; duty to provide written notice of vacant residential property and/or mortgage foreclosure. 
    All owners must register vacant and not properly maintained and/or foreclosing properties with the department of planning and community development on forms to be provided. All registrations must state the individual owners or agent's name, phone number and mailing address. The mailing address may not be a P.O. Box. This registration must also certify that the property was inspected and identify whether the property is vacant at the time of filing. If the property is vacant, the owner and/or registrant must designate and retain an individual or property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. This designation must state the individual or company's name, phone number and local mailing address. The mailing address may not be a P.O. Box. If the property is in the process of foreclosure, then the registration must be received within seven (7) days of the initiation of the foreclosure process as defined in section 8.80.020. If the enforcement authority determines that the property is vacant and the foreclosure proceedings have not been initiated, the registration must be received within fourteen (14) days of the enforcement authority's first notice of violations or summons for improper maintenance. All owners must also provide proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections which must be submitted to the department of planning and community development. 
    All property registrations are valid for one year from the date of the registration. The initial registration fee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and must accompany the registration form. Subsequent annual registration fees shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the first renewal, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the second renewal, and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for all subsequent renewals. All applications and fees are due by October 1st. Registration fees and renewal fees will not be prorated or refunded. 
    Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold or otherwise transferred, the owner must provide proof of sale, transfer or occupancy to the enforcement authority within thirty (30) days of sale, transfer or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 4763 , § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4675 , § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 4515 , § 2, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 4406, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4322, § 1, 8-28-2012; Ord. No. 4175, § 1, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 4002, § 3, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.040 - Maintenance requirements. 
    Properties subject to the requirements of this chapter must be maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. The owner, or its local agent must inspect the property twice a month for the duration of the vacancy. 
    The property must contain a posting with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local agent responsible for the maintenance. This sign must be posted on the front of the property so it is clearly visible from the street. 
    Adherence to this section does not relieve the owner of any applicable obligations set forth in the Code of the city of Elizabeth, covenant conditions and restrictions, and/or home owners' association rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4515 , § 3, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4002, § 4, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.050 - Inspections. 
    The enforcement authority shall have the authority and the duty to inspect properties subject to this chapter for compliance and to issue summonses for any violations. 
(Ord. No. 4002, § 5, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.060 - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Failure to initially register with the enforcement authority is punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
    If applicable, failure to properly identify the name of the owner or local agent is punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
    Failure to maintain the property or respond to the notice as set forth above in section 8.80.040 is punishable by a fine up to three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus costs associated with the cleanup, to include, but not be limited to tipping fees and overtime for use of personnel and equipment. 
    Nothing contained herein shall prevent the department of public works, in a case of an unregistered or delinquent registered owner, from cleaning up the property on an as needed basis and imposing a lien against the property for costs associated for cleanup as set forth in section 8.80.040. 
    Any fine(s) or cost(s) associated with cleaning up the property that remains uncollected or unpaid shall, by resolution of the city council, become a lien upon the property, which lien shall hereafter form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14 and section 15.12.180 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4515 , § 4, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4406, § 2, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4002, § 6, 11-12-2008) 
8.80.070 - Implementation. 
    Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, any existing vacant or foreclosing properties shall have thirty (30) days to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4002, § 7, 11-12-2008) 
Chapter 8.81 - MUNICIPAL IDENTIFICATION CARD PROGRAM FOR RESIDENTS OF THE CITY 

8.81.010 - Definitions. 
A.  City of Elizabeth "Municipal Identification Card" shall mean an identification card issued to residents of the city by the city that shall, at a minimum, display the cardholder's photograph, name, date of birth, address, and an expiration date. Such card shall also, at the cardholder's option, display the cardholder's self-designated gender. Such identification card shall be designed in a manner to deter fraud. 
B.  "Resident" shall mean a person who can establish that he or she is a current resident of Elizabeth pursuant to section 8.81.040. 
C.  "Administering Authority" shall be the director of the department of health and human services or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 2, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.020 - Municipal identification card program. 
    The department of health and human services of the city shall administer the municipal identification card program and shall promulgate all rules necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. The cards will be issued at the Elizabeth Public Library. Together with the Elizabeth Public Library, the administering authority shall make applications for such cards available for pick-up and submission to the Elizabeth Public Library. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 3, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.030 - Issuance of municipal identification card. 
A.  The city municipal identification card shall be available to any resident of Elizabeth, age fourteen (14) and over, regardless of race, color, creed, age, national origin, alienage or citizenship status, gender, sexual orientation, disability, marital status, partnership status; any lawful source of income; housing status, status as a victim of domestic violence or status as a victim of sex offenses or stalking; or conviction or arrest record, provided that such resident is able to meet the requirements for establishing his or her identity and residency as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The municipal identification card shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance. Residents of the city age fourteen (14) and over may apply for a card. Relocation out of the city invalidates the city municipal identification card and the card shall be returned to the department of health and human services for destruction. 
C.  The fee for the issuance of the municipal identification card shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for adults over the age of eighteen (18) years and seven dollars ($7.00) for children under eighteen (18) years of age, veterans, disabled and senior citizens over the age of sixty-two (62) years. Renewal cards shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for adults over the age of eighteen (18) years and seven dollars ($7.00) for children under the age of eighteen (18). The department of health and human services of the city may adopt rules permitting residents who cannot afford to pay such fee to receive a full or partial waiver. In order for an applicant to be granted a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate and have proof of one of the following circumstances: 
1.  Applicant is currently homeless; or 
2.  Applicant has recently experienced reported domestic violence; or 
3.  Applicant has proof of substantial debt caused by medical expenses within the last twelve (12) months; or 
4.  Applicant is currently unemployed; or 
5.  Applicant has filed for bankruptcy within the last six (6) months; or 
6.  Applicant currently receives one of the following: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SSI, or TANF, or food stamps. The applicant shall provide proof in the form of a letter, notice or other official document containing the name of the agency granting the benefit, the name of the recipient of the benefit and the name of the benefit received; or 
7.  Applicant's current household income is at or below one hundred fifty (150) percent of the federal poverty level. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 4, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.040 - Municipal identification card eligibility. 
A.  Proof of Identity. In order to obtain a municipal identification card, an applicant must establish proof of identity and proof of residency within the city as follows: 
1.  Proof of Identity. In order to establish identity, an applicant shall be required to produce one of the following documents: 
a.  A U.S. or foreign passport; 
b.  A U.S. state driver's license; 
c.  A U.S. state identification card; 
d.  A U.S. permanent resident card; 
e.  A consular identification card; 
f.  A photo identification card with name, address, date of birth, and expiration date issued by another country to its citizens or nationals as an alternative to a passport for re-entry to the issuing country; 
g.  A certified copy of U.S. or foreign birth certificate; 
h.  A Social Security card; 
i.  A national identification card with photo, name, address, date of birth, and expiration date; 
j.  A foreign driver's license; 
k.  A U.S. or foreign military identification card; 
l.  A current visa issued by a government agency; 
m.  A U.S. individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) authorization letter; 
n.  An electronic benefit transfer (EBT) card; or 
o.  Any other documentation that the administering agency deems acceptable. 
2.  Proof of Residency. In order to establish residency, an applicant shall be required to produce one of the following items, each of which must show the applicant's name and residential address located within the city, except as otherwise indicated in this paragraph: 
a.  A utility bill within sixty (60) days; 
b.  A current residential property lease; 
c.  A local property tax statement dated within one year of the date it is submitted; 
d.  A local real property mortgage payment receipt within sixty (60) days; 
e.  A bank account statement within sixty (60) days; 
f.  Proof that the applicant has a minor child currently enrolled in a school located within the city; 
g.  An employment pay stub within sixty (60) days; 
h.  A jury summons or court order issued by a federal or state court; 
i.  A federal or state income tax or refund statement dated within one year of the date it is submitted; 
j.  An insurance bill (homeowner, renter, health, life, or automobile insurance); 
k.  Written verification issued by a homeless shelter that the applicant receives city funding confirming at least fifteen (15) days residency; 
l.  Written verification issued by a hospital, health clinic or social services agency located within Elizabeth confirming at least fifteen (15) days residency; or 
m.  Any other documentation that the city deems acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 5, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.050 - Confidentiality of municipal identification card application information. 
A.  The city shall not retain originals or copies of records provided by an applicant to prove identity or residency for a municipal identity card. 
B.  Except as otherwise required by law, the city shall not disclose information about municipal identification card applicants to any public or private entity or individual, including federal, state, or city immigration or law enforcement entities. This protection shall extend to the municipal identification card application forms, information contained on those forms or obtained through the card application process, to the lists of individuals who hold or have applied for a municipal identification card, and to the fact of any individual's participation in the municipal identification card program. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 6, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.060 - Access to services. 
A.  All municipal agencies and offices, and all municipal employees, including law enforcement officers, shall accept such card as proof of identity and residency. 
B.  The city shall seek to expand the benefits associated with the municipal identification card, including encouraging eligible persons to apply for the card and promoting the acceptance of the municipal identity card by banks and other public and private institutions. 
C.  Elizabeth agencies and officers shall not require the possession of a city municipal identification card where identification is not already required to obtain city services. Provided, however that agencies may require the possession of a municipal identification card to obtain benefits or privileges offered exclusively to those who possess a municipal identification card as an incentive to apply for a municipal identification card. 
D.  No Elizabeth agencies or officers shall discriminate against or draw any inference about an individual's national origin, race, language proficiency, immigration status, religion, sexual orientation, disability, housing status, financial status, marital status, status as a victim of domestic violence, criminal history, or gender identity (although an inference about an individual's gender identity is permissible of the cardholder has elected to designate a gender on the card), based upon the fact that the individual holds or presents a municipal identity card issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 7, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.070 - Language assistance services. 
    The city shall, consistent with all federal, state and local laws, provide language assistance to applicants for the municipal identity cards to facilitate access thereto. The city shall identify and implement measures, including but not limited to staff training, community outreach, and language assistance tools, to address the needs of limited English proficient individuals in the administration of the municipal identification card program. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 8, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.080 - Disclaimer. 
    The city is providing the municipal identification card for identification and access to services provided by or in the city. The city does not guaranty or warrant either the information provided by the applicant or of/against acts, criminal or otherwise committed by the individual while possessing or using the city municipal identification card. The city does not waive any of its protections afforded under federal, state or local laws, including immunities under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq., by processing or issuing the city municipal identification card. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 9, 11-9-2016) 
8.81.090 - Counterfeit and fraudulent cards. 
    It is a violation of the Code of the city under this section for any person or entity to undertake any of the following acts: 
A.  To knowingly present false information in the course of applying for a city municipal identification card; 
B.  To alter, copy, or replicate the city municipal identification card; or 
C.  To use the city municipal identification card issued to another person, with the intent to cause a third person or entity to believe the holder of the card is the person to whom the card was issued. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during which or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 4776 , § 10, 11-9-2016) 
Chapter 8.85 - ABANDONED PROPERTIES 

8.85.010 - Municipal powers to rehabilitate abandoned property. 
    The City of Elizabeth hereby grants to itself all such powers granted to municipalities by the State of New Jersey for the rehabilitation of abandoned property. Such powers are set forth, inter alia, in the "Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act" (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) and in applicable portions of the "New Jersey Urban Development Corporation Act" (N.J.S.A. 55-19-1 though -77). These state statutory powers are collectively referred to herein as the "enabling statutes." 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 1, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.020 - Public officer. 
    The public officer, as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80, who is responsible for executing the provisions of this chapter for the rehabilitation of abandoned property, shall be designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 2, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.030 - Abandoned property. 
    The public officer shall designate a property as an "abandoned property" if said property meets the criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 (abandoned property criteria) and/or N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 (nuisance property criteria). The public officer's designation is limited by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-83. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 3, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.040 - Abandoned property list. 
    The public officer shall establish an Abandoned Property List pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55. An interested party (as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-105a) may request that the public officer include a property on the abandoned property list, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-105. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 4, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.050 - Rights of owner of abandoned property. 
    The owner of a property on the abandoned property list has such rights designated to said owner by the enabling statutes. Such powers include but are not limited to: 
A.  Challenging the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55e; 
B.  Seeking removal from said list, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-57 and 55:19-103; 
C.  Petitioning for reinstatement of control and possession, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-92 et seq.; 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 5, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.060 - Municipal powers. 
    The city has such powers and rights regarding abandoned properties as set forth in the enabling statutes. Such powers include but are not limited to: 
A.  Sale of tax lien, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56; 
B.  Special tax sales, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-101; 
C.  Foreclosing the right to redemption, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-58; 
D.  Recourse directly against property owner, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-100; 
E.  Possession and control of property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84 to 55:19-92 et seq.; 
F.  Rehabilitation and reuse of property, while in possession and control, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-90; 
G.  Borrowing money and making applications for rehabilitation of property, while in possession and control, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-91; 
H.  Sale of property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-96; 
I.  Purchase of property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-96; 
J.  Recover rehabilitation costs by lien on property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-98; 
K.  Clearance, development, redevelopment or repair of property through power of eminent domain, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, 55:19-102. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 6, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.070 - Rights of utilities. 
    Electric and natural gas utilities are granted such rights to abandoned properties as are set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-106. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 7, 1-12-2016) 
8.85.080 - Interpretation. 
    All references in this chapter to state statutes include reference to all amendments thereto. References to particular sections of the enabling statutes are for ease of reference, but may not be exhaustive and are not meant to be exclusive of other applicable statutory provisions contained in the enabling statutes or elsewhere in the New Jersey statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4659 , § 1, 1-12-2016) 
Chapter 8.86 - LANDLORD RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISORDERLY TENANTS 

8.86.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to enable the City of Elizabeth to take effective action to assure that excesses arising from irresponsible rentals, when they occur, shall not be repeated, and that landlords be held to sufficient standards of responsibility in order to preserve the quality of life for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
8.86.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    "Hearing officer" shall mean a licensed attorney of the State of New Jersey assigned by the law department, who shall not be an owner or lessee of any real property within the City of Elizabeth, nor hold any interest in the assets of or profits arising from the ownership or lease of such property. 
    "Landlord" shall mean the person (or persons) who owns or purports to own a building which there is rented or offered for rent housing space for living or dwelling under either a written or oral lease, which building contains no more than four (4) dwelling units. 
    "Substantiated complaint" means a complaint for an act of disorderly, indecent, tumultuous or riotous conduct, upon or in proximity to any rental premises, and attributable to the acts of incitements of any of the tenants of those premises which has been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
8.86.030 - Complaint. 
    If two (2) or more complaints in any twenty-four (24) month period on separate occasions of disorderly, indecent, tumultuous or riotous conduct upon or in proximity to any rental premises, and attributable to the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of those premises, have been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, the director of health and human services, or any officer or employee of the municipality designated by the director of health and human services for the purpose, may institute proceedings to require the landlord of those premises to post a bond against the consequences of future incidents of the same character. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
8.86.040 - Notice requirements. 
A.  The director of health and human services, or officer or employee designated pursuant to section 8.86.030, shall cause to be served upon the landlord, in person or by registered mail to the address appearing on the tax records of the city, notice advising of the institution of such proceedings, together with particulars of the substantiated complaints upon which those proceedings are based, and of the time and place at which a hearing will be held in the matter, which shall be in the municipal building, municipal court or other public place within the municipality, and which shall be no sooner than thirty (30) days from the date upon which the notice is served or mailed. 
B.  In the event a tenant is convicted of any of the conduct described in a substantiated complaint, the director of health and human services, or officer or employee designated pursuant to section 8.86.030, shall cause notice advising that the conduct specified has occurred to be served on the landlord, in person or by registered mail, at the address appearing on the tax records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
8.86.050 - Hearing; penalty. 
A.  At the hearing convened pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer shall give full hearing to any complaint of the City of Elizabeth and to any evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the landlord, if present or represented and offering such evidence, may present. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the landlord shall be required to post a bond with the department of health and human services in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
B.  Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the judgment of the hearing officer, in light of the nature and extent of the offenses indicated in the substantiated complaints upon which the proceedings are based, to be adequate in the case of subsequent offenses to make reparation for: 
1.  Damages likely to be caused to public or private property and damages consequent upon disruption of affected residents' rights of fair use and quiet possession of their premises; 
2.  Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for such offenses; and 
3.  Compensating the City of Elizabeth for the costs of repressing and prosecuting such incidents of disorderly behavior; but no such bond shall be in an amount less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
C.  The city may enforce the bond thus required by action in the Superior Court, and shall be entitled to an injunction prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing any lease of the affected premises for residential purposes until that bond or equivalent security, in satisfactory form and amount, has been deposited with the city. 
D.  A bond or other security deposited in compliance with this chapter shall remain in force for a period recommended by the hearing officer, which period shall be no less than two (2) years and no more than four (4) years. Upon the lapse of the specified period the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge thereof unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have been had under section 8.86.060, in which case the security shall be renewed in an amount and for a period that shall be specified by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
8.86.060 - Proceedings against landlord; recovery from tenant. 
A.  If, during the period for which a landlord is required to give security pursuant to the section 8.86.050, a substantiated complaint is recorded against the property in question, the director of health and human services or the director of health and human services' designee may institute proceedings against the landlord for the forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the security, for an extension of the period for which such security is required, or for an increase in the amount of security required, or for any or all of those purposes. 
B.  Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by the hearing officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in section 8.86.050. Any decision by the hearing officer to increase the amount or extend the period of the required security shall be determined in light of the same factors set forth in section 8.86.050, and shall be taken only to the extent that the nature of the substantiated complaint or complaints out of which proceedings arise under this chapter indicates the appropriateness of such change in order to carry out the purposes of this act effectually. The decision of the hearing officer in such circumstances shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided for in section 8.86.050. 
C.  A landlord may attempt to recover from a tenant any amounts of security actually forfeited as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4952 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Drug-free school zone map adopted. 
    In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, C. 44 (C. 2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about November 21, 1994 by the city engineer of the city of Elizabeth, is approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such school property. 
(Prior code § 69-1) 
9.24.020 - Location and boundaries of school property. 
    The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to Section 9.04.010 of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time if any that this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones. 
(Prior code § 69-2) 
9.04.030 - Notification of changes in location and boundaries. 
    The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of' any private or parochial school, is directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the city engineer and the city attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes. 
(Prior code § 69-3) 
9.04.040 - Copies of map on file. 
    The city clerk is directed to receive and to keep on file the original and ten (10) copies of the map approved and adopted pursuant to Section 9.04.010 of this chapter, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the county clerk and the office of the Union County prosecutor. In addition, ten (10) copies of the aforementioned map adopted pursuant to Section 9.04.010 of this chapter shall be placed on file in the police department for the examination of the public so long as this chapter is in effect. 
(Prior code § 69-4) 
9.04.050 - Map to be used as evidence. 
    The following additional matters are determined, declared, recited and stated: 
A.  It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to Section 9.04.010 of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following: 
1.  The location of elementary and secondary schools within the municipality; 
2.  The boundaries of the real property, which is owned by or leased to such schools or a school board; 
3.  That such school property is and continues to be used for school purposes; and 
4.  The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such school property. 
B.  Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C. 2C:35-7). 
C.  Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to Section 9.04.010 of this chapter. The failure of the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised and approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is not used for school purposes. 
D.  All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have been complied with. 
(Prior code § 69-5) 
Chapter 9.08 - GAMBLING 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Gambling, games of chance prohibited-Exception. 
A.  No person shall deal, play or engage in faro, roulette, dice or card games or other device, or have in his or her possession any ticket, slip or other writing or printing, or any interest or share or showing or indicating an interest, share, bet or pledge, in any pool, lottery, racing contest or other game of chance, or shall gamble in any form; and no person shall aid, abet, assist or participate in any such pool, lottery, race or other contest or game of chance. 
B.  This section shall not be construed to apply to the holding and operation of games of chance commonly known as bingo or lotto under a license duly issued under the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law, and the holding and operation of games of chance commonly known as a raffle or raffles under a license duly issued under the provisions of the Raffles Licensing Law. 
(Prior code § 79-1) 
9.08.020 - Money seized on arrest for playing unlawful games-Return prohibited-Exceptions. 
    Whenever any money, currency or cash shall be seized or captured by the police or other law enforcement officers in connection with any arrest for violation of or conspiracy to violate this chapter, the money, currency or cash shall be deemed prima facie to be contraband of law as a gambling device, or as part of a gambling operation, and it shall be unlawful to return the money, currency or cash to the person or persons claiming to own the same or to any other person, except in the circumstances and manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 79-2) 
9.08.030 - Disposition, pending trial, of moneys seized. 
    Pending trial or ultimate disposition of the charge or charges brought under this chapter, growing out of any arrest in connection with which any such money, currency or cash was seized or captured, the same shall be accounted for and deposited with the city treasurer by the arresting authorities and shall be under the supervision of the city treasurer. 
(Prior code § 79-3) 
9.08.040 - Disposition, on conviction, of money seized-Order of forfeiture. 
A.  If the trial or other ultimate disposition of such charge or charges results in a record of conviction being entered against the person or persons so arrested as aforesaid, in connection with which arrest the money, currency or cash was seized or captured, as aforesaid, then the city treasurer may, after six months from the date of the record of the entry of such conviction, make application, without prior notice, to the municipal court for an order to show cause why such money, currency or cash so seized or captured shall not be forfeited to the sole use and gain of the city; such order to show cause shall then be served upon the person from whom money, currency or cash was so seized or captured, in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure. Upon the return of the order, hearing shall be conducted in summary manner, and at such hearing proof of the conviction shall be prima facie evidence that the money, currency or cash so seized or captured was used in connection with the unlawful playing of any game wherein money or other thing of value is wagered or gambled; provided, however, that proof, to the satisfaction of the court, shall first be established that no action or proceeding, then pending and undetermined, has been filed in any court of competent jurisdiction against the city treasurer seeking a recovery or return of the money, currency or cash so held in custody. 
B.  Amounts seized or captured from any number of persons may be consolidated in a single action. 
(Prior code § 79-4) 
9.08.050 - Acquittal-Disposition of moneys seized-Claimant's application for return-Application for forfeiture. 
    If the trial or other ultimate disposition of such charge or charges brought under this chapter result in an acquittal or other final termination of such proceedings in favor of the person or persons so arrested, as aforesaid, in connection with which arrest the money, currency or cash was seized or captured, then the person or persons claiming to own the money, currency or cash may, within two years from the date of such acquittal or other final termination, in addition to any other remedy now provided by law, make application, on giving ten (10) days' prior notice thereof to the city treasurer, to the municipal court of the city for an order declaring such money, currency or cash to be the property of such person or persons and ordering the same to be returned by the city treasurer. At any time after the expiration of the period of two years from the date of acquittal or other final determination, the city treasurer may make application to the municipal court for an order to show cause why such money, currency or cash so seized or captured shall not be forfeited to the sole use and gain of the city; such order to show cause shall then be served upon the person or persons from whom the money, currency or cash was so seized or captured, in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure. Upon the return of the order, hearing shall be conducted in summary manner; provided, however, that proof, to the satisfaction of the court, shall first be established that no action or proceeding, then pending and undetermined, has been filed in any court of competent jurisdiction, seeking recovery. 
(Prior code § 79-4.1) 
9.08.060 - Filing of certified copy of orders. 
    A certified copy of all court orders made in compliance with the provisions of Sections 9.08.040 and 9.08.050 shall be kept on file by the city treasurer. 
(Prior code § 79-4.2) 
9.08.070 - Legal representation. 
    The municipal prosecutor shall be the legal representative on behalf of this municipality and all officers thereunder in the enforcement, prosecution and legal representation required by the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 79-4.3) 
9.08.080 - Certain games of chance permitted on Sunday. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-58, licensee may be issued for the holding, operating and conducting of certain games of chance within the city on the first day of the week commonly known and designated as Sunday. 
(Prior code § 79-5) 
Chapter 9.12 - GRAFFITI 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Use of graffiti prohibited. 
    No person shall write, print or place with ink, paint, chalk or other substances, graffiti on the real or personal property of another, whether the person or real property be publicly or privately owned, unless the owner of the property shall have, prior to the writing, printing or placing of graffiti, specifically consented to the same. 
(Prior code § 82-1) 
9.12.020 - Assisting in or encouraging violations. 
    It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having custody and care of any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage the minor to violate the provisions of this chapter, as defined herein, either by words, overt act, by failing to act, or by lack of supervision and control over the minor child. 
(Prior code § 82-2) 
9.12.030 - Minors in violation-Parent subject to penalties. 
    Any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years apprehended for the violation of this chapter shall be brought before a Judge of the Union County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court, and the parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of the minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the judge of the municipal court of the city and be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(Prior code § 82-3) 
9.12.040 - Violations and penalties-Exception. 
A.  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to: (1) a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and community service not to exceed twenty (20) hours, and/or (2) imprisonment of up to ninety (90) days in the county jail. 
B.  An exception to this section shall be any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall, upon conviction be subject to the penalties imposed on him or her by the judge of the Union County juvenile and domestic relations court. 
(Ord. 3890 § 1, 2007; prior code § 82-4) 
9.12.050 - Responsibility of owner for removal. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of real or personal property whose property has been written on, printed on or placed on with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, graffiti to remove same from the real or personal property in a professional workmanship manner and restored as nearly as possible to its original condition within thirty (30) days of written notification to do so from the enforcing authority. 
(Prior code § 82-7) 
9.12.060 - Reward by municipality for apprehension of person(s) committing acts of graffiti. 
    For the purposes of this section, "act(s) of graffiti" means drawing, painting or the making of any inscription on a bridge, building, public transportation vehicle, rock, wall, sidewalk, street or other exposed surface on public or private property without permission of the owner. 
A.  There is established a reward, not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), for the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of purposely or knowingly damaging tangible property of another by an act of graffiti in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3 and/or Chapter 82 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. The reward shall be paid to any person who the city council, acting upon the recommendation of the chief of police, may deem entitled thereto. 
B.  A reward is to be payable after conviction out of those funds of the city made available therefor. 
C.  No reward shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or to enforce the law or to the employee's spouse, child or parent, living in the same household. 
(Ord. 3529 § 1, 2003: prior code § 82-8) 
Chapter 9.16 - CIVIL LIABILITY FOR JUVENILE VANDALISM 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Findings. 
    The Legislature has made findings concerning vandalism by juveniles as a basis for establishing civil liability for vandalism. 
    The city adopts and incorporates these findings in part as follows: 
    "The Legislature finds that malicious acts of vandalism by youths are increasing at an alarming rate; that such acts are frequently attributable to lack of care, custody and control exercised by the parent; that parents should have some responsibility for the conduct of their children; that while there is a reluctance to charge a child with juvenile acts of vandalism there should be some legal deterrent to juvenile acts of vandalism and to parental neglect of child supervision." 
(Prior code § 94-19) 
9.16.020 - Definitions. 
    "Guardian" means a person other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile. 
    "Juvenile" means an individual who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Prior code § 94-20) 
9.16.030 - Responsibility. 
    A parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a juvenile, who fails or neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct of such juvenile shall be in violation of this chapter if the juvenile causes willfully malicious or unlawful injury or destruction to the real or personal property of another. 
(Prior code § 94-21) 
9.16.040 - Non-custodial parents. 
    This chapter shall not apply to a parent whose parental custody and control of such juvenile has been removed by court order, decree, judgment, military service or the marriage of such juvenile. 
(Prior code § 94-22) 
9.16.050 - Penalties. 
    All violators of this chapter may be required to perform community service and may be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Prior code § 94-23) 
Chapter 9.20 - LOITERING 
Sections: 

9.20.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    "Loitering" means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    "Parent" or "guardian" means any adult person having care or custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or otherwise. 
    "Public place" means any place to which the public has access, including any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks, both public and private schools, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the person charged with violating this chapter, or in the case of a minor, not owned or under the control of his or her parent or guardian. 
(Prior code § 91-1) 
9.20.020 - Certain types of loitering prohibited. 
    No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to: 
A.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
B.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
C.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; and 
D.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place as defined in Section 9.20.010. This subsection shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made. 
(Prior code § 91-2) 
9.20.030 - Determination of arrest for violation at discretion of police officer. 
    Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in Section 9.20.020, he or she may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 91-3) 
9.20.040 - Loitering by minors. 
    No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall knowingly permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 91-4) 
9.20.050 - Notice of minor's violation. 
    Whenever any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years is charged with a violation of this chapter, his or her parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the chief of police or any other person designated by him or her to give such notice. 
(Prior code § 91-5) 
9.20.060 - Recurring violation by minor. 
    If at any time within thirty (30) days following the giving of notice as provided in Section 9.20.050, the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this chapter, it shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his or her parent or guardian. 
(Prior code § 91-6) 
9.20.070 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Prior code § 91-7) 
Chapter 9.24 - OBSCENITY 
Sections: 

9.24.010 - Obscene materials or actions prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business, association, club, group of individuals or any combination of the aforementioned to knowingly photograph, act in, pose for, print, sell, offer for sale, give away, exhibit, publish or offer to publish or otherwise distribute or pander, make, display or exhibit any obscene material, communication or performance, or other article or item which is obscene, within the city. 
(Prior code § 98-1) 
9.24.020 - Determination of obscenity. 
    The word "obscene" means any material, communication or performance which the average person applying contemporary community standards existing within the municipality would find, when considered as a whole: 
A.  Appeals to the prurient interest; 
B.  Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct, as hereinafter specifically defined, or depicts or exhibits offensive nakedness, as hereinafter specifically defined; and 
C.  Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Prior code § 98-2) 
9.24.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, except as the context may clearly require or indicate otherwise, the following words shall be defined to include but not be limited to the meaning hereafter given: 
    "Communication" means any electronic audio or visual transmission by radio, cable television or closed circuit broadcast, explicit verbal description or narrative account. 
    "Material" means any printed matter, visual representation or sound recording and includes but is not limited to books, magazines, motion picture films, pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, sculptures and tapes or wire recordings or advertisements thereof. 
    "Offensive nakedness" means uncovered or less than opaquely covered, postpubertal human male or female genitals, pubic areas or buttocks, or the human female breast including the area within the outer ring of the nipple (or the breast with the nipple and immediately adjacent area only covered), or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    "Performance" means any play, motion picture film, dance or other exhibition, whether pictured, animated, live or recorded, performed in a place of public accommodation before an audience, whether or not restricted exclusively to persons over eighteen (18) years of age. 
    "Sexual conduct" means, but is not limited to acts or simulations of masturbation, fondling of genitals, homosexuality, bestiality, lesbianism, oral or anal intercourse, sexual intercourse, sadomasochistic abuse, depicting flagellation or torture with or without physical restraint by or upon a person nude or clad in a revealing or bizarre costume, excretory function or any lewd exhibition of the genitals. 
(Prior code § 98-3) 
9.24.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Prior code § 98-4) 
9.24.050 - Concealment of obscene materials from minors. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Knowingly" means: (a) having knowledge of the character and content of the material described herein; or (b) having failed to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose its character and content. 
    "Obscene material for person under eighteen (18) years of age" means any description, narrative account, display, or depiction of a specified anatomical area, or specified sexual activity contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing, composition, format, or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity. 
    "Retailer," as used in this chapter, means any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under eighteen (18) years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or other publications at retail containing pictures, drawings and photographs. 
    "Specified anatomical area" means: (a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered. 
    "Specified sexual activity" means: (a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse; or (c) fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
(Prior code § 98-8) 
9.24.060 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to knowingly display or permit to be displayed at his or her business premises any obscene material, as defined herein, at a height of less than five feet or without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front of the material displayed. 
B.  Public display of the obscene material, as defined herein, shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute a petty disorderly persons offense and shall be punishable by one or more of the following penalties; a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or a period of community service not exceeding thirty (30) days for the violation thereof. 
(Prior code § 98-9) 
Chapter 9.28 - SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN 
Sections: 

9.28.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Child" means any person under sixteen (16) years of age. 
    "Prohibited sexual act" means and includes: 
A.  Sexual intercourse; 
B.  Anal intercourse; 
C.  Masturbation; 
D.  Bestiality; 
E.  Sadism; 
F.  Masochism; 
G.  Fellatio; 
H.  Cunnilingus; 
I.  Any other sexual activity; or 
J.  Nudity, if such nudity is to be depicted for the purpose of sexual stimulation or gratification of any person who may view such depiction. 
(Prior code § 98-11) 
9.28.020 - Promotion of sexual acts prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, including any parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the care or custody of a child, to cause or permit a child to engage in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act if such person knows, has reason to know or intends that such act may be photographed or filmed. 
(Prior code § 98-12) 
9.28.030 - Photography or filming. 
    It is unlawful for any person to photograph or film a child in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act. 
(Prior code § 98-13) 
9.28.040 - Sale of photographs or film. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly receive for the purpose of selling or to sell any photograph or film which depicts a child engaging in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act. 
(Prior code § 98-14) 
9.28.050 - Presumption of age. 
    For purposes of this chapter, a person who is depicted as or presents the appearance of being under the age of sixteen (16) in any photograph or film shall be rebuttably presumed to be under the age of sixteen (16). 
(Prior code § 98-15) 
9.28.060 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Prior code § 98-16) 
Chapter 9.32 - CURFEW 
Sections: 

9.32.010 - Findings. 
    This chapter is adopted in accordance with the authorization granted by Chapter 132, Laws of New Jersey 1992 and incorporates the following findings: 
A.  Children who are left unsupervised during the overnight hours may be exposed to the most detrimental influences in society; that the allure of the rampant drug counter-culture, the potential for involvement in criminal activity, and other potential threats to the physical and mental health and welfare of children justify governmental action in furtherance of the protection of one of the most fragile and easily influenced segments of our society. 
B.  The city council further finds and declares that it is in the best interest of society to encourage family unity; to encourage the family unit to provide for the care, protection, and wholesome mental and physical development of children; to encourage the supervision of children by their parents and guardians and to encourage communication between them. 
C.  The city council further finds and declares that because of the peculiar vulnerability of children, their inability to make critical decisions in an informed, mature manner, and the importance of the parental role in child rearing, it is appropriate to authorize municipalities to enact ordinances to protect children from the dangers of the streets and to encourage the deepening of familial relationships. 
(Prior code § 94-10) 
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Juvenile" means an individual who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
B.  "Guardian" means a person other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile. 
C.  "Public place" any place to which the public has access, including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public building, structure or area. 
(Prior code § 94-11) 
9.32.030 - Hours. 
A.  It is unlawful for a juvenile of any age under eighteen (18) years to be on any public street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian or unless engaged in, or traveling to or from, a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a juvenile to perform. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any public street or in any public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Prior code § 94-12) 
9.32.040 - Exceptions. 
    The following are exceptions to this chapter: 
A.  Juveniles engaging in errands involving medical emergencies; 
B.  Attendance at extracurricular school activities; and 
C.  Activities sponsored by religious or community based organizations, and other cultural, educational and social events, sponsored by religious or community based organizations after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. 
(Prior code § 94-13) 
9.32.050 - Standards. 
    All standards required to be established by the provisions of Chapter 132, Laws of 1992 of New Jersey are set forth hereinabove with respect to prohibitions and exceptions thereto in order to apprise all juveniles, parents or guardians and police officers in connection with compliance and enforcement requirements. 
(Prior code § 94-14) 
9.32.060 - Penalties. 
    All violators of this chapter shall be required to perform community service and may be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or guardian violate this chapter, they shall be required to perform community service together. 
(Prior code § 94-15) 
Chapter 9.36 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Firearms 

9.36.010 - Discharge or firing of firearms prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge or fire any pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, cannon or firearms of any kind within the corporate boundaries of the city; provided, however, that this article shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation who shall be engaged in a public duty under the authority of any federal, state or municipal law, nor shall this article apply to any act, program or demonstration conducted under the supervision and approval of any federal, state or municipal authority. 
(Prior code § 73-1) 
9.36.020 - Starter pistols. 
    It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, distribute, lease, or make available in any manner whatsoever, a starter pistol to a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Prior code § 73-2) 
Article II - Sale and Possession of Cigarette Lighters Which Have the Appearance of Weapons-Prohibition 

9.36.030 - Definitions. 
    "Cigarette lighter" means any mechanical device which is used in the lighting of cigars, pipes or cigarettes. 
    "Weapon" means any instrument or device for use in attack or defense in combat, fighting or war; including but not limited to a sword, knife, firearm, hand grenade, rifle or gun. 
(Prior code § 82C-1) 
9.36.040 - Sale and possession. 
    It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, distribute or make available in any manner whatsoever, a cigarette lighter which has the appearance of a weapon of any kind. It also is unlawful for any person or persons to buy, carry or have in his possession a cigarette lighter which has the appearance of a weapon. 
(Prior code § 82C-2) 
9.36.050 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days in the county jail or both upon the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Prior code § 82C-3) 
Article III - Weapons Free Zones 

9.36.060 - Definitions. 
    "Public buildings or lands" means all city owned properties. 
    "Weapon" means a weapon is defined as any instrument or device readily capable of lethal use or of inflicting serious bodily injury, for use in attack or defense in combat, fighting or war. This term includes, but is not limited to all: (1) firearms, even though not loaded or lacking a clip or other component to render them immediately inoperable; (2) components which can be readily assembled into a weapon; (3) gravity knives, switchblade knives, daggers, dirks, stilettos, or other dangerous knives, billies, blackjacks, bludgeons, metal knuckles, sandclubs, slingshots, cesti or similar leather bands studded with metal flings or razor blades imbedded in wood; (4) stun guns; and any weapon or other device which projects, releases, or emits tear gas or any other substance intended to produce temporary physical discomfort or permanent injury through being vaporized or otherwise dispensed in the air; and (5) explosives of any kind. 
(Prior code § 82D-1) 
9.36.070 - Weapons free zone. 
    This article establishes that all public buildings and lands be declared "weapons free zones." Therefore, it is unlawful for any person(s) to enter into or on the premises of a public building or land being in possession of a weapon, as defined above. 
(Prior code § 82D-2) 
9.36.080 - Implementation. 
    All appropriate city officials will cause to be posted at all entrances to city buildings and facilities a sign declaring the facility a weapons free zone and citing the penalty for violation of same. 
(Prior code § 82D-3) 
9.36.090 - Exemption. 
    This article does not apply to any person(s) who, pursuant to law, is authorized to be in possession of such weapons. 
(Prior code § 82D-4) 
9.36.100 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to the fines and penalties set out in Section 1.12.010. 
(Prior code § 82D-5) 
Chapter 9.40 - LASER POINTERS 
Sections: 

9.40.010 - Definitions. 
    "Laser pointer" means any hand held instrument or device which emits a beam of light amplified by stimulated emission of radiation. 
(Ord. 3151 § 1, 1999) 
9.40.020 - Sale and possession. 
    It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, distribute or make available in any manner whatsoever, a laser pointer. It also is unlawful for any person or persons to buy, carry or have in their possession a laser pointer. 
(Ord. 3151 § 2, 1999) 
9.40.030 - Exemption. 
    This chapter does not apply to any person (s) who, pursuant to law are authorized to possess, operate or cause to be operated a laser pointer. 
(Ord. 3151 § 3, 1999) 
9.40.040 - Violation and penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to the fines and penalties set out in Section 1.12.010. 
(Ord. 3151 § 4, 1999) 
Chapter 9.44 - STINK BOMBS 
Sections: 

9.44.010 - Definitions. 
    "Stink bomb" means a small bomb made to emit a foul smell upon explosion or breakage. These devices include, but are not limited to, those activated by a match via a wick or those activates by breaking, crushing or cracking glass, plastic or the outer package. 
(Ord. 3152 § 1, 1999) 
9.44.020 - Sale and possession. 
    It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, distribute or make available in any manner whatsoever, a stink bomb. It also is unlawful for any person or persons to buy, carry or have in their possession a stink bomb. 
(Ord. 3152 § 2, 1999) 
9.44.030 - Exemption. 
    This chapter does not apply to any person who, pursuant to law are authorized to operate or cause to be operated a stink bomb. 
(Ord. 3152 § 3, 1999) 
9.44.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court judge of the city, be subject to the fines and penalties set out in Section 1.12.010. 
(Ord. 3152 § 4, 1999) 
Chapter 9.48 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sections: 

9.48.010 - Food storage-Open-air storage of containers prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to store any barrel, drum, jar, bottle or any container used for the packing of edible foods in any lot exposed to the elements. 
(Prior code § 75-1) 
9.48.020 - Labor-Prohibited recruitment of certain personnel. 
    It is unlawful within the city for any person to recruit any person or persons for employment, or to secure or offer to secure for any person or persons any employment, when the purpose of such recruiting, securing or offering to secure employment is to have such persons take the places in employment of employees in an industry where a labor dispute, strike or lockout exists. 
(Prior code § 86-1) 
9.48.030 - Labor-Prohibited employment of certain personnel. 
    No person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself of herself for employment in place of employees involved in a labor dispute shall take or offer to take the place in employment of any employee involved in a labor dispute. 
(Prior code § 86-2) 
9.48.040 - Library-Return of property required-Notice. 
    No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from the Elizabeth public library or any branch thereof contrary to the rules and regulations of the library, after thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date of posting, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to the person at the last address furnished to the library or branch. 
(Prior code § 87-1) 
9.48.050 - Library-Property protected. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by, or is in the custody of, any such library or branch. 
(Prior code § 87-2) 
9.48.060 - Library-False identification prohibited. 
    No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or address, or use any card other than the one issued to the person, for the purpose of borrowing any book or other article from such library or branch. 
(Prior code § 87-3) 
9.48.070 - Hate literature-Publication of certain printed matter prohibited. 
    Publication of printed matter inciting or tending to incite racial or religious hatred is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 105-8) 
9.48.080 - Hate literature-Conditions for publication, dissemination of certain printed matter. 
    It is unlawful for any person or organization to print, publish, distribute or cause to be printed, published or distributed, by any means or in any manner whatsoever, any handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, pamphlet, leaflet, card, sticker, periodical, literature or paper which tends to expose any individual or any racial or religious group to contempt, ridicule or obloquy, unless the same has clearly printed or written thereon: 
A.  The true name and post office address of any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization causing same to be printed, published or distributed; 
B.  If such name is that of a firm, corporation, partnership or organization, the name of the individual acting in its behalf or causing such printing, publication or distribution. 
(Prior code § 105-9) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - ONE-WAY STREETS 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Caspian Street-Portion affected. 
    Caspian Street is designated as a one-way street in the indicated direction: 
Street Direction Caspian Street South from First Avenue to Third Avenue  
(Prior code § 141-93) 
10.04.020 - Caspian Street-Erection of signs. 
    Appropriate one-way street signs shall be erected indicating the direction of traffic, which signs shall be in accordance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 141-94) 
10.04.030 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code § 141-98) 
10.04.040 - Streets set forth in Schedule I made one-way streets. 
    The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I, in Section 10.04.050, are designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated. 
(Prior code § 141-99) 
10.04.050 - Schedule I. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 10.04.030, the following described streets or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated: 
Name of 

Street Direction Location and Limits Adam's Avenue Southbound Starting at the south curbline of Fairmount Avenue and continuing southwest to the north curbline of Mary Street Alina Street Northwesterly Cross Avenue to Stanton Street Allen Street Westbound Between Old Road and Routes 1 and 9 Anna Street Westerly Between Jefferson Avenue and Walnut Street Broadway Easterly From Spring Street to Reid Street Butler Street Southbound Entire length Caldwell Place East Entire length Carrington Street Eastbound Entire length Cherry Street North Between Morris Avenue and Trotters Lane Cherry Street North From Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28) to Morris Avenue Chetwood Street East From Carteret Street to Summer Street Chilton Street South From Elmora Avenue (Rt. No. 439) to Rahway Avenue (Rt. No. 27) Cross Avenue Northbound From Virginia Street to Newark city line DeHart Place Northerly From Fay Avenue to Rahway Avenue Delaware Street Northbound Entire length Ely Street Northbound Between Eugenia Place and Pearl Street Erico Avenue South From Grove Street to NJ 439 (South Elmora Avenue) Erie Street Southbound Entire length Eugenia Place Eastbound Between Washington Avenue and Ely Street Fairbanks Street Northeasterly Between Allen Street and Myrtle Street First Avenue Eastbound Third Street to Elizabeth Avenue Flora Street Eastbound Catherine Street to Routes 1 and 9 (Spring Street) Florida Street Northbound Entire length Fourth Street Southbound Trumbull Street to New Point Road Geneva Street Southbound Entire length Glenwood Road Southwesterly From Magie Avenue to Edgewood Road Green Street West From Summer Street to Carteret Street Grove Street West From New York Avenue to Erico Avenue Jackson Avenue Easterly From Magnolia Avenue to Anna Street Jacques Street Southbound East Grand Street to Elizabeth Avenue Julia Street Westerly Between Jackson Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Kipling Road North From Magie Avenue to Browning Avenue Liberty Street Northerly From South Street to Pearl Street Livingston Street Westbound Division Street to East Grand Street Louisa Street Easterly Between Jefferson Avenue and Spring Street Ludlow Street Southerly From the Newark city line to its terminus in the city of Elizabeth Mary Street Easterly Between North Broad Street and Jackson Avenue McKinley Street Northerly Bayway Avenue to Richmond Street McKinley Street Southbound Between Bayway Avenue (N.J. Route 439) and Myrtle Street Monroe Avenue Northeasterly From Jackson Avenue to Anna Street Montgomery Street West Entire length Myrtle Street Westbound Between McKinley Street and Polonia Avenue Neck Lane Eastbound From Van Buren Avenue to Route No. 1 New Point Road Westerly From Sixth Street to Livingston Street Norwood Terrace East Entire length Ogden Street Westbound From Bayway to Allen Street Old Road Southwesterly Between Myrtle Street and Allen Street Parker Road Westerly Ursino Drive to Morris Avenue Pingry Place Eastbound Beginning at Westminster Avenue to confluence of Salem Avenue and North Broad Street Polonia Avenue Northbound Between Myrtle Street and Bayway Avenue (N.J. Route 439) Raymond Terrace North Between Lincoln Avenue and North Avenue Roanoke Avenue Northerly North Avenue to Georgian Court Roosevelt Street Easterly Rosehill Place to Washington Avenue Salem Avenue North Between Pingry Place and North Avenue Sheridan Avenue Southbound Between Carrington Street and Virginia Street Sherman Avenue Northbound Between Alma Street and Virginia Street Smith Street Northbound Elizabeth Avenue to Livingston Street Stanton Avenue North From Alma Street to Garfield Place Thomas Street Eastbound Allen Street to Bayway Trenton Avenue Northerly Clifton Street and the Elizabeth River Bridge West End Avenue Northbound From West Jersey Street to Grove Street West End Avenue Southbound From West Grand Street to Grove Street  
(Ord. No. 5053 , § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 4994 , § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4942 , § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. 3591 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3575 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3556 § 1, 2003; prior code § 141-100) 
Chapter 10.08 - STOP INTERSECTIONS, YIELD INTERSECTIONS, THROUGH STREETS AND NO PASSING ZONES 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Four-way stop intersections. 
    The following four-way stop intersections are designated: 
A.  Grove Street and Grier Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of all approaches. A supplementary plate, Type R1-3, twelve (12) by six inches, bearing the message "4-way" should be mounted below each stop sign. 
B.  Second Street and Clark Place. Stop signs with blinkers shall be installed as provided. 
C.  Second Avenue and Delaware Street. Stop signs with blinkers shall be installed as provided. 
D.  Second Avenue and Florida Street. Stop signs with blinkers shall be installed as provided. 
E.  Second Avenue and Franklin Street. Stop signs with blinkers shall be installed as provided. 
F.  Lidgerwood Avenue at intersection with Garden Street and Rosehill Place. Lidgerwood Avenue where it intersects with Garden Street and Rosehill Place. 
G.  Establish a four-way stop intersection at Fifth Street and Marshall Street; Shelley Avenue and Edgewood Road and Harding Road and Shelley Avenue. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Establish a four-way stop at the intersection of Grove Street and Vine Street. 
J.  Madison Avenue and Anna Street. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
K.  Third Street and Pine Street. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
L.  Establish a four-way stop intersection at the intersection of Sheridan Avenue and Alina Street. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of all approaches. 
M.  Jefferson Avenue and Dickinson Street. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
N.  Grier Avenue and Garden Street. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
O.  Establish a four-way stop intersection at Third Street and Fulton Street. 
P.  Adams Avenue and Mary Street. 
Q.  Magie Avenue and Springfield Road. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
R.  Pennington Street and Standish Street. 
S.  Myrtle Street and Grier Avenue. Stop sign warning should be installed, one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign. 
T.  Third Street and Pine Street and the installation of a "Stop Sign Warning" one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign at said intersection. 
U.  Alina Street and Jefferson Avenue and the installation of a "Stop Sign Warning" one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign at said intersection. 
V.  Durant Street and Cross Avenue and the installation of a "Stop Sign Warning" one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign at said intersection. 
W.  Ogden Street and Myrtle Street and the installation of a "Stop Sign Warning" one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign at said intersection. 
X.  Fifth Avenue and Atlantic Street and the installation of a "Stop Sign Warning" one hundred (100) feet before the stop sign at said intersection. 
Y.  Second Street and Pine Street. Stop signs and Stop bars shall be installed along Second Street, "STOP" pavement markings be placed ten (10) feet behind the STOP bar and advance warning signs (STOP Ahead) be placed approximately 100 feet prior to the STOP bar. "ALL-WAY" plaque shall be installed below each STOP sign at the intersection (four (4) total). 
Z.  South Park Street and New Point Road. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
AA.  Livingston Street and Sixth Street. Stop signs shall be installed as provided. 
BB.  Alina Street and Cross Avenue. Stop signs and stop bars shall be installed as provided. 
CC.  South Park Street and Seventh Street. Stop signs and stop bars shall be installed as provided. 
(Ord. No. 5070 , § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 4944 , § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4798 , § 2, 1-24-2017; Ord. No. 4619 , § 1, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 4489 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4488 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4487 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4486 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4484 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4461, § 1, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 4447, § 1, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 4407, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4368, § 1, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 4355, § 1, 2-13-2013; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 4108, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. 3959 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3901 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3576 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3551 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3541 § 1, 2003; prior code § 141-144) 
10.08.020 - Stop intersections designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the following intersections are designated as stop intersections: 
A.  Install an illuminated stop sign at the intersection of Jacques Street and Lafayette Street in an east-west direction on Lafayette Street; 
B.  Install an illuminated stop sign at the intersection of Pingry Place and Salem Avenue on Pingry Place; 
C.  Establish a stop intersection and to install a stop sign at the intersection of DeWitt Road and Salem Avenue; 
D.  Establish a stop intersection and to install a stop sign at the intersection of Edgar Road and Gibbons Court on Gibbons Court; 
E.  Establish a stop intersection and to install a stop sign at the intersection of Third Street and Livingston Street; 
F.  Seventh Street and New Point Road. A stop sign shall be installed on Seventh Street; 
G.  Establish three-way stop at the intersection of Third Street and Broadway with stop signs to be erected at the northeasterly corner of Third Street, at the southwesterly corner of Third Street, and the southeasterly corner of Third Street; 
H.  Establish three-way stop at the intersection at Summit Road and Livingston Road. A stop sign shall be installed on Summit Road facing Livingston Road in both directions. 
I.  Establish a three-way stop intersection at the intersection of Front Street and Pine Street. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of all approaches. 
J.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Williamson Street and South Street, a stop sign to be installed on Williamson Street. 
K.  Fay Avenue and Grove Street. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of all approaches. 
L.  A three-way stop at the intersection of Jackson Avenue and Fairmount Avenue with stop signs to be erected at the southeasterly corner of Jackson Avenue, at the southwesterly corner of Fairmount Avenue, and at the northeasterly corner of Fairmount Avenue. 
M.  A three-way stop at the intersection of Murray Street and DeHart Place as follows: On Murray Street at the West Side corner of DeHart Place; on Murray Street at the East Side corner of DeHart Place; on DeHart Place at the South Side corner of Murray Street. 
N.  A three-way stop at the intersection of Clarkson Avenue and Fillmore Street with stop signs to be erected on the Eastbound corner of Fillmore Street, at the Northeast corner of Clarkson Avenue and Southwest corner of Clarkson Avenue. 
O.  A three-way stop at the intersection of Fourth Street and Marshall Street with stop signs to be erected on the Northeast and Northwest corner of Fourth Street and on the Southwest and Northeast corner of Marshall Street. 
P.  Establish a three-way stop at the intersection of Chilton Street and Stiles Street. 
Q.  Establish a three-way stop at the intersection of Henry Street and Julia Street, with a stop sign being added to the North side of Henry Street and a "Stop Sign Warning" be installed one hundred (100) feet before the stop signs at said intersection, and a STOP bar installed along Henry Street, "STOP" pavement markings be placed ten (10) feet behind the STOP bar and advance warning signs (STOP Ahead) be placed approximately one hundred (100) feet prior to the STOP bar. In addition, an "ALL WAY" plaque shall be installed below each STOP sign at the intersection (three (3) total); 
R.  Establish a STOP intersection on Henry Street at the intersection of Henry Street and Fairmount Avenue with the stop sign installed on Henry Street and the installation of a STOP bar on Henry Street, "STOP" pavement markings shall be placed ten (10) feet behind the STOP bar and advance warning signs (STOP Ahead) be placed approximately one hundred (100) feet prior to the STOP bar. 
S.  Stop signs are to be erected at the intersection of Crane Street and Union Street and the intersection of Harrison Street and Westfield Avenue. 
T.  Establish a stop intersection and install a stop sign on Community Lane at Bond Street, and install signage and have stop bars placed on roadway. 
U.  Establish a three-way stop intersection at the intersection of Delaware Street at Merritt Avenue, and install signage and have stop bars placed on roadway. 
V.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Summit Road and Colonia Road. A stop sign as well as pavement markings, signage and stop bars shall be installed at all approaches. 
W.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Baldwin Place and Princeton Road. A stop sign as well as pavement markings, signage and stop bars shall be installed at all approaches. 
X.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Byron Avenue and Keats Avenue. A stop sign as well as pavement markings, signage and stop bars shall be installed at all approaches. 
Y.  Establish a stop intersection facing Broadway at the intersection of Sixth Street. 
Z.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Irvington Avenue and Prince Street with pavement markings, signage and stop bars installed at all approaches. 
AA.  Establish a stop intersection at the intersection of Nelson Avenue and Grove Street and the intersection of Nelson Avenue and Devine Avenue with pavement markings, signage and stop bars installed at all approaches. 
BB.  Establish a three-way stop intersection on Dowd Avenue and York Street. A stop sign shall be installed on the west side of Dowd Avenue and a "Stop Sign Warning" installed two hundred (200) feet before the stop signs at said intersection and a stop bar shall be installed along Dowd Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on the east side of Dowd Avenue and a "Stop Sign Warning" sign shall be installed five hundred (500) feet before the stop signs at said intersection. A STOP bar shall be installed along Dowd Avenue, and a stop sign shall be installed to the South side of York Street and a "Stop Sign Warning" be installed two hundred (200) feet before the stop signs at said intersection. A STOP bar shall be installed along York Street, and a stop sign shall be installed at the west exit ramp of Dowd Avenue, and a STOP bar installed along the west exit ramp of Dowd Avenue. In addition, an "ALL WAY" plaque shall be installed below each STOP sign at the intersection (three (3) in total) except for the Dowd Avenue exit ramp. 
CC.  Establish a stop intersection facing Broadway at the intersection of Reid Street with pavement markings, signage and stop bars installed at all approaches. 
(Ord. No. 4995 , § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4913 , § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 4879 , § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4833 , § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4798 , § 3, 1-24-2017; Ord. No. 4679 , § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 4622 , § 1, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 4609 , § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4572 , § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4571 , § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4484 , § 2, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4483 , § 2, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4443, § 1, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 4356, § 1, 2-13-2013; Ord. No. 4279, § 1, 1-24-2012; Ord. No. 4171, § 1, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. 4109, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. 3958 § 1, 2008; prior code § 141-144.1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4021, § 1, adopted February 24, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection I. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection J. 
10.08.030 - Traffic control intersections designated. 
A.  Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following intersections: 
Intersection 
Anna Street and Catherine Street; 
Bellevue Street and Pennington Street; 
Bond Street and Catherine Street; 
Cherry Street and Sayre Street; 
Cherry Street and Stiles Street; 
East Jersey Street and Division Street; 
East Jersey Street and Reid Street; 
East Jersey Street and Third Street; 
East Jersey Street and Fifth Street; 
East Jersey Street and Sixth Street; 
East Jersey Street and Seventh Street; 
Madison Avenue and North Avenue; 
Magie Avenue and Monmouth Road; 
Magnolia Avenue and Trinity Place; 
Monroe Avenue and North Avenue; 
North Avenue East and Kapkowski Road; 
Pennsylvania Avenue and Fairmount Avenue; 
Route 1 and 9 and Fairmount Avenue; 
Second Avenue and John Street. 
B.  A scramble traffic light control system (all-around-red) shall be installed and operated at the following intersections in the city: 
Intersection 
Broad Street and Caldwell Place; 
Broad Street and East/West Grand Street; 
Broad Street and East/West Jersey Street; 
Broad Street and Elizabeth Avenue. 
C.  Intersection Control Beacon. An intersection control beacon, as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices ((M.U.T.C.D.) at (4E-3)), shall be installed and operated at the following intersection: 
Intersection 
    West Jersey Street and DeHart Place with the flashing yellow caution light being for east/west traffic on West Jersey Street and the flashing red for north bound traffic on DeHart Place. 
    Intersection of Louisa Street and Monroe Avenue: the side facing Monroe Avenue shall flash yellow and the side facing Louisa Street shall flash red. 
    Cross Avenue and Alina Street with the yellow flashing caution light being for north/south traffic on Cross Avenue and flashing red for west bound traffic on Alina Street. 
(Ord. 3957 § 1, 2008; Res. dated 4-11-2006; Ord. 3602 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3574 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3134 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1999; prior code § 141-145) 
10.08.040 - Installation, design and operation. 
    The traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the provision of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of Transportation. 
(Prior code § 141-146) 
10.08.050 - Through streets designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I (Section 10.04.080) are designated as "through streets." "Stop" signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where "yield right-of-way" signs are provided for in the designation. 
(Prior code § 143-8) 
10.08.060 - Stop intersections designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule II (Section 10.08.090) are designated as "stop intersections." "Stop" signs shall be installed as provided therein. 
(Prior code § 143-9) 
10.08.070 - Yield intersections designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule III (Section 10.04.100) are designated as "yield intersections." "Yield right-of-way" signs shall be installed as provided therein. 
(Prior code § 143-10) 
10.08.080 - Schedule I, through streets. 
A.  County Roads. 
1.  Galloping Hill Road: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route No. 28 and the city of Elizabeth-township of Union corporate line. 
2.  Magie Avenue: 
a.  Between Galloping Hill Road and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and New Jersey Route No. 28. 
3.  Orchard Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route No. 28 and Morris Avenue. 
4.  West Grand Street: 
a.  Between the borough of Roselie, city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between West End Avenue and New Jersey Route 27. 
5.  West Jersey Street: 
a.  Between the borough of Roselle-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and New Jersey Route No. 27. 
6.  Lidgerwood Avenue: 
a.  Between the city of Linden-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and Rosehill Place; 
c.  The intersection of Lidgerwood Avenue and Rosehill Place is designated a stop intersection. A stop sign shall be installed on the easterly approach of Lidgerwood Avenue facing westbound traffic. 
7.  South Broad Street-Broad Street-North Broad Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9; 
b.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and New Jersey Route No. 27; 
c.  Between New Jersey Route No. 27 and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
d.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and the most northerly city of Elizabeth-township of Hillside corporate line. 
    Note: Broad Street is under municipal jurisdiction but was included in order to maintain continuity and to cover the entire length of the roadway. 
8.  South Pearl Street-Pearl Street: 
a.  Between Grove Street and South Broad Street. A yield right-of-way sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on Bridge Street. 
9.  Morris Avenue: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route No. 27 and the township of Union-township of Hillside-city of Elizabeth corporate line. 
10.  Jefferson Avenue: 
a.  Between Magnolia Avenue and North Avenue. 
B.  Municipal Roads. 
1.  Colonia Road; 
2.  Park Avenue: 
a.  Between Galloping Hill Road and New Jersey Route No. 439. 
3.  Monmouth Road: 
a.  Between Magic Avenue and the township of Union-city of Elizabeth corporate line. 
4.  Pennington Street: 
a.  Between the borough of Roselle-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between West End Avenue and De Hart Place. 
5.  West End Avenue: 
a.  Between West Grand Street and West Jersey Street. 
6.  Murray Street: 
a.  Between borough of Roselle-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and Chilton Street. 
7.  Linden Avenue: 
a.  Between the borough of Roselle-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and Grove Street. 
8.  Edgar Road-Washington Avenue: 
a.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and Pearl Street. 
9.  Grier Avenue: 
a.  Between the city of Linden-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439; 
b.  Between New Jersey Route No. 439 and United States Route Nos. 1 and 9; 
c.  Between United States Route Nos. 1 and 9 and South Street. 
10.  Brunswick Avenue: 
a.  Between the city of Linden-city of Elizabeth corporate line and New Jersey Route No. 439. 
11.  Cross Avenue: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 439 and Lower Road to Newark. A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on the easterly approach of Cross Street facing westbound traffic. 
12.  First Street: 
a.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street; 
b.  Between East Jersey Street and Magnolia Avenue; 
c.  Between Magnolia Avenue and Trumbull Street. 
13.  Second Street: 
a.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street; 
b.  Between East Jersey Street and Magnolia Avenue; 
c.  Between Magnolia Avenue and Trumbell Street. 
14.  Third Street: 
a.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street; 
b.  Between East Jersey Street and Magnolia Street; 
c.  Between Magnolia Street and Trumbell Street. 
15.  Summer Street-South Fifth Street-Fifth Street: 
a.  Between South Broad Street and Elizabeth Avenue; 
b.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street; 
c.  Between East Jersey Street and Magnolia Avenue; 
d.  Between Magnolia Avenue and Pine Street. 
16.  Seventh Street: 
a.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and New Point Road; 
b.  Between New Point Road and East Jersey Street; 
c.  Between East Jersey Street and Trumbell Street. 
17.  South Street: 
a.  Between New York Avenue and Washington Avenue; 
b.  Between Washington Avenue and South Broad Street; 
c.  Between South Broad Street and South Pearl Street. A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on the southerly approach of Williamson Street. 
18.  Division Street: 
a.  Between East Jersey Street and Trumbell Street; 
b.  Between Trumbell Street and Dowd Avenue. 
19.  Henry Street: 
a.  Between Magnolia Avenue and Woodruff Lane. 
20.  Catherine Street-Jackson Street: 
a.  Between East Jersey and East Grand Street; 
b.  Between East Grand Street and Magnolia Avenue; 
c.  Between Magnolia Avenue and North Avenue. A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on the easterly approach of Jackson Street at its intersection with Catherine Street facing east-bound traffic. 
21.  Jackson Street: 
a.  Between Magnolia Avenue and Catherine Street. 
22.  Madison Avenue: 
a.  Between East Jersey Street and East Grand Street; 
b.  Between East Grand Street and Magnolia Avenue; 
c.  Between Magnolia Avenue and North Avenue; 
d.  Between North Avenue and the city of Elizabeth-city of Newark corporate line. 
23.  Meadow Street: 
a.  Between United States Route Nos. 1 and 9 and Fair-mount Avenue. A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on Van Buren Avenue. 
24.  East Broad Street: 
a.  Between Broad Street and Magnolia Avenue. 
25.  Prince Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route No. 27 and Irvington Avenue. 
26.  Parker Road-Union Avenue: 
a.  Between Westminster Avenue and city of Elizabeth-township of Hillside corporate line. 
27.  Parker Road: 
a.  Between Parker Road-Union Avenue and Trotters Lane. 
28.  West Grand Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 27 and Broad Street. 
29.  West Jersey Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 27 and Broad Street. 
30.  Myrtle Street: 
a.  Between Brunswick Avenue and Grier Avenue. 
31.  Grove Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 27 and Murray Street; 
b.  Between Murray Street and West Jersey Street. 
32.  Chilton Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 27 and West Jersey Street; 
b.  Between West Jersey Street and Grand Street; 
c.  Between New Jersey Route 28 and Orchard Street; 
d.  Between Orchard Street and New Jersey Route 439. 
33.  Cherry Street: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 28-New Jersey Route 27 and Orchard Street; 
b.  Between Orchard Street and Morris Avenue. 
34.  Rahway Avenue-Elizabeth Avenue: 
a.  Between New Jersey Route 27 (Cherry Street) and South Broad Street-Broad Street; 
b.  Between South Broad Street-Broad Street and Front Street; 
c.  A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed at the southerly intersection of First Avenue facing southbound traffic. 
35.  First Avenue. 
a.  Between the southerly intersection with Elizabeth Avenue and South Fifth Street; 
b.  Between South Fifth Street and the northerly intersection with Elizabeth Avenue; 
c.  A "YIELD RIGHT OF WAY" sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on Erie Avenue. 
36.  Second Avenue: 
a.  Between South Second Street and South Fifth Street; 
b.  Between South Fifth Street and Elizabeth Avenue. 
37.  Third Avenue: 
a.  Between South First Street and South Fifth Street; 
b.  Between South Fifth Street and South Street. 
38.  East Jersey Street: 
a.  Between Front Street and U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9; 
b.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and Broad Street. 
39.  New Point Road: 
a.  Between Elizabeth Avenue and Division Street; 
b.  Between Seventh Street and East Jersey Street; 
c.  Between East Jersey Street and Livingston Street; 
d.  Between South Park Street and Fifth Street. 
40.  East Grand Street-Trumbell Street: 
a.  Between Broad Street and U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9; 
b.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and First Street. 
41.  Magnolia Avenue: 
a.  Between Division Street and New Jersey Route No. 27. 
42.  Mary Street: 
a.  Between Jackson Avenue and Madison Avenue; 
b.  Between Jefferson Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue. 
43.  Fairmount Avenue: 
a.  Between Division Street and U.S. Route Nos. 1and 9; 
b.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and Jackson Avenue; 
c.  Between Jackson Avenue and Madison Avenue; 
d.  Between Jefferson Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue. 
44.  North Avenue: 
a.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and New Jersey Route No. 27. 
45.  Westminster Avenue: 
a.  Between Prince Street and the city of Elizabeth-township of Hillside corporate line. 
46.  Salem Avenue: 
a.  Between North Broad Street and New Jersey Route No. 439. 
47.  Virginia Street: 
a.  Between the city of Elizabeth-city of Newark corporate line and Cross Avenue. 
48.  Dowd Avenue: 
a.  Between U.S. Route Nos. 1 and 9 and York Street; 
49.  Pennsylvania Avenue: 
a.  Between North Avenue and Mary Street. 
50.  Wyoming Avenue: 
a.  Entire length. 
51.  Livingston Road: 
a.  Entire length. 
52.  Edgewood Road: 
a.  Entire length. 
53.  Hillside Road: 
a.  Between Park Avenue and New Jersey Route No. 28. 
54.  Palisade Road: 
a.  Between Park Avenue and New Jersey Route No. 28. 
55.  Summit Road: 
a.  Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue. 
56.  Keats Avenue at Edgewood Road. 
(Ord. No. 5051 , § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 4914 , § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. 3820 § 1, 2006; prior code § 143-11) 
10.08.090 - Schedule II, stop intersections. 
A.  Clifton Avenue and Clarkson Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on the one-way section of Clarkson Avenue facing westbound traffic. 
B.  Clifton Avenue and Clarkson Avenue-Arnett Street. A stop sign shall be installed on Clarkson Avenue facing eastbound traffic. 
C.  DeHart Place and Edgar Place-Pennington Street. A stop sign shall be installed on Edgar Place. 
D.  Rosehill Place and Grove Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Grove Street. 
E.  Clarkson Avenue and Garden Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Garden Street. 
F.  West Scott Place and Dickerson Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Dickerson Street. 
G.  East Scott Place and Dickerson Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Dickerson Street. 
H.  Fairmount Avenue and Meadow Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Meadow Street. 
I.  Irvington Avenue and Prince Street. A stop sign shall be installed on the easterly approach of Prince Street. 
J.  Browning Avenue and Harding Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Harding Road. 
K.  Coolidge Road and Shelley Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Shelley Avenue. 
L.  Highland Avenue and Colonia Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Colonia Road. 
M.  Princeton Road and Colonia Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Colonia Road. 
N.  Coolidge Road and Browning Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Browning Avenue. 
O.  Shelley Avenue and Harding Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Harding Road. 
P.  Springfield Road and Baker Place. A stop sign shall be installed on Baker Place. 
Q.  Springfield Road and Cleveland Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Cleveland Avenue. 
R.  Bailey Avenue and Springfield Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Springfield Road. 
S.  Floral Avenue and Springfield Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Springfield Road. 
T.  Emerson Avenue and Springfield Road. Stop signs shall be installed on Springfield Road. 
U.  Verona Avenue and Cleveland Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on Cleveland Avenue. 
V.  Browning Avenue and Byron Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Byron Avenue. 
W.  Shelby Avenue and Byron Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Byron Avenue. 
X.  Browning Avenue and Kipling Road. A stop sign shall be installed on Kipling Road. 
Y.  Fulton Street and Fourth Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Fulton Street. 
Z.  Franklin Street and Fourth Street. Stop signs shall be installed on Franklin Street. 
AA.  Magnolia Avenue and Fifth Street. A stop sign shall be installed on the southwest corner of Magnolia Avenue facing eastbound traffic. 
BB.  New Point Road and Fifth Street. A stop sign shall be installed on the southeast corner of New Point Road facing northbound traffic. 
CC.  Louisa Street and Van Buren Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on both the northeast and northwest corners of Van Buren Avenue facing the southbound traffic. The present amber lighting of the overhead control device designating Van Buren Avenue as the through street shall be substituted with red lighting, making it a three-way stop street. 
DD.  South Park Street and Sixth Street. Stop signs shall be installed on both corners of South Park Street and both corners of Sixth Street. 
EE.  Pennsylvania Avenue and Mary Street. A stop sign shall be installed on Pennsylvania Avenue. 
FF.  Trinity Place and Mary Street. A stop sign shall be placed on Trinity Place. 
GG.  Louisa Street and Adams Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on both the northeast and northwest corners of Adams Avenue facing the southbound traffic. A stop sign shall be installed on both the northwest and southwest corners of Louisa Street. The present amber lighting of the overhead control device shall be substituted with red lighting making it a two-way stop street. 
HH.  Alma Street and Stanton Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on Alma Street. 
II.  Acme Street and Jersey Avenue. A flashing light shall be installed at the Acme Street side of the stop intersection. 
JJ.  Commerce Place and East Grand Street. Stop signs shall be installed at the intersection of Commerce Place and East Grand Street. 
KK.  Grove Street and Rosehill Place. Stop signs with blinkers shall be installed at the intersection of Grove Street and Rosehill Place. 
LL.  Louisa Street and Monroe Avenue. An illuminated stop sign and stop bar on the south side of Louisa Street at the intersection of Louisa Street and Monroe Avenue. 
MM.  Julian Place and Morris Avenue, eastbound. A stop sign shall be installed on Julian Place. 
NN.  Railroad Place and Morris Avenue, westbound. A stop sign shall be installed on Railroad Place. 
OO.  Sullivan Road and Dowd Avenue. A stop sign shall be installed on Sullivan Road. 
PP.  New York Avenue and Grove Street. The stop sign shall be installed on Grove Street facing westbound traffic. 
QQ.  Erico Avenue and NJ 439 (South Elmora Avenue). The stop signs shall be installed on Erico Avenue facing southbound traffic. 
RR.  New Point Road and Broadway. The stop sign shall be installed on New Point Road facing westbound traffic. 
SS.  New Point Road and Livingston Street. The stop signs shall be installed on Livingston Street facing northbound and southbound traffic. 
TT.  New Point Road and Seventh Street. The stop signs shall be installed on New Point Road facing westbound traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5052 , § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 4943 , § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4631 , § 1, 10-13-2015; Prior code § 143-12) 
10.08.100 - Schedule III, yield intersections. 
A.  South First Street and Third Avenue. A yield right-of-way sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on Third Avenue. 
B.  Westminster Avenue and North Broad Street. A yield right-of-way sign having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed on Westminster Avenue. 
(Prior code § 143-13) 
10.08.110 - No passing zones established. 
A.  A no passing zone is established along Bellevue Street, for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet east and one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Jersey Avenue. 
B.  A no passing zone is established along Second Avenue, for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet east and one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Atlantic Street. 
(Prior code § 143-16) 
10.08.111 - Do not block intersections. 
A.  The intersection of South Broad Street and Garden Street, with signs to be erected at the Southeast and Southwest corners of Garden Street and the Northwest corner of South Broad Street. 
(Ord. No. 4359, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2013) 
10.08.120 - Dangerous intersections designated. 
A.  Atlantic Street and Second Avenue. Overhead intersection control beacon shall be installed at the intersection of Atlantic Street and Second Avenue; red (or stop indication) on Atlantic Street and the yellow (or caution indication) on Second Avenue. 
B.  Jersey Avenue and Bellevue Street. Overhead Intersection Control Beacon shall be installed at the intersection of Jersey Avenue and Bellevue Street; red (or stop indication) on Bellevue Street and the yellow (or caution indication) on Jersey Avenue. 
(Prior code § 143-17) 
Chapter 10.12 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code §§ 141-119 and 141-129) 
10.12.020 - No left turns as designated. 
    No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in Section 10.12.040. 
(Prior code §§ 141-122 and 141-130) 
10.12.030 - Violations and penalties-No left turns. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of Sections 10.12.020 and 10.12.040 or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than sixty-five dollars ($65.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 48, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code §§ 141-123 and 141-131) 
10.12.040 - Schedule-No left turns. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 10.12.020, no person shall make a left turn at any of the following locations: 
A.  From driveways on the west side of Newark Avenue (Route 27). 
1.  Two hundred twenty-eight (228) feet north of the north curbline of Durant Street, 
2.  Three hundred fifteen (315) feet north of the north curbline of Durant Street; 
B.  North on Elmora Avenue while existing in an easterly direction from the parking lot of the White Castle Restaurant located at the intersection of Westfield Avenue and Elmora Avenue. This ban is only intended with respect to the vehicle exit located on the Elmora Avenue side of the premises; 
C.  South on Elmora Avenue while exiting in a westerly direction from the parking lot of the Charcoal House located at the intersection of Westfield Avenue and Elmora Avenue. This ban is only intended with respect to the vehicle exit located on the Elmora Avenue side of the premises; 
D.  West onto Railroad Place (Julian Place if extended-Morris Avenue if extended) while proceeding north on Broad Street, at the location commonly referred to as the "Arch"; 
E.  East on North Avenue, when exiting the driveways of the City Federal Bank facilities, located on the northside of North Avenue west of Newark Avenue; 
F.  North on Elmora Avenue while exiting in an easterly direction from Park Avenue; 
G.  South on Morris Avenue while exiting in a westerly direction from Union Avenue; 
H.  While traveling east on West Grand Street and turning north onto Broad Street; 
I.  While traveling north on Bridge Street and turning west onto Elizabeth Avenue; 
J.  Reserved; 
K.  From Pantry Pride parking lot, 184 Elmora Avenue, onto Elmora Avenue (Route 439); 
L.  From premises 119-121 Elmora Avenue onto Elmora Avenue (Route 439); 
M.  From the Elizabeth General Hospital Parking Lot at 956-968 East Jersey Street onto East Jersey Street; 
N.  From Jacques Street onto Elizabeth Avenue; 
O.    
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited Exit driveway of the Recycling Center/Animal Shelter and Trenton Avenue Left Westbound on driveway to southbound on Trenton Avenue. Trenton Avenue and Atlantic Street Left Northbound on Trenton Avenue to southbound on Atlantic Street.  
P.    
Intersection All Right Turns on Red Prohibited North and south corner of Edgar Road, where Edgar Road intersects with South Elmora Avenue. From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday  
Q.  West on East Jersey Street while exiting from the City Federal Savings & Loan Association Television drive-in Bank, 1128 East Jersey Street; 
R.  North on Kipling Road to west on Magie Avenue. 
( Ord. No. 4623 , § 1, 9-22-2015; Ord. 3133 § 1; prior code §§ 141-126, 141-132 and 143-15) 
10.12.050 - Prohibited turns on red signal. 
    No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop) indication at any of the following locations, whenever an official sign is present prohibiting such a turn on the red signal: 
Intersection All Right Turns on Red Prohibited Broad Street and Caldwell Place From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Broad Street and Elizabeth Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Broad Street and Grand Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday First Street and East Jersey Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday East Jersey Street and Jefferson Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Elizabeth Avenue and High Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Elizabeth Avenue, Bridge Street and West Scott Place From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Elizabeth Avenue and Jefferson Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday North Broad Street and Westfield Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Morris Avenue, Union Street and Westfield Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Magnolia Avenue, North Broad Street, Prince Street and Westminster Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Washington Avenue and Grove Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Elizabeth Avenue and Fifth Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday North Broad Street and North Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Elizabeth Avenue and Third Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Second Street and Magnolia Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Friday North Broad Street and Parker Road From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday East Grand Street and Madison Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Washington Avenue and Pearl Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday North Avenue and Madison Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Madison Avenue and East Jersey Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday East Jersey Street and Second Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Union Avenue and Prince Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday South Broad Street and South Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Elizabeth Avenue and Sixth Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Second Avenue and South Fifth Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Orchard Street and Morris Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Jefferson Avenue and Mary Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Elizabeth Avenue and Seventh Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Washington Avenue and South Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday East Jersey Street and Third Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Jefferson Avenue and Fairmount Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Westfield Avenue and Cherry Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday South Fifth Street and Third Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Magie Avenue and Monmouth Road From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday East Jersey Street and Smith Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Magnolia Avenue and Fifth Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday North Avenue and Monroe Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday First Street and Magnolia Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Third Street and Magnolia Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Fifth Street and East Jersey Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Third Street and Trumbull Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Bridge Street and Pearl Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday Westminster Avenue and Parker Road From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday South Street and Pearl Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday Grove Street and Murray Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday Fourth Avenue, South Street and South Spring Street At all times West Grand Street and Grove Street At all times West Grand Street and Grove Street From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Southeast corner of South Street and Elizabeth Avenue At all times Elizabeth Avenue and Second Avenue At all times From Jefferson Avenue onto Mary Street At all times From Elizabeth Avenue onto Second Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. From South Street onto Elizabeth Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. From Morris Avenue onto Irvington Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Irvington Avenue onto Morris Avenue From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Catherine Street onto Bond Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Bond Street onto Catherine Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Catherine Street onto Anna Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Anna Street onto Catherine Street From 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Cherry Street onto Westfield Avenue Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From Westfield Avenue onto Cherry Street Between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday South Street and Third Avenue onto South Street eastbound Avenue only for north-bound traffic on Third At all times Galloping Hill Road and Magie Avenue At all times Orchard Street and Magie Avenue All times East Broad Street and Magnolia Avenue Jacques Street and Elizabeth Avenue All times  
(Ord. No. 4553 , § 1, 2-24-2015; Ord. No. 4497 , § 1, 10-28-2014; prior code § 141-133) 
10.12.060 - Violations and penalties-Prohibited turns on a red signal. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of Section 10.12.050 shall be liable to a penalty of not more than ninety (90) days' imprisonment or by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such imprisonment and fine. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-134) 
10.12.070 - All turns prohibited at certain intersections-Exceptions. 
    All turns by motor vehicles, with the exception of buses, are prohibited at the following intersections in the city of Elizabeth, county of Union, state of New Jersey: 
Intersection 
East Jersey Street and Broad Street 
(Prior code § 141-134.1) 
Chapter 10.16 - WEIGHT LIMITS 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected. 
    Trucks over four (4) tons gross weight are excluded from the street or parts of street described, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such street. 
  
Street Location Aberdeen Road Entire length Allen Street Grier Avenue to Thomas Street Alina Street From Newark Avenue to Stanton Avenue Anna Street Between Routes 1 and 9 and Division Street Anna Street From Routes 1 and 9 to Jackson Avenue Atlantic Street Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Bellevue Street Between West Grand Street and Jersey Avenue Bond Street Between Route 1 and Division Street Bond Street Between Second Street and Fourth Street Bonnet Street Between Bayway Avenue and Myrtle Street Boudinot Place from Catherine Street to Spring Street (Route 1&9) Boudinot Place Between Route 1 and Catherine Street Broadway Between Fourth Street and Fifth Street Broadway Between Front Street and Third Street Butler Street From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue Catherine Street Between East Jersey Street and East Grand Street Clark Place Between First Street and Third Street Clarkson Avenue Entire length Clifton Street Between Trenton Avenue and Clarkson Avenue Concord Place Entire length Court Street Between Fifth Street and Trumbull Street Court Street Between First Street and Fourth Street Cross Avenue Entire length Delaware Street From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue DeWitt Road Entire length Division Street Between New Point Road and East Grand Street/Trumbull Street Doyle Street Entire length East Jersey Street Between Front Street and Sixth Street East Jersey Street Between Route 1 & 9 and Sixth Street Elizabeth Avenue Between Route 1 And 9 and Front Street Elmwood Place Entire length Emma Street Between Routes 1 and 9 and Henry Street Erie Street From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue Fay Avenue Between South Elmora Avenue and Richford Terrace Fifth Avenue Between Atlantic Street and South Fifth Street Fifth Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Bond Street First Avenue Between Elizabeth Avenue and Atlantic Street First Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Slater Drive First Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street Flora Street Between Routes 1 and 9 and Henry Street Florida Street From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue Fourth Avenue Between intersection with South Street and intersection with South Fifth Street Fourth Street Between Court Street and First Avenue Franklin Street Between First Street and Sixth Street Franklin Street Between Sixth Street and New Point Road Fremont Place Entire length Fulton Street Between Front Street and Sixth Street Garden Street Between Route 1 and Maple Avenue and South Broad Street Garden Street Between Route 1 southbound and South Broad Street Garden Street From South Broad Street to Edgar Road Garfield Place Entire length Geneva Street From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue Gibbons Court Entire length Grier Avenue Between Route 1 and Bayway Avenue Grove Street From South Broad Street to Erico Avenue Grove Street Between Route 1 and Maple Avenue Hamilton Street Entire length Henry Street Between Magnolia Avenue and Julia Street Inslee Place Between First Street and Third Street Irvington Avenue Entire length Jackson Avenue Entire length Jacques Street Entire length Kenneth Avenue Entire length Kilsyth Road Entire length Lafayette Street from Madison Avenue to Spring Street (Route 1&9) Lexington Place Entire length Lidgerwood Avenue Garden Street to South Elmora Avenue Livingston Street Between Front Street and the Board of Education property Livingston Street Between Third Street and Sixth Street Lower Road Entire length Lt. Glenn Zamorski Drive Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Madison Avenue From North Avenue to Neck Lane Magnolia Avenue Between Fifth Street and Trumbull Street Magnolia Avenue Between Front Street and Fourth Street Maple Avenue Between Route 1 and Bayway Avenue Maple Avenue Between Summer Street and Bayway Avenue Marshall Street Between Front Street and Sixth Street McKinley Street Entire length Merritt Avenue Between South Second Street and Lt. Glenn Zamorski Drive Monmouth Road From Emerson Road to Westfield Avenue Monroe Avenue From Fairmount Avenue to North Avenue Msgr. Kemezis Place Between Second Street and Trumbull Street Myrtle Street Between Pulaski Street and Routes 1 and 9 Neck Lane Entire length Oakwood Place Entire length Ogden Street Entire length to the city line Olive Street Between Routes 1 and 9 and Division Street Olive Street From Routes 1 and 9 to Jackson Avenue Parker Road Entire length Pennington Street Between Elmora Avenue and West End Avenue Pine Street Between First Street and Third Street Pingry Place Entire length Polonia Avenue Entire length Port Avenue Between First Street and Third Street Ripley Place Between First Street and Third Street Riverside Drive Entire length Salem Avenue Entire length Sayre Street Entire length Second Avenue Between Butler Street and Atlantic Street Second Avenue Between Elizabeth Avenue and South Fifth Street Second Street Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Sheridan Avenue Entire length Sixth Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street South Broad Street From Route U.S. 1 to Route N.J. 439 (Bayway Avenue) South Fifth Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Fifth Avenue South Fifth Street Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South First Street Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South Park Street Between First Street and Second Street South Park Street Between Fifth Street and Trumbull Street South Park Street Between Park Place and Fourth Street South Second Street Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue South Street Between South Broad Street and Elizabeth Avenue Standish Street Entire length between intersection with Jersey Avenue and intersection with West Grand Street Stanley Avenue Off Cross Avenue Stanley Terrace Entire length Stanton Avenue Off North Avenue, from Hamilton Street, to and including Stanton Avenue cul-de-sac Stanton Street Entire length Stiles Street Between Morris Avenue and Westfield Avenue Summer Street Entire length Third Avenue South Fifth Street to South Spring Street Third Avenue Between Trenton Avenue/Atlantic Avenue and South Fifth Street Third Street Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Thomas Street Between Allen Street and Bayway Avenue Union Avenue Entire length Van Buren Avenue From North Avenue to Neck Lane Walnut Street From Magnolia Avenue to Fairmount Avenue West End Place Entire length Westminster Avenue Entire length Westminster Avenue On the northbound lane from Prince Street to the township of Hillside corporate line William Street Entire length William Street from Madison Avenue to Spring Street (Route 1&9)  
(Ord. No. 5121 , § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 4923 , § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 4880 , § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4858 , § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4848 , § 1, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 4847 , § 1, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 4809 , § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 4746 , § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4745 , § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4744 , § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4569 , § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4559 , § 1, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 4353, § 1, 12-26-2012; Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 3990, § 1, 10-14-2008; Ord. 3761 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3917 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3148 § 1, 1999; prior code § 141-81) 
10.16.020 - Four-ton weight limit-Erection of signs. 
    Signs indicating that trucks over four (4) tons are excluded from these streets shall be installed. 
(Prior code § 141-82) 
10.16.030 - Four-ton weight limit-Violations and penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of Sections 10.16.010 and 10.16.020 or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 49, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3157 § 1, 1999; prior code § 141-83) 
10.16.040 - Five-ton weight limit for trucks-Streets affected. 
Name of Street Location Westminster Avenue Wilder Street From North Broad Street to the City Line (Except for pick-up and deliveries)  
(Prior code § 141-84) 
10.16.050 - An 80,000 pound overweight vehicle zone limit-Streets affected. 
Street Location North Avenue East Beginning at a point 440 feet east of the intersection of North Avenue East and Kapkowski Road and continuing east 520 feet to the vacated portion of North Avenue East and its connection to the Port Authority over weight vehicle zone.  
( Ord. No. 4654 , § 1, 12-22-2015) 
Chapter 10.20 - STREET CLOSINGS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Mayor authorized to regulate. 
    The mayor of the city of Elizabeth is authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic during specified hours on any day or days, whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare. 
(Prior code § 143-135) 
10.20.020 - Applications. 
A.  Applications for the above-described street closings must be submitted to the mayor of the city of Elizabeth at least thirty (30) days prior to the requested closing date. 
B.  Any application requesting the closing of a street in connection with a festival, as same is defined in Chapter 12.56 of this code, shall not be presented to the mayor for processing until such time as the city council has adopted an appropriate resolution approving the use of the city street in question for festival purposes. The applicant shall furnish a certified copy of the city council resolution, along with the application for the street closing. 
C.  All applications for closing of streets shall include therein the exact date(s) and time(s) of closing, as well as a full description of the street or streets to be closed and, in the case of an application under the festival ordinance, said closing dates and times shall correspond to the dates and times authorized in Chapter 12.56 of this code. 
(Prior code § 141-135.1) 
10.20.030 - Posting of signs. 
    Any regulations promulgated by the mayor under and in accordance with Section 10.20.010 shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing in any street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof. 
(Prior code § 141-136) 
10.20.040 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any violation of Sections 10.20.010 through 10.20.050 or of any regulation promulgated thereunder shall be punished by a fine not to exceed sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
C.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 50, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-137) 
10.20.050 - Submission to commissioner. 
    Any regulation adopted under this ordinance shall not become effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the commissioner of transportation of the department of transportation. 
(Prior code § 141-137) 
10.20.060 - Streets designated. 
    The city council of the city of Elizabeth establishes the following street closings: 
Street Hours Location South Street 2:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m. (Mon., Tues., Wed.) Between South Broad Street and Liberty Street 1:30 p.m.-3:00 p.m. (Thurs) 12:00 p.m.-1:00 p.m. (Fri.)  
(Prior code § 143-18) 
Chapter 10.24 - PUBLIC MARKET TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Market space, traffic regulations established. 
    Market space and traffic regulations for the convenience of the residents of the city are established at the following locations described in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 107-23) 
10.24.020 - One-way streets designated. 
A.  Center Street shall be designated a one-way street running westerly from Elizabeth Avenue to Second Avenue at all times. 
B.  High Street shall be designated a one-way street running easterly between Second Avenue and First Avenue at all times. 
C.  Second Avenue shall be designated a one-way street running southerly from Elizabeth Avenue to High Street at all times. 
(Prior code § 107-24) 
10.24.030 - Market stalls-Center Street. 
    Market stalls on Center Street shall be aligned on the north side. 
(Prior code § 107-25) 
10.24.040 - Angle parking. 
    Ninety (90) degree angle parking on High Street, Center Street and Second Avenue shall be permitted as follows: 
A.  High Street. On the north side between First and Second Avenues on market days, from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. only; at all other times parallel parking to be practiced. 
B.  Center Street. On the north side between Elizabeth Avenue and Second Avenue on market days only; at all other times parallel parking to be practiced. 
C.  Second Avenue. On the east side between South Street and High Street at all times. 
(Prior code § 107-26) 
10.24.050 - Angle parking-Trucks. 
    All trucks shall be parked at a ninety (90) degree angle to the curb, and each six-foot market stall shall be outlined in white paint on the curbing only, and all market vendors shall back their vehicles into allotted stalls. 
(Prior code § 107-26) 
10.24.060 - Traffic lane established-Obstruction prohibited. 
    In the setting up of the foregoing, a twelve (12) foot traffic lane shall be provided at all times running from the west curbing of Second Avenue between South and High Streets, from the south curbing of Center Street from Elizabeth Avenue to Second Avenue, and from the south curbing of High Street between First and Second Avenues toward the street center, such traffic lanes to be kept clear at all times during the use of angle-parking provisions, and no vehicle or any portion of any vehicle is to encroach upon or obstruct this lane line; said lane line to consist of a six-inch white line to be painted on the street surface to indicate the above-designated boundary. 
(Prior code § 107-28) 
10.24.070 - Prohibited parking-Zones designated. 
    Parking shall be prohibited at all times as follows. 
A.  West side of Second Avenue, South Street to High Street. 
B.  South side of High Street, Second Avenue to First Avenue. 
C.  South side of Center Street, Elizabeth Avenue to Second Avenue. 
(Prior code § 107-29) 
10.24.080 - Prohibited parking zones-Markings, signs required. 
A.  At all intersections of the above-mentioned streets, all parking prohibitions shall be marked off in conformance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to be indicated by curb painting. 
B.  Signs shall be erected prohibiting parking for a distance of five feet west and east of the driveway in the rear of Utility Distributors on the north side of High Street. This prohibition, which should also include the ten (10) foot driveway, is located approximately two hundred thirty (230) feet west of First Avenue. 
C.  All parking prohibition shall be indicated by yellow painting on the surface of the street in a diagonal pattern and by signs and curb painting. 
(Prior code § 107-30) 
10.24.090 - Warning signs. 
    The warning signs shall be installed as follows: 
A.  One-Way Arrows and Do Not Enter. 
1.  Southwest and southeast corners of High Street and First Avenue; 
2.  Northeast and southeast corners of Center Street at Second Avenue; 
3.  Southwest and northeast corners of Second Avenue at Center Street; 
4.  Southwest and northeast corners of Second Avenue at High Street; 
5.  Southwest and southeast corners of South Street at Elizabeth Avenue; 
6.  Northwest and northeast corners of Second Avenue at South Street. 
B.  Two-Way Traffic Ahead. 
1.  On the west side of Second Avenue one hundred fifty (150) feet north of High Street; 
2.  On the north side of Center Street one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Second Avenue. 
C.  One-Way Traffic Ahead. 
1.  On the south side of Center Street one hundred (100) feet west of Second Avenue; 
2.  On the east side of Second Avenue one hundred (100) feet south of High Street; 
3.  On the south side of South Street one hundred (100) feet west of Second Avenue; 
4.  On the south side of High Street one hundred (100) feet west of Second Avenue. 
(Prior code § 107-31) 
10.24.100 - Loading zone abolished. 
    The loading zone area in front of Utility Distributors, 12 Center Street, shall be rescinded and signs removed. 
(Prior code § 107-32) 
10.24.110 - Traffic-control signals. 
    Standard traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following intersections in the city: 
1.  Grove Street and Linden Avenue; and 
2.  West Jersey Street and Union Street. 
3.  Elizabeth Avenue and Jefferson Avenue. 
4.  Elizabeth Avenue and Bridge Street-Winfield Scott Plaza. 
5.  North Broad Street and Westfield Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 4743 , § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4685 , §§ 1, 2, 3-8-2016; prior code § 107-33) 
Chapter 10.28 - PARKING RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

10.28.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code §§ 141-113 and 141-119) 
10.28.020 - Prohibited parking-Prohibited stopping or standing. 
A.  Regulations Not Exclusive. The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.R.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule I in Section 10.28.040. 
C.  Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II in Section 10.28.050. 
D.  Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III in Section 10.28.060. 
E.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
(Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code §§ 141-114(A)-(D) and 141-120) 
10.28.030 - Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets. 
    This section is supplemented to add one dollar ($1.00) surcharge for the New Jersey Spinal Cord Research Fund, pursuant to Chapter 201 Laws of 1999. 
Name of Street Side Location Adams Avenue Both Beginning at a point 270 feet more or less westerly from State Highway Nos. 1 and 9 for a distance of 365 feet more or less southwesterly to the terminus of this section of Adams Avenue Allen Street North Beginning 347 feet from Amboy Avenue traveling east to end of roadway Baker Place (Except during street cleaning of southern curbline.) North Along the north curbline of Baker Place from Springfield Road to Elmora Avenue Bayway Avenue South Between Amboy Avenue and Arthur Kill Broadway North Between Front Street and First Street Broadway South Beginning at a point 200 feet from the easterly curbline of Third Street and extending to a point 320 feet easterly thereof Burlington Avenue North Entire length Burnett Street East From a point 25 feet north of the east curbline of Pearl Street and continuing 100 feet northerly thereof Butler Street East Beginning 535 feet from the southerly curbline of Elizabeth Avenue to a point 593 feet south thereof Cherry Street West From the intersection of Sayre Street for a distance of 50 feet southeasterly thereof Cherry Street West Beginning 50 feet from West Grand Street traveling south Cherry Street East Beginning 70 feet from West Grand Street traveling south Chilton Street West From West Jersey Street to the driveway of the Chilton Towers Commerce Place East Between Police Plaza and the roadway adjacent to the Parking Authority Offices for a total distance of 238 feet Court Street North Beginning at a point 295 feet east of the west curbline of Fourth Street and continuing for a distance of 80 feet easterly Court Street West From Seventh Avenue to Trumbull Street Crane Street Entire length Dickenson Street North Beginning 211 feet on the northern curb line heading west from Jefferson Avenue Dickinson Street North Beginning at a point 151 feet west of curb line of Winfield Scott Plaza and continuing in a westerly direction for 57 feet Dickenson Street South Between 145 and 167 feet on the southern curb line heading west from Jefferson Avenue Dowd Avenue Both Between Trumbull Street and Schiller Street Dowd Avenue East Starting at the northeast curbline of Trumbull Street and continuing north to the southeast curbline of the North Avenue East Westbound extension Dowd Avenue West Starting at the northwest curbline of Trumbull Street and continuing north to the southwest curbline of the North Avenue East Westbound extension East Broad Street North West curbline of Chestnut Street for 120 feet westerly thereof East Grand Street North Beginning at the intersection of the easterly curbline of Commerce Place and continuing 85 feet easterly thereof East Grand Street North Starting at the east side curbline of Commerce Place and continuing easterly to the west side curbline of Jefferson Avenue East Grand Street North Between Jefferson Avenue and Commerce Place, excluding two handicap parking spaces as designated by section 10.44.020 East Grant Street North Beginning at the westerly curb of Division Street and continuing for a distance of 481 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street North At a point 195 feet west of the western curbline of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 57 feet in a westerly direction East Jersey Street North From the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue to a point 200 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street South Beginning at a point 45 feet west of the west curbline of New Point Road and extending to a point 50 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street South From the westerly curbline of Jefferson Avenue to a point 200 feet westerly thereof Edgar Place North Entire length Elizabeth Avenue North Beginning at a point 247 feet east of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet in an easterly direction Elizabeth Avenue North Starting at a point 25 feet from the east curbline of Broad Street and continuing 52 feet in an easterly direction Fairmount Avenue North A distance of 100 feet east of the point of intersection of the westerly curbline of Route 27 and the northerly side of Fairmount Avenue Fairmount Avenue South A distance of 100 feet west of the point of intersection of the westerly curbline of Route 27 and the southerly side of Fairmount Avenue Faye Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Route 439 to a point 110 feet northerly thereof First Street Both Between Trumbull Street and Port Avenue Hand Place Both From the railroad bridge to a point 100 feet easterly thereof Hand Place Both From the railroad bridge westerly to Pennsylvania Avenue Harrison Street Entire length Hazard Place West Between Clinton Place and North Avenue, except on Wednesdays from 11:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. when street cleaning will be taking place on east side curb line Irvington Avenue East East side of Irvington Avenue for a distance of 125 feet from the north curbline of Prince Street Irvington Avenue West For a distance of 125 feet from the curbline of Prince Street Jackson Avenue East Between Magnolia Avenue and Bond Street Jackson Avenue East Starting at the north curbline of Julia Street and continuing 75 feet in a northerly direction Jackson Avenue East Starting at the south curbline of Julia Street and continuing 75 feet in a southerly direction Jefferson Avenue Both Between East Jersey Street and Dickinson Street Jefferson Avenue Both East Jersey Street to Hampton Place Jefferson Avenue Both From the southerly curbline to East Jersey Street to a point 200 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue West Jefferson Avenue from Alina Street to Virginia Street Jersey Avenue North From the intersection of Acme Street for a distance of 130 feet westerly thereof John Street West Between 415 and 407 John Street, heading south from Fourth Avenue 121 feet to 135 feet Linden Street Both Between Magnolia Avenue and East Broad Street Lt. Glen Zamorski Drive East Between Second Avenue and Third Avenue Lyon Place West From the intersection of Rahway Avenue for a distance of 200 feet northerly thereof Lyon Place East From the intersection of Rahway Avenue for a distance of 215 feet northerly thereof Madison Avenue West From the western curbline of Madison Avenue just south of Hampton Place and continuing south to East Jersey Street Magie Avenue North From Stiles Street to a point 65 feet easterly thereof Magie Avenue Northeasterly From the northeasterly intersection of Elmora Avenue to a point 105 feet northwesterly thereof Magie Avenue South From Stiles Street to a point 65 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue North Along the side walls of the Magnolia Avenue Overpass, including all four ramp-way exits and entrances adjacent to the overpass between Reid Street and its western terminus McLester Street Both Between Bay Avenue and Tripoli Street Meadow Street West From Louisa Street to Fairmount Avenue Miller Street West From the southerly curbline of East Jersey Street to a point 80 feet southerly thereof Morses Mill Road West Entire length Mulberry Street West Mulberry Street from a point 50 feet north of Westfield Avenue to a point 107 feet thereof Myrtle Street North From Ogden Street to South Broad Street Myrtle Street North From South Front Street to Amboy Avenue New Point Road Both Between Pine Street and Trumbull Street North Avenue North Between the easterly curbline of Newark Avenue and the westerly side of the Amtrak railroad overpass North Avenue South Beginning at a point 25 feet east of Newark Avenue and continuing for a distance of 297 feet easterly thereof North Avenue East Both From Route No. 1 to Division Street North Broad Street East From a point 150 feet south of Westfield Avenue to the crosswalk at Westfield Avenue and North Broad Street Parker Road South Between North Broad Street and Union Avenue Pearl Street East Beginning at a point 425 feet south of South Street and continuing along the east curbline of Pearl Street to its intersection with Grove Street Pearl Street East Beginning at an intersection with South Street and continuing for a distance of 100 feet southerly thereof Pingry Place North 60 feet on the north side of Pingry Place beginning at the Westminster Avenue curbline Pingry Place North Beginning at a point 248 feet west of Salem Avenue and continuing for a distance of 13 feet westerly thereof Police Plaza North Beginning at the intersection of Jefferson Avenue westerly to a point 151 feet east of the east curbline of Commerce Place Price Street East Beginning 25 feet from Easterly curbline of Price Street to terminus Price Street Both Between West Grand Street and West Jersey Street Puleo Plaza Both From First Street to Atalanta Plaza Rahway Avenue North Northeast corner of Cherry Street and continuing 380 feet easterly thereof Rahway Avenue South On the south side of Rahway Avenue, between Broad Street and Burnet Street Railroad Place Both Between Union Street and Railroad Station Rear of 1164 Dickinson Street (Public Lane) Both Entire length Ripley Place North 250 feet west from First Street Ripley Place North Starting at a point 232 feet north of the north curbline of Second Street and continuing 42 feet northerly thereof Second Avenue South Starting at the east curbline of Delaware Street and continuing 75 feet in an easterly direction Second Avenue South Starting at the west curbline of Delaware Street and continuing 75 feet in a westerly direction Service Drive Both Entire length (Between Trotters Lane and Parker Road) Sixth Street East Starting at the north curbline of Newpoint Road and continuing 100 feet north to the southern curbline of Broadway Sixth Street West Starting at the north curbline of Newpoint Road and continuing 123 feet north to the southern curbline of Broadway South Broad Street West Beginning 363 feet south of South Street continuing for a distance of 50 feet southerly thereof South First Street Both From Elizabeth Avenue to Third Avenue South Park Street Southerly Beginning 120 feet east of the southeast corner of the intersection of South Park Street and 7th Street for a distance of 36 feet easterly thereof South Park Street West Westerly extreme portion at its adjacency to the former Conrail Railroad track embankment South Street Both From Fourth Avenue to Pearl Street South Street North From Williamson Street to Washington Avenue South Street South From Pearl Street to Williamson Street Standish Street West Beginning 145 feet from the southerly curbline of West Grand Street and extending 27 feet from the point of beginning Stanton Avenue Both Between Alma Street and Garfield Place Sterling Place West Between Murray Street and West Jersey Street Sullivan Road Both Beginning 237 feet north from Dowd Avenue Third Avenue North Between South First Street and South Second Street Third Avenue Both From South First Street to Butler Street Trotters Lane Both Between Morris Avenue and Cherry Street Trumbull Street Both Between Fourth Street and a point east of the Central Railroad overpass Union Avenue East Beginning at a point 355 feet north of Morris Avenue and continuing for a distance of 45 feet northerly thereof Union Avenue East From the northerly curbline of Prince Street to a point 278 feet thereof Union Street Both Between West Grand Street and West Jersey Street Vine Street South Between Watson Avenue and Warinaco Park Watson Avenue West Between Vine Street and Murray Street West End Place East Between West Jersey Street and Mary Street except on Fridays from: 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. for street cleaning West End Place West Between West Jersey Street and Murray Street except for Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. West Grand Street North Between Elmora Avenue and Cherry Street West Grand Street South Beginning 300 feet from Cherry Street traveling west West Grand Street South Beginning 80 feet from Cherry Street traveling east West Grand Street South Between Price Street and Broad Street West Grand Street South Between Union Street and Price Street West Jersey Street North Between Broad Street and Elizabethtown Plaza, from a point 185.5 feet west of Broad Street and continuing 104 feet in a westward direction West Jersey Street South Between Broad Street and Elizabethtown Plaza, from a point 172.9 feet west of Broad Street and continuing 44 feet in a westward direction West Jersey Street North Between Elizabethtown Plaza and Price Street West Jersey Street South Between Elizabethtown Plaza and Sterling Place York Street South Between Division Street and Dowd Avenue  
* Note: Specific Violations and Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of this city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of this city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of this city for the Body Armor Replacement Program, as authorized by Public Law 1997 Chapter 177, known as the Body Armor Replacement Fund. 
** Erection of signs. 
The appropriate signs will be erected indicating the parking ban as aforesaid in accordance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. 
(Ord. No. 5046 , § 1, 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 5013 , § 1, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 4996 , § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4945 , § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4868 , § 1, 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4844 , § 1, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 4834 , § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4818 , § 1, 3-28-2017; Ord. No. 4805 , § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 4787 , § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4641 , § 1, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 4632 , § 1, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 4590 , § 1, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4562 , § 1, 4-15-2015; Ord. No. 4558 , § 1, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 4483 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4437, § 1, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 4361, § 1, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 4261, § 1, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 4062, § 1, 8-25-2009; Ord. 3904 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3884 § 2, 2007; Ord. 3699 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3687 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3547 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3140 § 1, 1999; prior code §§ 141-104, 141-105, 141-108-141-110, 141-116, 141-123 and 141-124) 
10.28.040 - Schedule II-No parking certain hours. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  In accordance with the provisions of Section 10.28.020(C), no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets: 
Name of Street Side Hours Location Aberdeen Road North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between North Broad Street and Salem Avenue Acme Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Canton Street and Jersey Avenue Acme Street East All times, except Mondays between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Between Jersey Avenue and Canton Street Acme Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jersey Avenue and Canton Street Adams Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Jackson Avenue Adams Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Jackson Avenue Algonquin Place East Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Algonquin Place West Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Allen Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Thomas Street and Route No. 1 Alina Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Van Buren Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Alina Street North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue and Stanton Avenue Alina Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and dead end Alina Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and Van Buren Avenue Alina Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Jefferson Avenue Alina Street South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and Newark Avenue Alton Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Canton Street and Jersey Avenue Alton Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jersey Avenue and Canton Street Amboy Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. 12:00 Noon City line to South First Street Amboy Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon South First St. to city line Amity Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fourth Avenue and First Avenue Amity Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Elizabeth River to Fourth Avenue Amity Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue Amity Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Fourth Avenue to Elizabeth River Anna Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Walnut Street Anna Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Walnut Street and Division Street Anna Street South All times except Tuesday between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Between Madison Avenue and Monroe Avenue Applegate Avenue East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and Rahway Avenue Applegate Avenue West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Fay Avenue Arnett Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Clifton Street and Summer Street Arnett Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summer Street and Clifton Street Atlantic Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and First Avenue Atlantic Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth River Bridge and Third Avenue Atlantic Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth River Bridge Atlantic Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Augusta Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Route No. 1 and Jackson Avenue Augusta Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Route No. 1 Bailey Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Verona Avenue and Elmora Avenue Bailey Avenue West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue Verona Avenue Baker Place North Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Springfield Road Baker Place South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Springfield Road Baldwin Place North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Princeton Road and Summit Road Baldwin Place South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summit Road and Princeton Road Bank Street East Thursday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between New Point Road and Martin Street Bank Street East Thursday 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Martin Street and New Point Road Bank Street West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Martin Street and New Point Road Bank Street West Tuesday 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Martin Street and New Point Road Barnard Place East Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Barnard Place West Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Bellevue Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chancellor Street and West Grand Street Bellevue Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Linden Avenue Bellevue Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Grand Street and Chancellor Street Bellevue Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Linden Avenue and Rahway Avenue Bellwood Place East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Park Avenue and Livingston Road Bellwood Place West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Livingston Road and Park Avenue Berwick Street East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Linden Avenue and Jersey Avenue Berwick Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jersey Avenue and Linden Avenue Bond Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Second Street and Trumbull Street Bond Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Jackson Avenue Bond Street North All times, except Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Second Street Bond Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Second Street Bond Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Division Street Bond Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Second Street Bonnett Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Myrtle Street and South Broad Street Bonnett Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Broad Street and Myrtle Street Boudinot Place North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Catherine Street and Route No. 1 Boudinot Place South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Route No. 1 and Catherine Street Boxwood Court Both Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Grove Street and Grove Street Boyle Place North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Terminus to Edgar Road Boyle Place South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgar Road and dead end Boyle Place South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Edgar Road to Terminus Britton Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Clarkson Avenue and dead end Britton Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between dead end and Clarkson Avenue Broadway North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Third Street Broadway North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Fourth Street and New Point Road Broadway South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and Front Street Broadway South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between New Point Road and Fourth Street Broadway South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Third Street and extending to a point 165 feet easterly thereof Broadway South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the westerly curbline of Second Street and extending to a point 265 feet westerly thereof Broadway South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. SCHOOL DAYS Beginning at a point 235 feet west of First Street and continuing 25 westerly thereof Broadway, 900 Block North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Reid Street and Spring Street Broadway, 900 Block South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Spring Street and Reid Street Browning Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Harding Road and Magie Avenue Browning Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Harding Road Burnett Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Street and Pearl Street Burnett Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and South Street Burnham. Road North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Clover Street and Elmora Avenue Burnham. Road South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Clover Street Butler Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue Butler Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue Byron Avenue North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Keats Avenue and Magie Avenue Byron Avenue South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Keats Avenue Canton Street North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Acme Street Canton Street South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Acme Street and Elmora Avenue Carolynn Road North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Neck Lane Carolynn Road South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Neck Lane Caspian Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and First Avenue Caspian Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Catherine Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Grand Street Catherine Street East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between East Grand Street and Jackson Avenue Catherine Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Grand Street and Elizabeth Avenue Catherine Street West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and East Grand Street Cedar Avenue North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Richford Terrace Cedar Avenue South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Richford Terrace and dead end Center Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fourth Avenue and Second Avenue Center Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Second Avenue and Fourth Avenue Chancellor Street North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Acme Street Chancellor Street South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Acme Street and dead end Cherry Street East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Avenue Cherry Street West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Morris Avenue and Westfield Avenue Chestnut Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Trinity Place and Madison Avenue Chestnut Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Madison Avenue and Trinity Place Chetwood Street East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Carteret Street and Summer Street Chetwood Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summer Street and Carteret Street Chilton Street East Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Elmora Avenue Chilton Street East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rahway Avenue and West Grand Street Chilton Street West Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Westfield Avenue Chilton Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between West Grand Street and Rahway Avenue Christine Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fourth Avenue and First Avenue Christine Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue Clark Place North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Third Street Clark Place South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and First Street Clarkson Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Myrtle Street and Grove Street Clarkson Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and Myrtle Street Cleveland Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Verona Avenue and Elmora Avenue Cleveland Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Verona Avenue Clifton Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trenton Avenue and Clarkson Avenue Clifton Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Clarkson Avenue and Trenton Avenue Clinton Place North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Newark Avenue Clinton Place South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue and North Broad Street Clover Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Vine Street Clover Street East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Murray Street and Linden Avenue Clover Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Vine Street and Rahway Avenue Clover Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Linden Avenue and Murray Street Coakley Circle North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Neck Lane Cole Place East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway and Elizabeth River Bridge Cole Place West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth River and Bayway Colonia Road North Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Galloping Hill Road Colonia Road South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Galloping Hill Road and Westfield Avenue Community Lane North All times, except Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Entire length Community Lane South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Entire length Concord Place North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and North Broad Street Concord Place South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Stanton Avenue Coolidge Road Both Saturday 8:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Coolidge Road North Saturday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Coolidge Road South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Country Club Lane North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between dead end and North Broad Street Country Club Lane South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and dead end Court Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Seventh Street Court Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Seventh Street and First Street Crawford Place North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Wyoming Avenue Crawford Place South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Wyoming Avenue and Magie Avenue Cross Avenue East Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Lower Road Cross Avenue West Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Lower Road and North Avenue Cross Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bank Street and Smith Street Cross Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Smith Street and Bank Street Cross Street South All hours, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Thursdays Between Smith Street and Bank Street Dayton Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Linden Avenue Dayton Street West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Linden Avenue and Rahway Avenue Decker Avenue North Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Lincoln Avenue and North Avenue Decker Avenue South Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between North Avenue and Lincoln Avenue DeHart Place East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and West Grand Street DeHart Place West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Grand Street and Fay Avenue Delaware Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and First Avenue Delaware Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Denman Place East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Denman Place West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Denton Street Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Broad Street and dead end Devine Avenue North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Reuter Avenue and Johnson Avenue Devine Avenue South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Johnson Avenue and Reuter Avenue Dewey Place East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and Rahway Avenue Dewey Place West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Fay Avenue DeWitt Road (no gutter) North Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between North Broad Street and Salem Avenue DeWitt Road North Monday: 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Salem Avenue to North Broad Street Dewitt Road South All times, except Monday: 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Salem Avenue and North Broad Street Dickinson Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (on school days) Beginning 118 feet east of Jefferson Avenue for a distance of 40 feet easterly thereof Dowd Avenue 
(no gutter) Both Between Rt. 1 and relocated Schiller Street Doyle Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fifth Avenue and Third Avenue Doyle Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Fifth Avenue Durant Street North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue and Sheridan Avenue Durant Street North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and dead end Durant Street North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Sheridan Avenue and Cross Avenue Durant Street South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Sheridan Avenue and Newark Avenue Durant Street South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between dead end and Cross Avenue Durant Street South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Sheridan Avenue and Cross Avenue East Broad Street North Monday 6:00 to 8:00 a.m. Between Chestnut Street and Broad Street East Grand Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Division Street and Madison Avenue East Grand Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Madison Avenue to Broad Street East Grand Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Division Street East Jersey Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Second Street East Jersey Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Second Street and Front Street East Jersey Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and Madison Avenue East Jersey Street North Thursday 3:00 to 4:00 p.m. Between Second Street and Third Street East Jersey Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Madison Avenue to Broad Street East Jersey Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days From a point 62 feet west of Second Street continuing 159 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street North Saturday and Sunday Beginning 192 feet west of Second Street to 170 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Third Street East Jersey Street South Tuesday 6:00 to 8:00 a.m. Between Third Street and Second Street East Jersey Street South Tuesday 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. From Seventh Street to New Point Road Eaton Street North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Dayton Street and Bellevue Street Eaton Street South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Bellevue Street and Dayton Street Edgar Place South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between DeHart Place and Chilton Street Edgar Place North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chilton Street and DeHart Place Edgar Road East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Spofford Avenue and Grove Street Edgar Road West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and Spofford Avenue Edgewood Road Both Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Summit Road Edgewood Road North Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summit Road and Magie Avenue Edgewood Road South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Summit Road Elizabeth Avenue North Tuesday 2:00 to 5:00 a.m. Between First Street and Broad Street Elizabeth Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Monday Between Front Street and Broad Street Elizabeth Avenue South Thursday 2:00 to 5:00 a.m. Between Broad Street and First Street Elizabeth Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Friday Between Broad Street and Front Street Elm Court North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Chilton Street and dead end Elm Court South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between dead end and Chilton Street Elm Street East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Chilton Street and Morris Avenue Elm Street West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Morris Avenue and Chilton Street Elmwood Place North Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Elmwood Place South Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Ely Street East 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Friday From Eugenia Place to Pearl Street Ely Street West Except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Friday On the west side of Ely Street from Eugenia Place to Pearl Street Emerson Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Verona Avenue and Elmora Avenue Emerson Avenue North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Monmouth Road Emerson Avenue South Monday 8:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Monmouth Road and Elmora Avenue Emerson Avenue West Wednesday p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Verona Avenue Emma Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Henry Street and Catherine Street Emma Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Catherine Street and Henry Street Erico Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Elmora Avenue and Grove Street Erico Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and South Elmora Avenue Erie Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and First Avenue Erie Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Eugenia Place North All times, except 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Friday From Washington Avenue to end Eugenia Place South All times, except 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Friday From Washington Avenue to end Fairbanks Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Myrtle Street Fairbanks Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Myrtle Street and Allen Street Fairmount Avenue North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) and North Broad Street Fairmount Avenue North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Spring Street Fairmount Avenue South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) Fairmount Avenue South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street and Division Street Fay Avenue North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between DeHart Place and Richford Terrace Fay Avenue South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Richford Terrace and DeHart Place Fanny Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) and dead end Fanny Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) Fernwood Terrace North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Summit Road and Galloping Hill Road Fernwood Terrace South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Galloping Hill Road and Summit Road Fifth Avenue North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Trenton Avenue and Niles Street Fifth Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Niles Street and Trenton Avenue Fifth Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Avenue and Pine Street Fifth Street East Thursday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between First Avenue and Pine Street Fifth Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pine Street and First Avenue Fifth Street West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Pine Street and First Avenue First Avenue North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Seventh Street First Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Seventh Street and Elizabeth Avenue First Street East Tuesday 8:00 to 9:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street First Street West Thursday 8:00 to 9:00 a.m. Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Flora Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Catherine Street Flora Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Catherine Street and Division Street Floral Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Verona Avenue and North Avenue Floral Avenue North Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Monmouth Road Floral Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Monmouth Road and Elmora Avenue Floral Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between North Avenue and Verona Avenue Florida Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue Florida Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue Fourth Avenue North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Doyle Street and South Street Fourth Avenue South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between South Street and Doyle Street Fourth Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Court Street Fourth Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pine Street and Trumbull Street Fourth Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Court Street and Elizabeth Avenue Fourth Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Pine Street Franklin Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Seventh Street Franklin Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Seventh Street and First Street Fremont Place North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and Stanton Avenue Fremont Place South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and Cross Avenue Front Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Fulton Street and Pine Street Front Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pine Street and Elizabeth Avenue Fulton Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Seventh Street Fulton Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Seventh Street and Front Street Galloping Hill Road East Saturday 8:00 to 9:00 a.m. Between Westfield Avenue and Magie Avenue Garden Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Maple Avenue and Washington Avenue Garden Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Washington Avenue and Maple Avenue Garfield Place North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and Stanton Avenue Garfield Place South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and Cross Avenue Gebhardt Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Verona Avenue and Monmouth Road Gebhardt Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Monmouth Road and Verona Avenue General Karge Court Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue (Rt. No. 439) and dead end Geneva Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue Geneva Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue Georgian Court North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Roanoke Avenue to city line Georgian Court South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Roanoke Avenue to city line Georgian Court South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Roanoke Avenue to city line Georgian Court North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Roanoke Avenue to city line Gibbons Court North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between N.J. Rt. No. 1 and Edgar Road Gibbons Court South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgar Road and N.J. Rt. No. 1 Glenwood Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Glenwood Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Green Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Carteret Street and Garden Street Green Street East All times except Friday between 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summer and Garden Street, between Summer Street and Garden Street Green Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Garden Street and Carteret Street Grier Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and South Street Grier Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Street and Allen Street Grove Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Maple Avenue and Erico Avenue Grove Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon From Route No. 1 to Maple Avenue Grove Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Erico Avenue and Maple Avenue Grove Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon From Maple Avenue to Route No. 1 Halsted Road East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Halsted Road West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Hamilton Street North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and Stanton Avenue Hamilton Street South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and Cross Avenue Hampton Place North Tuesday 8:00 to 9:00 a.m. Between Madison Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Hampton Place North Tuesdays 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Hampton Place South Wednesday 8:00 to 9:00 a.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and Madison Avenue Hampton Place South Wednesdays 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Harding Road Both Saturday 8:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Magie Avenue and Halsted Road Harding Road North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Halsted Road and Magie Avenue Harding Road South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Halsted Road Hayes Avenue East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Cedar Avenue and Rahway Avenue Hayes Avenue West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Cedar Avenue Hazard Place East Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Clinton Place and North Avenue Hazard Place West Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Clinton Place Henry Street East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Avenue and Olive Street Henry Street East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Olive Street and Woodruff Lane Henry Street West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Olive Street and Magnolia Avenue Henry Street West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Woodruff Lane and Olive Street Henry Street West All times From a point 70 feet north of Julia Street for a distance of 60 feet northerly High Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and the Elizabeth River High Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and the Elizabeth River Highland Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Fernwood Terrace Highland Avenue West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fernwood Terrace and Westfield Avenue Hillside Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and city line Hillside Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and Westfield Avenue Inslee Place North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Third Street Inslee Place South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and First Street Irvington Avenue East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Prince Street and Elizabeth city line Irvington Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between city line and Prince Street Jackson Avenue East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Avenue and Neck Lane Jackson Avenue West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Magnolia Avenue Jackson Avenue West All times, except Thursday between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Between Anna Street and Flora Street Jacques Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Grand Street Jacques Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Grand Street and Elizabeth Avenue Jefferson Avenue East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and the railroad bridge Jefferson Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chestnut Street and Magnolia Avenue Jefferson Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Avenue and North Avenue Jefferson Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Avenue and Chestnut Street Jefferson Avenue West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Virginia Street and Fanny Street Jefferson Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and the railroad bridge Jefferson Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Magnolia Avenue Jefferson Avenue East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fanny Street and Virginia Street John Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth River and First Avenue John Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Elizabeth River Johnson Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and Montgomery Street Johnson Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Montgomery Street and Grove Street Julia Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) and Jefferson Avenue Julia Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Henry Street and Spring Street Julia Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and Spring Street (Rt. No.1) Julia Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street and Henry Street Keats Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgewood Road and Magie Avenue Keats Avenue West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Edgewood Road Kempshall Place East Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Kempshall Place West Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Kenneth Avenue North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgar Road and Lidgerwood Avenue Kenneth Avenue South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Lidgerwood Avenue and Edgar Road Kerlyn Court North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and South Elmora Avenue Kerlyn Court South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between South Elmora Avenue and Fay Avenue Kilsyth Road East Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Virginia Street Kilsyth Road West Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Virginia Street and North Avenue Kipling Road Both Saturday 8:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Kipling Road North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Kipling Road South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Lafayette Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Livingston Street and Madison Avenue Lafayette Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Livingston Street Laura Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street (Rt. No. 1) and Jackson Avenue Laura Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) Lexington Place North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Stanton Avenue and North Broad Street Lexington Place South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Stanton Avenue Lidgerwood Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Spofford Avenue and Edgar Road Lidgerwood Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgar Road and Spofford Avenue Lincoln Avenue East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Magie Avenue and Cherry Street Lincoln Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Cherry Street and Magie Avenue Linden Avenue North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and West Jersey Street Linden Avenue North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue city line Linden Avenue South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Jersey Street and Elmora Avenue Linden Avenue South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and Elmora Avenue Linden Street East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between East Broad Street and Anna Street Linden Street West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Anna Street and East Broad Street Livingston Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Summit Road and Elmora Avenue Livingston Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Summit Road Livingston Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and East Grand Street Livingston Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Grand Street and Front Street Loomis Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fifth Avenue and First Avenue Loomis Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Fifth Avenue Louisa Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Meadow Street and dead end Louisa Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Meadow Street Lowden Street East No parking any time, except Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Sayre Street Lowden Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Sayre Street Lower Road North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and North Broad Street Lower Road South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Cross Avenue Lyon Place East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rahway Avenue and Murray Street Lyon Place West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Murray Street and Rahway Avenue Madison Avenue East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Avenue and North Avenue Madison Avenue East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Jersey Street and East Grand Street Madison Avenue East All times From a point l04 feet south of Mary Street for a distance of 80 feet southerly Madison Avenue West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Magnolia Avenue Madison Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and North Avenue Madison Avenue West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Grand Street and East Jersey Street Madison Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and city line Magie Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Between Galloping Hill Road and Summit Road Magie Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Between Summit Road and Elmora Avenue Magie Avenue West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Summit Road Magnolia Avenue North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Jackson Avenue Magnolia Avenue South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Division Street Maple Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue and Grove Street Maple Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and Bayway Avenue Marshall Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and New Point Road Marshall Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between New Point Road and Front Street Martin Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Division Street and Smith Street Martin Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Smith Street and Division Street Mary Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and North Broad Street Mary Street North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Pennsylvania Avenue and Walnut Street Mary Street South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Jackson Avenue Mary Street South SCHOOL DAYS 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 25 feet east of the curbline of Mary Street and continuing 80 feet easterly thereof Mary Street South SCHOOL DAYS 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 25 feet east of the curbline of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 80 feet easterly thereof McKinley Street East Friday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Myrtle Street and Bayway Avenue McKinley Street West Wednesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue and Myrtle Street McLain Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Washington Avenue and Rosehill Place McLain Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rosehill Place and Washington Avenue Meadow Street East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Louisa Street Meadow Street West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Louisa Street and Jackson Avenue Mellon Place North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Chilton Street and dead end Mellon Place South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between dead end and Chilton Street Melrose Terrace North Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Lincoln Avenue and North Avenue Melrose Terrace South Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between North Avenue and Lincoln Avenue Merritt Avenue North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. From South Second Street to Lt. Glen Zamorski Drive Merritt Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. From South Second Street to Lt. Glen Zamorski Drive Miller Street West All times From the southerly curbline of East Jersey Street to a point 80 feet southerly thereof Monmouth Road East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Gebhardt Avenue and Magie Avenue Monmouth Road East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Westfield Avenue and Gebhardt Avenue Monmouth Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Gebhardt Avenue Monmouth Road West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Gebhardt Avenue and Westfield Avenue Monroe Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Anna Street and North Avenue Monroe Avenue East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Neck Lane Monroe Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and Anna Street Monroe Avenue West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and North Avenue Montgomery Place East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Montgomery Street and Norwood Terrace Montgomery Place West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Norwood Terrace and Montgomery Street Montgomery Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and Williamson Street Montgomery Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Williamson Street and Pearl Street Morrell Street East Tuesday 2:00 to 5:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street Morrell Street West Thursday 2:00 to 5:00 a.m. Between East Jersey Street and Elizabeth Avenue Morris Avenue East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. From Railroad Place to the city line Morris Avenue North 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. From the northeasterly curb of Morris Avenue and Trotters Lane to a point 300 feet westerly therefrom Morris Avenue West Monday through Friday, 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. From Cherry Street to city line Morris Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. From Railroad Place to the city line Morristown Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Livingston Road Morristown Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Livingston Road and Westfield Avenue Msgr. Kemezis Place South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Southwest side of Msgr. Kemezis Place Muriel Parkway North Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Stiles Street and Elmora Avenue Muriel Parkway South Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Elmora Avenue and Stiles Street Murray Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Cherry Street and Chilton Street Murray Street North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chilton Street and city line Murray Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Chilton Street and Cherry Street Murray Street South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and Chilton Street Myrtle Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between McKinley Street and Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) Myrtle Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Ogden Street and South Broad Street Myrtle Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) and McKinley Street Neck Lane North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) and Monroe Avenue Neck Lane South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Monroe Avenue and Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) Nelson Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Grove Street and Devine Avenue Nelson Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Devine Avenue and Grove Street New Point Road East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street New Point Road West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue New York Avenue East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between DeHart Place and South Elmora Avenue New York Avenue West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Elmora Avenue and DeHart Place Newark Avenue East Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 210 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 75 feet southerly thereof Newcomb Place East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Vine Street Newcomb Place West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Vine Street and Rahway Avenue Niles Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth River and First Avenue Niles Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Elizabeth River North Avenue North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) and Pennsylvania R.R. North Avenue South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Pennsylvania R.R. and Rt. No. 1 (Spring Street) North Avenue South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 25 feet west of the westerly curbline of Pennsylvania Avenue and continuing for a distance of 128 feet westerly thereof North Avenue South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 25 feet east of the easterly curbline of Pennsylvania Avenue and continuing for a distance of 190 feet easterly thereof North Avenue, East North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Dowd Avenue and Spring Street North Avenue, East South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street and Dowd Avenue North Broad Street East Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. From Concord Place to Lower Road North Broad Street East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between the Arch and Newark Avenue North Broad Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between the Arch and Parker Road Norwood Terrace North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and Williamson Street Norwood Terrace South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Williamson Street and Pearl Street Oak Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Grand Street and C.R.R. Oak Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between C.R.R. and East Grand Street Oakwood Place North Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Union Avenue and Irvington Avenue Oakwood Place South Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Irvington Avenue and Union Avenue Odgen Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Bayway Avenue (Rt. No. 439) Odgen Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue (Rt. No. 439) and Allen Street Old Road East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Myrtle Street Old Road West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Myrtle Street and Allen Street Olive Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Henry Street and Jackson Avenue Olive Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jackson Avenue and Henry Street Orchard Street North Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. From Morris Avenue to Magie Avenue Orchard Street South All hours, except Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. From a point east of Chilton Street and continuing eastward to Morris Avenue Orchard Street South Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. From a point west of Chilton Street and continuing westward to Magie Avenue Palisade Road East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Westfield Avenue and city line Palisade Road West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and Westfield Avenue Park Avenue North Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Galloping Hill Road Park Avenue North All school days 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. From a point 25 feet west of Elmora Avenue and continuing westerly thereof for a distance of 219.5 feet Park Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Galloping Hill Road and Elmora Avenue Park Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days Beginning 123 feet west of Elmora Avenue for a distance of 162 feet westerly thereof Parker Road North Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Westminster Avenue and Trotters Lane Parker Road South Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Trotters Lane and Westminster Avenue Parkview Terrace North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Bellevue Street and dead end Parkview Terrace South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Bellevue Street Parmelee Place North Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magie Avenue and Wyoming Avenue Parmelee Place South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Wyoming Avenue and Magie Avenue Pearl Street North Saturdays 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between South Street and Williamson Street Pearl Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rahway Avenue and Grove Street Pennington Street North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between DeHart Place and city line Pennington Street North Friday 1:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Standish Street and city line Pennington Street South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and DeHart Place Pennington Street South Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between city line and Standish Street Pennsylvania Avenue East Wednesday 3:00 to 6:00 a.m. Between Mary Street and North Avenue Pennsylvania Avenue East 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. From a point 322 feet south of Hand Place to a point 35 feet southerly thereof Pennsylvania Avenue East Monday to Friday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 295 feet south of the southeast corner of Hand Place and continuing for a distance of 100 feet southerly therefrom Pennsylvania Avenue East Wednesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Mary Street and North Avenue Pennsylvania Avenue West Tuesday 3:00 to 6:00 a.m. Between North Avenue and Mary Street Pennsylvania Avenue West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Mary Street and North Avenue Pershing Avenue East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Murray Street Pershing Avenue West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Murray Street and Rahway Avenue Pine Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Trumbull Street Pine Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Front Street Pingry Place North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Entire length Pingry Place South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Entire length Polonia Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Bayway Avenue (Rt. No. 439) Polonia Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue (Rt. No. 439) and Allen Street Port Avenue North All times, except Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon East side of First Street Port Avenue South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and First Street Port Avenue South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon East side of First Street Price Street East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between West Jersey Street and West Grand Street Price Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between West Grand Street and West Jersey Street Princeton Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Magie Avenue Princeton Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Westfield Avenue Progress Street East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Dowd Avenue Progress Street West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Dowd Avenue and dead end Prospect Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street Prospect Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between East Jersey Street and Elizabeth Avenue Pulaski Street East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway and Clifton Street Pulaski Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Clifton Street and Bayway Race Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Street and Pearl Street Race Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and South Street Rankin Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and First Avenue Rankin Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Third Avenue Raymond Terrace North Monday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Lincoln Avenue and North Avenue Raymond Terrace South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between North Avenue and Lincoln Avenue Rebecca Place North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Division Street and Smith Street Rebecca Place South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Smith Street and Division Street Redcliffe Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fifth Avenue and Third Avenue Redcliffe Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Fifth Avenue Reid Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Magnolia Avenue Reid Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Magnolia Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue Relocated Bayway Avenue South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Turnpike and Front Street Relocated Bayway Avenue South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Turnpike Richford Terrace East Monday 11:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and Rahway Avenue Richmond Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Clarkson Avenue and Brunswick Avenue Richmond Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Brunswick Avenue and Clarkson Avenue Ripley Place North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Third Street Ripley Place North 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Starting at a place 137 feet north of the north curbline of Second Street and continuing for 95 feet Ripley Place South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Third Street and First Street Riverside Drive North Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Parker Road and city line Riverside Drive South Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between city line and Parker Road Roanoke Avenue West Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. North Avenue to Georgian Court Roosevelt Street North Friday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rosehill Place and Washington Avenue Roosevelt Street South Wednesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rosehill Place and Washington Avenue Rosehill Place East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Garden Street and South Street Rosehill Place West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Street and Garden Street Russell Place North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Grove Street and dead end Russell Place South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Grove Street Sailer Court Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Salem Avenue (no gutter) East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between North Broad Street and North Avenue Salem Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between North Avenue and North Broad Street Sayre Street North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Morris Avenue and Chilton Street Sayre Street South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Chilton Street and Morris Avenue Schiller Street Both Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between New Point Road and New Point Road Schiller Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Dowd Avenue and dead end Schiller Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between dead end and Dowd Avenue Scotland Road North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Salem Avenue and Westminster Avenue Scotland Road South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Westminster Avenue and Salem Avenue Second Avenue North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Butler Street and High Street Second Avenue South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between High Street and Butler Street Second Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street Second Street East Monday to Friday On the east curbline of Second Street beginning at a point 67 feet north of Clark Place and 70 feet northerly thereafter Second Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Second Street West Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 25 feet from the north curbline of Ripley Place, for a distance of 82 feet northerly thereof Seib Avenue East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fay Avenue and Rahway Avenue Seib Avenue West Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue and Fay Avenue Seventh Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street Seventh Street East 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (on school days) A point 25 feet south of East Jersey Street for a distance of 30 feet southerly thereof Seventh Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Shelley Avenue East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Park Avenue and Magie Avenue Shelley Avenue West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Park Avenue Sheridan Avenue East Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) and Virginia Street Sheridan Avenue West Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Virginia Street and Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) Sherman Avenue East Wednesdays 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue and Virginia Street Sherman Avenue West Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue and Virginia Street Sixth Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Avenue and New Point Road Sixth Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between South Park Street and Trumbull Street Sixth Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between New Point Road and First Avenue Sixth Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and South Park Street Smith Street East Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Livingston Street Smith Street West Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Livingston Street and Elizabeth Avenue South Broad Street East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Bayway Avenue South Broad Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue and Pearl Street South Broad Street East 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Beginning 75 feet south of the curbline of Elizabeth Avenue to a point 194 feet southerly thereof South Broad Street East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (on school days) Beginning 40 feet south of South Street for a distance of 180 feet southerly thereof South Broad Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue and Allen Street South Broad Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and Bayway Avenue South Fifth Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and First Avenue South Fifth Street East Thursday 9:00 a.m. to noon on Between Elizabeth Avenue and First Avenue South Fifth Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South Fifth Street West Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and First Avenue South Fifth Street West 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. school days From a point beginning 149 feet north of Third Avenue continuing 117 feet northerly thereof South First Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South First Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon Amboy Avenue to Third Avenue South First Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue South First Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon Third Ave. to Amboy Avenue South Front Street East Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway and Elizabeth Avenue South Front Street West Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth Avenue and Bayway South Park Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Front Street and Second Street South Park Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Fifth Street and Trumbull Street South Park Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Second Street and Front Street South Park Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Trumbull Street and Fifth Street South Reid Street East Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South Reid Street West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue South Second Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Third Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue South Second Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Third Avenue South Seventh Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth River and First Avenue South Seventh Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Elizabeth River South Spring Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between South Street and Elizabeth Avenue South Spring Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and South Street South Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Washington Avenue and Rahway Avenue (Rt. No. 27) South Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rahway Avenue (Rt. No. 27) and Washington Avenue South Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Washington Avenue to South Broad Street Spencer Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth River and First Avenue Spencer Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between First Avenue and Elizabeth River Spofford Avenue North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Edgar Road and Lidgerwood Avenue Spofford Avenue South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Lidgerwood Avenue and Edgar Road Spring Street East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and East Jersey Street Spring Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between East Mravlag Place and Elizabeth Avenue Springfield Road East Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Westfield Avenue and Emerson Avenue Springfield Road South Schooldays from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Between Magie Avenue and Baker Place Springfield Road West Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Emerson Avenue and Westfield Avenue Standish Street East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jersey Avenue and West Grand Street Standish Street East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Pennington Street and West Grand Street Standish Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Grand Street and Jersey Avenue Standish Street West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Grand Street and Pennington Street Stanley Terrace North Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and dead end Stanley Terrace South Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between dead end and Cross Avenue Stanton Avenue Both All times Between Alina Street and Garfield Place Stanton Avenue East Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Avenue and dead end Stanton Avenue East Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Garfield Place and Lexington Place Stanton Avenue West Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between dead end and North Avenue Stanton Avenue West Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Garfield Place and Lexington Place Stewart Place North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Washington Avenue and Rosehill Place Stewart Place South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Rosehill Place and Washington Avenue Stiles Street East Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28) and Morris Avenue Stiles Street West Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Morris Avenue and Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28) Summer Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth River and U.S. Rt. No. 1 Summer Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between U.S. Rt. No. 1 and Elizabeth River Summit Road East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Colonia Road and city line Summit Road West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between city line and Colonia Road Third Avenue North Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between South First Street and South Spring Street Third Avenue South Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between South Spring Street and South First Street Third Street East Tuesday 9:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Elizabeth Avenue and Trumbull Street Third Street East 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days Between East Jersey Street and Fulton Street Third Street East 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Between East Jersey Street and Fulton Street Third Street West Thursday 9:00 to 10:00 a.m. Between Trumbull Street and Elizabeth Avenue Thomas Street East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Allen Street and Bayway Avenue Thomas Street West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Bayway Avenue and Allen Street Trenton Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between relocated Bayway and Elizabeth River Trenton Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elizabeth River and relocated Bayway Trinity Place East 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except Sundays From Chestnut Street to Mary Street Trotters Lane North Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. From Morris Avenue to Elizabeth River Bridge Trotters Lane South Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. From Morris Avenue to Elizabeth River Bridge Trumbull Street North Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between First Street and Division Street Trumbull Street South Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Division Street and First Street Union Avenue East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Morris Avenue and Prince Street Union Avenue East Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Prince Street and city line Union Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. From northerly curbline of Prince Street to a point 221 feet northerly thereof Union Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Prince Street and Morris Avenue Union Avenue West Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between city line and Prince Street Union Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. From the southerly curb of Oakwood Place to a point 210 feet southerly thereof Union Street East Monday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Union Street and Julia Place Union Street West Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Union Street and Julia Place Ursino Place North Tuesday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Parker Road and Trotters Lane Ursino Place South Monday 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Between Trotters Lane and Parker Road Van Buren Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Meadow Street and Neck Lane Van Buren Avenue West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Neck Lane and Meadow Street Vine Street North Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chilton Street and Watson Avenue Vine Street South Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Watson Avenue and Chilton Street Virginia Street North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Monroe Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Virginia Street North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) and Cross Avenue Virginia Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Avenue and Monroe Avenue Virginia Street South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Cross Avenue and Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) Virginia Street South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Between Madison Avenue and Jefferson Avenue Vista Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Colonia Road and Fernwood Terrace Vista Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Fernwood Terrace and Colonia Road Walnut Street East Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Chestnut Street and Fairmount Avenue Walnut Street East Thursday 3:00 to 6:00 a.m. Between East Broad Street and Chestnut Street Walnut Street East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between dead end and Alina Street Walnut Street West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Fairmount Avenue and Chestnut Street Walnut Street West Tuesday 3:00 to 6:00 a.m. Between Chestnut Street and East Broad Street Walnut Street West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Beginning 62 feet from the northwest curbline of East Broad Street and continuing 74 feet northerly thereof Walnut Street West Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Alina Street and dead end Washington Avenue East Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Stewart Place and Pearl Street Washington Avenue West Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Pearl Street and Stewart Place Watson Avenue East Monday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Rahway Avenue (Rt. No. 27) and Linden Avenue Watson Avenue West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Linden Avenue and Rahway Avenue (Rt. No. 27) Waverly Place North Thursday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) and North Broad Street Waverly Place South Wednesday 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Between North Broad Street and Newark Avenue (Rt. No. 27) West End Place East Mondays from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Jersey and Murray Street West End Place West Friday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between West Grand Street and West Jersey Street West Grand Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between West End Avenue and DeHart Place West Grand Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Broad Street to Cherry Street West Grand Street North Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Park Street and Standish Street West Grand Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between DeHart Place and West End Avenue West Grand Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Park Street to a point 200 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Park Street to a point 200 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street South Monday through Friday 12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m. Beginning 146 feet east of the easterly curbline of Cherry Street to a point 50 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street South Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Standish Street and Park Street West Jersey Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Cherry Street and DeHart Place West Jersey Street North Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between DeHart Place and Elizabeth-Roselle city line West Jersey Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Broad Street to Cherry Street West Jersey Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. From Chilton Street to West End Avenue West Jersey Street South Friday 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 noon Between Cherry Street and Elizabeth-Roselle city line West Jersey Street South Friday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between DeHart Place and Elizabeth-Roselle city line West Jersey Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. From Chilton Street to West End Place Westminster 
Avenue East Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Prince Street and North Avenue Westminster 
Avenue West Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between North Avenue and Prince Street Whitehead Place North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Entire length Whitehead Place South Wednesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Entire length William Street North Tuesday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Reid Street and Madison Avenue William Street South Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Madison Avenue and Reid Street Williamson Street East Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Between Grove Street and South Street Williamson Street East Friday 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Between South Street and Pearl Street Williamson Street South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between Pearl Street and Grove Street Williamson Street West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Between South Street and Grove Street Williamson Street West Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Between Pearl Street and South Street Wilson Terrace North Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Lincoln Avenue and dead end Wilson Terrace South Monday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between dead end and Lincoln Avenue Winthrop Place North Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Emerson Avenue and Gebhardt Avenue Winthrop Place South Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Gebhardt Avenue and Emerson Avenue Woodruff Lane North Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Spring Street Woodruff Lane South Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Spring Street and Division Street Wyoming Avenue East Wednesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Summit Road and Elmora Avenue Wyoming Avenue West Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Between Elmora Avenue and Summit Road York Street (no gutter) North Thursday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Dowd Avenue and Division Street York Street South Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Division Street and Dowd Avenue  
C.  No one shall park a vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of streets except for the time specified herein: 
Name of Street Side Hours Location North Broad Street Northwest Corner Fifteen minutes only Northwest corner of North Broad Street and extending 60 feet westerly on Aberdeen Road  
(Ord. No. 4903 , § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4811 , § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4687 , § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 4630 , § 1, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 4590 , § 2, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4557 , § 1, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 4523 , §§ 1, 2, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 4020, § 1, 2-10-2009; Ord. 3898 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3884 § 3, 2007; Ord. 3804 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3760 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3707 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3706 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3705 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3699 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3694 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3693 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3688 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3687 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3686 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3624 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3610 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3594 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3582 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3581 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3501 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 3174 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3173 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3172 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3167 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3126 § 1, 1999; prior code § 141-117) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 4366, adopted April 9, 2013, provides for a one-year moratorium suspending the enforcement of section 10.28.040 with respect to Ripley Place outside of Benjamin Franklin School No. 13. 
10.28.050 - Schedule III-No stopping or standing. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 10.28.020(D), no person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets: 
    The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
Name of Street Side Hours Location Aberdeen Road South All times, except Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Between Salem Avenue and North Broad Street Fairmount Avenue Both At any time Between Route No. 1 and Division Street McLester Street Both At any time From North Avenue East to Bay Avenue North Avenue East Both At any time From Division Street to McLester Street North Broad Street East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. From the Arch to a point 150 feet south of Westfield Avenue North Broad Street West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. From Westfield Avenue to Railroad Place  
County Roads 
Name of Street Side Hours Location Jersey Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Grove Street to Elizabeth-Roselle city line Jersey Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Elizabeth-Roselle city line to Grove Street Morris Avenue East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Westfield Avenue to Elizabeth-Union City line Morris Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Westfield Avenue to Elizabeth-Union township line Orchard Street West 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Morris Avenue to Magie Avenue South Broad East 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. Elizabeth Avenue to Pearl Street South Broad Street East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Elizabeth Avenue to Pearl Street West Grand Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. West End Place to Cherry Street West Grand Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Cherry Street to West End Place West Jersey Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Grove Street to Cherry Street West Jersey Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Cherry Street to Grove Street  
City Roads 
Name of Street Side Hours Location Atalanta Plaza/Slater Drive Both All times Beginning at Puleo Plaza and continuing to the terminus of Atalanta Plaza which then continues as Slater Drive upon reaching First Street Atlantic Street East All times Beginning at the southerly curbline of Third Avenue and extending 163 feet therefrom Caldwell Place North All times Between Elizabethtown Plaza and Broad Street Caldwell Place Both All times Between Elizabethtown and Broad Street Canton Street North All times (Except street cleaning day) Beginning at the westerly curbline of Elmora Avenue and continuing westward to Acme Street Cherry Street East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Westfield Avenue to Stiles Street Cherry Street East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Westfield Avenue to Stiles Street Chilton Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Rahway Avenue to Murray Street Chilton Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. West Grand Street to Elmora Avenue Chilton Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Rahway Avenue to Murray Street Chilton Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. West Grand Street to Elmora Avenue Chilton Street East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. West Jersey Street to West Grand Street Chilton Street East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. West Jersey Street to West Grand Street Chilton Street West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Murray Street to West Jersey Street Chilton Street West 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Murray Street to West Jersey Street Commerce Place Easterly All times Entire length from East Grand Street to Broad Street Commerce Place Northerly All times Entire length from East Grand Street to Broad Street Division Street Both All times Between North Avenue, East and Livingston Street East Grand Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Broad Street to Division Street East Grand Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Division Street to Broad Street East Grand Street Southerly All times 150 feet in an easterly direction from the intersection of Broad Street East Jersey Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Smith Street to Jefferson Street East Jersey Street North At any time Commencing 250 feet from the curbline of Route 1 and 9 northwest corner and 250 feet from the curbline of Route 1 and 9 northeast corner East Jersey Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Broad Street to Smith Street East Jersey Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. From Broad Street to Jefferson Avenue East Jersey Street South At any time Commencing 250 feet from the curbline of Route 1 and 9 southwest corner East Scott Place West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Elizabeth Avenue to East Jersey Street Elizabethtown Plaza West All times Between the northerly curbline of Rahway Avenue to a point 175 feet northerly thereof Elizabethtown Plaza Both All times Between West Jersey and Caldwell Place Fillmore Street East All times On the east side of Fillmore Street Galloping Hill Road (County Road) Easterly Beginning at the northerly curb of Westfield Avenue at its intersection with the easterly side of Galloping Hill Road, and extending to a point 80 feet north thereof along the said easterly side line of Galloping Hill Road. Jefferson Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Elizabeth Avenue to East Jersey Street Jefferson Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Hampton Place to Magnolia Avenue Jefferson Avenue Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Elizabeth Avenue to East Jersey Street Jefferson Avenue Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Hampton Place to Magnolia Avenue Jefferson Avenue West All times West side of the Conrail Railroad Bridge and continuing southerly to the north side curbline of East Grand Street Kapkowski Road Both All times From the intersection of North Avenue East southerly to its terminus, a distance of 1,440 feet Madison Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. East Jersey Street to East Grand Street Madison Avenue Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. East Grand Street to East Jersey Street Magnolia Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Division Street to North Broad Street Magnolia Avenue North All times Beginning at the westerly curbline of Division Street and extending 188 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. North Broad Street to Division Street Morris Avenue East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Railroad Place to Westfield Avenue Morris Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Julian Place to Westfield Avenue North Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Newark Avenue to U.S. Route No. 1 North Avenue Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. U.S. Route No. 1 to Newark Avenue North Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Weekdays On the east side of North Avenue from Route 1 to Newark Avenue North Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. North Avenue from Newark Avenue to North Broad Street North Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. North Avenue from Newark Avenue to North Broad Street North Avenue West 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Weekdays On the west side of North Avenue from Route 1 to Newark Avenue North Avenue East Both From the N.J. Turnpike underpass to McLester Street North Broad West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at the northerly curbline of North Avenue and continuing along the westerly curbline of North Broad Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 95 feet North Broad Street East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. East Broad Street to Chestnut Street North Broad Street West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Westfield Avenue to Railroad Place Pearl Street South Between Williamson Street and South Street Prince Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Irvington Avenue to North Broad Street Prince Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. North Broad Street to Irvington Avenue Service Drive Both All times Entire length between Parker Road and Trotters Lane South Pearl Street West All times From Bridge Street to South Street Standish Street Both All times Northbound to West Grand Street and southbound from West Grand Street respectively for a distance of 125 feet from the intersection Trumbull Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Second Street and First Street Watson Avenue West All times Between Rahway Avenue and Vine Street West Grand Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Union Street to Broad Street West Grand Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Broad Street to Union Street West Grand Street North All times Broad Street to Union Street West Grand Street North All times At a point west of Elmora Avenue and continuing westward along the northern curb to the Roselle-Elizabeth city line West Grand Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Cherry Street to Union Street West Grand Street South 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Union Street to Cherry Street West Grand Street South All times Eastbound approach to Standish Street and eastbound departure from Standish Street for a distance of 125 feet measured from the center line of the two streets West Grand Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Park Street to a point 200 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street South Beginning at a point 26 feet west of the west curbline of Broad Street and continuing for a distance of 66 feet westerly West Grand Street South All times Bellevue Street to Elmora Avenue Street West Grand Street Southerly All times 26 feet west of the west curbline of Broad Street and continuing a distance of 217 feet westerly thereof West Jersey Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. Cherry Street to Sterling Place West Jersey Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Elizabethtown Plaza to Broad Street West Jersey Street Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Broad Street to Union Street West Jersey Street Both All times Between Elizabethtown Plaza and Broad Street West Jersey Street North Sterling Place to Union Street West Scott Place East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. East Jersey Street to Dickinson Street  
(Ord. No. 4954 , § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4812 , § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4640 , § 1, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 4629 , § 1, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 4589 , § 1, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4573 , § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4485 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4237, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4015, § 1, 1-27-2009; Ord. 3597 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 141-118) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 4154, adopted September 14, 2010, states the following: "SECTION 1. That a moratorium is hereby established for a period of one year from the effective date of this ordinance for the enforcement and issuance of summonses for a violation of certain provisions of Chapter 10.28.040 and Chapter 10.28.050 of the Code of the City of Elizabeth more specifically No Parking 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. where signs have been recently reinstalled by the Department of Public Works. (A list of locations is on file in the City Clerk's Office)." 
10.28.060 - Spaces restricted. 
    That parking in the area of the Elizabeth Home Improvement Program (EHIP) office, located at 246 Elizabeth Avenue, and further described hereafter, is restricted to EHIP employees and official city business only, as follows: 
Name of Street Side Hours Location First Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday to Friday Beginning at the intersection of Florida Street and First Avenue westerly, a distance of 55 feet thereof  
(Prior code § 141-128.1) 
10.28.070 - Forty-five-degree angle parking. 
    Forty-five-degree-angle parking shall be permitted on the following streets or parts of streets in the locations indicated: 
Name of Street Sides Location Broadway Center Between Front Street and Second Street Broadway South From a point 30 feet west of Front Street to a point 30 feet east of First Street Broadway Center From a point 30 feet west of the curbline of Second Street Jefferson Avenue Northwest Between Virginia Street and the Newark city line Lt. Glen Zamorski Drive West Between Second Avenue and Third Avenue Roanoke Avenue Westerly From a point 44 feet northerly from the northerly curbline of North Avenue, parallel to the westerly line of Roanoke Avenue and 6 feet at right angles easterly of the westerly line of Roanoke Avenue for a distance of 118 feet; thence easterly and at right angles to the westerly line of Roanoke Avenue and 6 feet therefrom, a distance of 20 feet; thence southerly parallel with the westerly line of Roanoke Avenue distance at right angles 26 feet therefrom, a distance of 120 feet; thence northwesterly and at right angles to the westerly line of Roanoke Avenue, a distance of 20 feet to the point or place of beginning  
(Ord. No. 4261, § 2, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 4237, § 2, 9-13-2011; Ord. 3884 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3767 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3686 § 1, 2005; prior code § 141-140) 
10.28.080 - Locations established. 
    In front of the Ritz Theater, 1148 East Jersey Street, on the south curbline, beginning at a point ninety-two (92) feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing twenty-six (26) feet in a westerly direction. 
(Prior code § 141-87) 
10.28.090 - Emergency no parking. 
A.  No Parking During Emergencies-Posting of Signs. 
1.  Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs are displayed. The chief of police, or in his or her absence, the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. 
2.  Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs. 
B.  Removal and Storage of Vehicles in Violation. Any occupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage, which may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle. 
C.  Effectiveness of Provisions. The effectiveness of this section is contingent on signs being erected, as required by law. 
D.  Violations and Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section, or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
E.  Approval. This section is subject to the approval of the state of New Jersey and the county of Union, as the case may be, as same is provided for and required by law. 
(Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code §§ 141-118.1-141-118.5) 
10.28.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not less than forty dollars ($40.00) plus a one dollar ($1.00) surcharge for the Emergency Medical Technician Training Fund pursuant to Chapter 143, Laws of 1992. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 51, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code §§ 114(E), (F), 115 and 116.1) 
Chapter 10.32 - PARKING AUTHORITY LOTS AND FACILITIES 
Sections: 

10.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Authority" means the parking authority of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    "Metered surface facility" means any lot where any mechanical device is installed or used for the regulation of parking in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. Each parking meter installed will indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the authority and, when in operation, shall indicate the balance of legal parking time and, at the expiration of the legal parking, shall indicate overtime parking. 
    "Parking meter space" means any space within a parking metered surface facility adjacent to a parking meter. 
    "Parking space" means any space within the authority facility, other than a metered space, that is leased during the hours of operation and in the manner prescribed at each facility. 
    "Public parking lot" includes all areas, lots and facilities owned, operated or controlled by the authority and used or devoted to public parking. 
B.  Whenever any other words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code § 141-13) 
10.32.020 - Marking of spaces. 
    The authority may have lines or markings painted in any of the authority facilities indicating the parking space. When installed, no person shall park any vehicle across any such line or marking or park any vehicle in such position that it shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. No person shall park any vehicle in any unmarked area of any authority facility with the exception of Lot Nos. 5 and 7. 
(Prior code § 141-14) 
10.32.030 - Manner of parking. 
    When a parking space in any authority facility is other than parallel parking, the vehicles shall head into the parking space unless otherwise instructed by an appropriate sign. 
(Prior code § 141-15) 
10.32.040 - Use of parking meter spaces and parking spaces. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space during the hours of operation without depositing one or more appropriate coins of the United States of America at the rate provided for that facility in the parking meter adjoining such parking meter space. 
B.  No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space during the hours of operation without having obtained either a claim check from an attendant or a mechanical ticket dispensing device or without having obtained a monthly permit for the month applicable from the authority. 
(Prior code § 141-16) 
10.32.050 - General regulations. 
A.  No person shall cause a vehicle to remain or to be parked in a parking meter space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter displays a device or signal indicating that the period of time for such parking has expired. 
B.  No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be parked in any parking meter space herein designated or to be hereafter designated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  No person shall deface, tamper with, damage, unlawfully open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The authority shall comply with all requirements affecting parking as it relates to physically handicapped persons as same is provided for in N.J.S.A. 52:32-11 and 32-12, as same may be amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 141-17) 
10.32.060 - Parking meter zones established-Designation of lots. 
A.  Any and all parking lots and facilities now or hereafter owned, constructed, maintained or operated by the authority are and shall be public parking lots, and the same are constituted and are to be known as "parking meter zones" for a twenty-four (24) hour period extending over seven days per week. 
B.  The parking lots now owned or operated by the authority are located and described as follows: 
1.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 1," located on the corner of West Jersey Street and South Union Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 26, 28, 30 and 32 West Jersey Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and 73, 75, 77, 79, 81, 83 and 85 South Union Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
2.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 2," located on Jefferson Avenue extending through to Commerce Place, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 208, 210, 212, 214, 216, 218 and 220 Jefferson Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and 233 Commerce Place, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
3.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 3," located on the corner of South Reid Street and Elizabeth Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 920, 922, 924, 926, 928, 930 and 932 Elizabeth Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and 10, 12, 14 and 16 South Reid Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
4.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 4," located on Morris Avenue and extending through to Westfield Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 322 and 324 Morris Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and 59, 61 and 63 Westfield Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
5.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 5," located on 14 and 24 Rahway Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
6.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 6," located on the corner of Jefferson Avenue and Dickinson Street and known as 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50, 52 and 54 Jefferson Avenue; 1151, 1153, 1155, 1157, 1159, 1161, 1163 and 1165 Dickinson Street; part of 55 Broad Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
7.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 7," located on the corner of Sterling Place and West Jersey Street and known as 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 87 and 89 Sterling Place and 40, 42, 44, 46 and 48 West Jersey Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
8.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 11," located on West Grand Street and known as 23 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
9.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 8," located on Jefferson Avenue and Hampton Place, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 121-125 Jefferson Avenue and 1131-1137 Hampton Place, Elizabeth, New Jersey; 
10.  Parking lot known as "Parking Lot No. 9," located on Elizabeth Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey, and known as 1152-1158 Elizabeth Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 141-18) 
10.32.070 - Installation of parking meters. 
    In each of the public parking lots, the authority may install parking meters. The parking meters shall be placed immediately adjacent to or in front of the parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking place adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the authority and, when operated, shall indicate on and by its dial "legal parking" for the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the expiration of such period, shall indicate "violation" for illegal parking or over parking. 
(Prior code § 141-19) 
10.32.080 - Overtime parking prohibited. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicles registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time herein established for any public parking lot as herein described. 
(Prior code § 141-20) 
10.32.090 - Legal parking required. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to or next to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(Prior code § 141-21) 
10.32.100 - Deposit of coin substitutes prohibited. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a proper coin of the United States. 
(Prior code § 141-22) 
10.32.110 - Use by certain trucks prohibited. 
A.  No truck having a load-weight capacity of more than one-half ton shall park or use any public parking lot owned, operated or maintained by the authority. 
B.  All vehicles servicing sites, the owners of which are under a specific contractual agreement with the authority, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 141-23) 
10.32.120 - Use by certain vehicles prohibited. 
A.  No truck, tractor or trailer, or vehicle moved by human or animal power, shall park in or use any public parking lot owned, operated or maintained by the authority. 
B.  All vehicles servicing sites, the owners of which are under a specific contractual agreement with the authority, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 141-24) 
10.32.130 - Pneumatic tires required for use. 
    Only vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall park in or use any public parking lot owned, operated or maintained by the authority. 
(Prior code § 141-25) 
10.32.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of police officers of the city, when issuing a summons for a violation of any of the pro-visions of this chapter, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the police director or designee, to report: 
1.  The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The state license number of such vehicle; 
3.  The time which such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
4.  Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
B.  In addition to the penalty provided in Section 10.32.160, each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter and instructing such owner or operator to report at the headquarters of the police department of the city in regard to such violation. 
(Prior code § 141-26) 
10.32.150 - Parking limited to authorized vehicles. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by any person to be parked in any public parking lot owned by the authority and which portion is not used or devoted to public parking, or in a parking meter zone, without said person first obtaining a written permit from the authority authorizing the parking of said vehicle in said public parking lot. Vehicles permitted to be parked shall properly identify said written permission at the front or rear window of the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 141-27) 
10.32.160 - Violations and penalties-Towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
A.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provision of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than the payable amount of thirty-nine dollars ($39.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) days, either or both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court. The foregoing payable amount includes all court costs. The foregoing penalties amount includes all court costs. 
B.  In addition to the penalty provided for in subsection A., any vehicle parked on property of the parking authority illegally, as provided for in section 10.32.150, may be towed away at the owner's expense by the city or its agents. 
C.  The parking authority shall receive from the city the sum of five dollars ($5.00) included within the costs of the payable amount for each summons issued by its parking enforcement officers for violations of this chapter and for violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey. 
D.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
E.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 1, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 47, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-28) 
Chapter 10.36 - PARKING METERS 
Sections: 

10.36.010 - Statutory definitions applicable. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code § 141-56) 
10.36.020 - Designation of meter zones and hours of parking. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle other than as hereinafter shown upon any of the following streets or parts of streets, except Sundays and public holidays, unless otherwise indicated: 
Street Sides Hours Location 7th St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and Franklin St. 7th St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and Franklin St. Alina St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the westerly curbline of Sherman Ave. to a point 155 feet west thereof Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Dickenson St. and Elizabeth Ave. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between E. Jersey St. and Dickenson St. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the northerly curbline of Caldwell Pl., to a point 310 feet north thereof Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Rahway Ave. and Caldwell Pl. Burnett St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Rahway Ave. and Pearl St. Burnett St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Rahway Ave. and Pearl St. Chestnut St. Both Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the easterly curbline of N. Broad St. to a point 450 feet east thereof - to Amtrak train trestle Chestnut St. Both Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and E. Broad St. Commerce Pl. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning at a point 110 feet north of the northerly curbline of East Grand Street and continuing for a distance of 134 feet northerly thereof. Commerce Pl. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 129 feet north of the northerly curbline of East Grand Street to a point 154 feet thereof. Commerce Pl. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 60 feet north of the northerly curbline of East Grand Street to a point 110 feet thereof. Dickinson St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. Dickinson St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Winfield Scott Plaza and Jefferson Ave. Dickinson St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. Dickinson St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Winfield Scott Plaza and Jefferson Ave. E. Broad St. North Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Magnolia Ave. E. Broad St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Magnolia Ave. E. Grand St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Broad St. and Commerce Pl. E. Grand St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Commerce Pl. and Jefferson Ave. E. Grand St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Madison Ave. E. Grand St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. E. Grand St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Madison Ave. and Jefferson Ave. E. Grand St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 25 feet from the easterly curbline of Broad Street to a point 187 feet thereof. E. Jersey St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Catherine St. and Jefferson Ave. E. Jersey St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. E. Jersey St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Catherine St. and Jefferson Ave. E. Jersey St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Catherine St. and Morrell St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 5th St and 6th St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 4th St and 5th St Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jacques St. and N. Reid St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Jefferson Ave. and Broad St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Morrell St. and Martin Luther King Plaza Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between W. Mravlag Pl. and Prospect St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between New Point Rd. and Smith St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Reid St. and N. Spring St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Prospect St. and Catherine St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 7th St. and New Point Rd. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 6th St. and 7th St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Smith St. and Jacques St. Elizabeth Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Winfield Scott Plaza and Jefferson Ave. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Bridge St. and City La. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between City La. and S. Spring St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 5th St. and 4th St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between High St. and 7th St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. Reid St. and Second Ave. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between 6th St. and 5th St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. Broad St. and Winfield Scott Plaza Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. 7th St. and 6th St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. Spring St. and S. Reid St. Elizabeth Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between South St. and Center St. Elmora Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Pennington St. and Linden Ave. State Highway 439 Elmora Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Pennington St. and W. Grand St., State Highway No. 439 Elmora Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Linden Ave. and Rahway Ave. Elmora Ave. West Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Pennington St. and Linden Ave. State Highway 439 Elmora Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between W. Grand St. and Pennington St., State Highway No. 439 Elmora Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Linden Ave. and Rahway Ave. High St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between First Ave. and Elizabeth Ave. Jefferson Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between E. Grand St. and Chestnut St. Jefferson Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and Dickinson St. Jefferson Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Hampton Pl. and E. Grand St. Jefferson Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between E. Grand St. and Chestnut St. Jefferson Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between E. Jersey St. and E. Grand St. Jefferson Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and Dickinson St. Jersey Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 160 feet east thereof, County Rd. Jersey Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the westerly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 115 feet west thereof, County Rd. Jersey Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 100 feet east thereof, County Rd. Jersey Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from westerly curbline of Elinora Ave. to a point 55 feet west thereof, County Rd. Julian Pl. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Morris Ave. and Union St. Julian Pl. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Union St. and Morris Ave. Julian Pl. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Morris Ave. and Union St. Madison Ave. East Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between E. Jersey St. and Lafayette St. Madison Ave. East Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between Lafayette St. and William. St. Madison Ave. East Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between William. St. and E. Grand St. Madison Ave. West Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Between E. Grand St. and Hampton Pl. Magnolia Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Trinity Pl. Magnolia Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Trinity Pl. Martin Luther King Plaza West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Dickinson St. and E. Jersey St. Martin Luther King Plaza West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Dickinson St. and Elizabeth Ave. Mary St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Trinity Pl. Mary St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Trinity Pl. Morrell St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 190 feet from southerly curbline of E. Jersey St. to a point 86 feet southerly thereof Morrell St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and E. Jersey St. Morris Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Orchard St. and City Line County Rd. Morris Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Orchard St. and Union Ave., County Rd. Morris Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Union Ave. and Westfield Ave., County Rd. Morris Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westfield Ave. and Julian Pl. Morris Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Julian Pl. and Westfield Ave. Morris Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westfield Ave. and Sayre St., County Rd. Morris Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Sayre St. and Orchard St., County Rd. Morris Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Orchard St. and City Line County Road Morris Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the northerly curbline of Julian Pl. to a point 80 feet west thereof N. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 150 feet from the northerly curb of E. Broad St. to a point 190 feet north thereof N. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the northerly curbline of Whitehead Pl. to a point 152 feet thereof, State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Chestnut St. and Magnolia Ave., State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Magnolia Ave. and Mary St., State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Mary St. and Whitehead Pl., State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the southerly curbline of Pingry Pl. to a point 90 feet south thereof, County Rd. N. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. 10 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 215 feet from the southerly curbline of Parker Rd. to Prince St., State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Prince St. and Westminster Ave., State Highway No. 27 N. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westfield Ave. and Railroad Pl. N. Reid St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 70 feet north thereof N. Reid St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 60 feet north thereof Newark Ave. Both Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and City Line Pearl St. North Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. Broad St. and Bridge St. Pennington St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from easterly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 100 feet east thereof Pennington St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the westerly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 85 feet west thereof Pennington St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the easterly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 60 feet east thereof Pennington St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the westerly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 100 feet west thereof Prince St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Westminster Ave. Prince St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Union Ave. and Irvington Ave. Prince St North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westminster Ave. and Union Ave. Prince St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Union Ave. and Irvington Ave. Prince St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westminster Ave. and Union Ave. Rahway Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between S. Broad St. and Burnet St. Rahway Ave. Both Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Cherry St. and Elmora Ave. S. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from the northerly curbline of Pearl St. to a point 133 feet north thereof S. Broad St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from southerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 175 feet south thereof, County Rd. S. Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Rahway Ave. and Pearl St, County Rd. S. Reid St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from southerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 40 feet south thereof S. Reid St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from southerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 66 feet south thereof Second Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between South St. and High St. Second Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and South St. Second Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between South St. and High St. Sheridan Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of North Ave. to a point 154 feet northerly thereof Sherman Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curb of Alina St. to a point 175 feet north thereof Smith St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Elizabeth Ave. and Cross St. Smith St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of Elizabeth Ave. to a point 120 feet north thereof South St. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Second Ave. and Elizabeth Ave. South Broad St. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Pearl St. and South St. Sterling Place East Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning at a point along the easterly curb line of Sterling Place 41 feet southerly from south curb line of West Jersey St. and running for 174 feet Sterling Place East Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning at a point along the easterly curb line of Sterling Place 373 feet southerly from the south curb line of West Jersey St. and running for 455 feet Sterling Place West Monday through Wednesday and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning at a point along westerly curb line of Sterling Place 288 feet southerly from the south curb line of West Jersey St. and running for 484 feet Trinity Pl. Both Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Chestnut St. and Magnolia Ave. Union Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Prince St. and Morris Ave. Union Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Between Morris Ave. and Prince St. Union Street East and West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Westfield Ave. and Julian Place W. Grand St. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from easterly curbline of Union St. to a point 50 feet east thereof W. Grand St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Cherry St. and Price St. W. Jersey St. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Cherry St. and Sterling Pl. Westfield Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Morris Ave. and N. Broad St., State Highway No. 27 Westfield Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Mulberry St. and Morris Ave., State Highway No. 27 Westfield Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from easterly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 150 feet east thereof, State Highway No. 28 Westfield Ave. North Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from westerly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 100 feet west thereof, State Highway No. 28 Westfield Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Morris Ave., State Highway No. 27 Westfield Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Union St. and Harrison St., State Highway No. 27 Westfield Ave. South Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from westerly curbline of Elmora Ave. to a point 250 feet west thereof. State Highway No. 28 Westminster Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of Parker Rd. to a point 230 feet northerly thereof Westminster Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from northerly curbline of Pingry Pl. to a point 80 feet north thereof Westminster Ave. East Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between N. Broad St. and Prince St. Westminster Ave. West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Beginning 35 feet from southerly curbline of Prince St. to a point 300 feet south thereof Winfield Scott Plaza West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between Dickinson St. and Elizabeth Ave. Winfield Scott Plaza West Monday through Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Thursday and Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Between E. Jersey St. and Dickinson St.  
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
(Ord. No. 4969 , § 1, 1-23-2018; Ord. No. 4369, § 1, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 4360, § 1, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 8-25-2009; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 3178 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3139 § 1, 1999; prior code § 141-57) 
10.36.030 - Additional provisions applicable. 
    The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-1-38. 
(Prior code § 141-58) 
10.36.040 - Meters installed in compliance with statutory requirements only. 
    In or upon the aforementioned streets or parts of streets, parking meters may be installed, operated and maintained but no parking meter shall be installed where prohibited by state law as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138. 
(Prior code § 141-59) 
10.36.050 - Establishment of parking rate authorized. 
    A rate may be charged for parking in the above mentioned metered area, which rate shall be set by resolution or regulation of the parking authority of the city from time to time. 
(Prior code § 141-60) 
10.36.060 - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than the payable amount of thirty-nine dollars ($39.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) days, either or both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court costs. The foregoing payable amount includes all court costs. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 2, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 52, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-61) 
10.36.070 - Legal parking time limits-Meter feeding. 
    The legal time limit for parking in any parking meter area shall be thirty (30) minutes, one, two, ten (10) or twelve (12) hour parking. The legal time limit for parking meter areas on streets will be one hour, except for portions of Burnett Street, Chestnut Street, East Broad Street, Julian Place, Madison Avenue, Martin Luther King, Jr. Plaza, Mary Street, Prince Street, South Broad Street, Union Avenue, Union Street, Westminster Avenue, and Winfield Scott Plaza, where the legal time limit shall be thirty (30) minutes, two, ten (10) or twelve (12) hours as indicated on the parking meter adjacent to the parked vehicle. 
(Ord. 3154 § 1, 1999) 
Chapter 10.40 - PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON TRUCKS, BUSES AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.40.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code § 141-69) 
10.40.020 - No parking of certain vehicles from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.-Exceptions. 
    Hereafter there shall be no parking upon streets or sections of streets within the city of all commercial vehicles between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition is not applicable to authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus a one dollar ($1.00) surcharge for the Emergency Medical Technician Training Fund pursuant to Chapter 143, Laws of 1992. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
(Ord. No. 4677 , §§ 1, 2, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 4149, § 53, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 141-70) 
10.40.030 - Violation constitutes nuisance-Removal-Redemption. 
    Any prohibited vehicle parked or standing on streets or parts of streets between the aforesaid hours in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 141-71) 
10.40.040 - Signs required. 
    The effectiveness of this chapter is contingent upon the proper signs being erected as required by law. 
(Prior code § 141-72) 
10.40.045 - No off-street parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones. 
    Any commercial truck or van of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds in weight shall be stored in a garage. The property owner and/or vehicle owner shall not allow off-street parking of any commercial truck or van of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds in weight in residential zones and require that the vehicle be stored in a garage. 
(Ord. No. 4686 , § 1, 3-8-2016) 
10.40.050 - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 54, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-73) 
10.40.060 - No parking anytime of trucks or buses. 
    Trucks and buses are prohibited from parking at the Sailors and Soldiers Monument located at the intersection of North Broad Street and Westminister Avenue and Magnolia Avenue. 
(Prior code § 141-74) 
10.40.070 - No parking of trucks-Portion affected. 
    Trucks are prohibited from parking on the following streets: 
Street Side Location Allen Street East Brunswick Avenue and the city line - Entire length Broadway North Fourth Street to Fifth Street Court Street Both Seventh Street to Trumbull Street Fairmount Avenue Both Division Street to Route 1 & 9 Henry Street Both Fairmount Avenue to Woodruff Lane Julia Street Both Division Street to Route 1 & 9 Lidgerwood Avenue Both From the point where Garden Street and Rosehill Place intersect to Edgar Road Livingston Street Both Division Street to East Grand Street Miller Street Both East Jersey Street to Livingston Street Neck Lane Both from Spring Street to Virginia Street New Point Road Both South Park Street to Broadway New Point Road Both South Park Street to Court Street Papetti Plaza Both Entire length Rebecca Place Both Entire length between intersection with Division Street and intersection with Smith Street Spring Street West From 400 feet of Neck Lane to the intersection of Fanny Street Trumbull Street Both Sixth Street to East Grand Street and from East Grand Street to Madison Avenue Van Buren Avenue Both From North Avenue to Neck Lane Woodruff Lane Both Entire length  
(Ord. No. 5095 , § 1, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 5015 , § 1, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 4881 , § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4798 , § 1, 1-24-2017; Ord. No. 4688 , § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 4655 , § 1, 12-22-2015; Ord. No. 4624 , § 1, 9-22-2015; prior code § 141-77) 
10.40.075 - No trailer, pole trailer, recreational vehicle, camper or boat parking on any street. 
A.  No person shall park a trailer, pole trailer, recreational vehicle, camper, or boat on any street, or any part of a street even if attached to another vehicle. 
B.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any vehicle from making deliveries of merchandise or other property to the premises on the street along which said vehicle is so parked, nor to prevent the parking of any such vehicle by any public utility company in connection with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of public utilities, nor to prevent the temporary parking of any vehicle actively engaged in repair or maintenance work, nor to prevent the parking of vehicles attending to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 4915 , § 1, 9-26-2017) 
10.40.080 - Erection of signs. 
    Signs indicating the foregoing prohibition of parking shall be installed. 
(Prior code § 141-78) 
10.40.090 - No parking of trucks, anytime, around schools, parks and houses of worship. 
    There shall be no parking of trucks at any time on streets which surround schools, parks and houses of worship as outlined in the attached Schedule A. 
Schedule A 
Parks 
Street Side Location Mattano  Fifth Avenue West Atlantic Street to So. Fifth Street.  So. Fifth Street South Fifth Avenue to Elizabeth River.  Summer Street South Arnett Street to Elizabeth River.  Arnett Street East Summer Street to Clifton Street.  Clifton Street East Arnett Street to Cole Place. Elizabeth River Park  Summer Street North Elizabeth River to 215 feet west.  So. Fifth Street North Elizabeth River to 260 feet east.  So. Pearl Street East Grove Street to South Street.  Bridge Street East Elizabeth River to So. Pearl Street.  Bridge Street West Elizabeth River to Pearl Street.  Pearl Street North Bridge Street to 350 feet west. Jackson Park  Broadway East Park Place to Second Street.  Second Street North Broadway to Court Street.  Court Street West Second Street to Park Place.  Park Place South Court Street to Broadway. Scott Park  Elizabeth Avenue North Winfield Scott Plaza to Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza.  Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza West Elizabeth Avenue to East Jersey Street.  East Jersey Street South Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza to Winfield Scott Plaza.  Winfield Scott Plaza East East Jersey Street to Elizabeth Avenue.  Dickinson Street North Winfield Scott Plaza to Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza.  Dickinson Street South Winfield Scott Plaza to Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza. Jefferson Park  Anna Street East Jefferson Avenue to Madison Avenue.  Madison Avenue North Anna Street to Mary Street.  Mary Street West Madison Avenue to Jefferson Avenue.  Jefferson Avenue South Mary Street to Anna Street. Woodruff Circle  Adams Avenue South Mary Street to Jackson Avenue.  Jackson Avenue North Adams Avenue to Mary Street.  Mary Street West Jackson Avenue to Adams Avenue. Kellogg Park  North Avenue East Railroad to Madison Avenue.  Madison Avenue North North Avenue to Fanny Street.  Fanny Street West Madison Avenue to Railroad. Wilson Park  Newark Avenue North Sherman Avenue to Virginia Street.  Virginia Street South Newark Avenue to Sherman Avenue.  Sherman Avenue East Virginia Street to Newark Avenue. Crane Square  Newark Avenue West Sheridan Avenue to 825 feet north.  Sheridan Avenue East Newark Avenue to 825 feet north. North End School House Site  Salem Avenue East North Broad Street to 250 feet north.  North Broad Street West Salem Avenue to 255 feet north. Military Park  North Broad Street North Westminster Avenue to Prince Street.  Prince Street West North Broad Street to Westminister Avenue.  Westminster Avenue South Prince Street to North Broad Street. Caldwell Park  De Hart Place North South Street to Railroad.  South Street West DeHart Place to Railroad. West End Park  Grove Street East Linden Avenue to Jersey Avenue.  Linden Avenue North Grove Street to Jersey Avenue.  Jersey Avenue South Linden Avenue to Grove Street. McPherson Park  Elmora Avenue West Westfield Avenue to Park Avenue.  Westfield Avenue North Elmora Avenue to 60 feet west.  Park Avenue South Elmora Avenue to 75 feet west. Carteret Park  Vine Street North Elmora Avenue to 2000 feet east.  Elmora Avenue East Vine Street to Murray Street.  Murray Street South Elmora Avenue to Grove Street.  
Playgrounds and Recreation Centers 
Street Side Location Coakley Playground  Coakley Circle South Beginning at a point 65 feet east of Neck Lane to 180 feet east. Arabella Miller Street Mack Bldg. Rec. Center and Park  South Park Street North First Street to 115 feet east.  First Street East South Park Street to Court Street.  Court Street South First Street to 145 feet east. Mickey Walker Rec. Center  Anna Street South Division Street to 780 feet west.  Division Street West Anna Street to 127 feet south. Fred Erxleben Rec. Center  Clifton Street South Beginning at a point 315 feet east of Clarkson Avenue to 300 feet east.  Richmond Street North Beginning at a point 165 feet west of Pulaski Street to 100 feet west. Brophy Field  Trumbull Street South Third Street to Railroad.  Third Street West Trumbull Street to 550 feet south. Kenah Field  Fanny Street North Beginning at a point 215 feet west of Jefferson Avenue to the Railroad. Mahon Rec. Center  South Broad Street East Beginning at a point 175 feet north of Pearl Street to the Elizabeth River. Kirk Community Center  First Avenue West John Street to 100 feet north.  John Street North First Avenue to 130 feet west. Elmora Racquet Club  Fernwood Terrace North Beginning at a point 400 feet east of Galloping Hill Road to 200 feet east. O'Brien Field  Third Avenue East Christine Street to So. Seventh Street.  South Seventh Street South Third Avenue to Second Avenue.  Second Avenue West South Seventh Street to Christine Street.  Christine Street North Second Avenue to Third Avenue. Fairmount Avenue  Fairmount Avenue North Beginning at a point 345 feet west of Jefferson Avenue to Railroad. Florida Street Playground  Second Avenue South Florida Street to 115 feet east.  Florida Street East Second Avenue to 165 feet south. Holland Playground  Broadway South Reid Street to 245 feet west.  Reid Street West Broadway to 75 feet south. Kopnicki Playground  Fulton Street South Beginning at a point 265 feet east of Second Street to 200 feet east. Masnicki Playground  East Jersey Street South Beginning at a point 365 feet west of Third Street to Railroad.  Fulton Street North Beginning at a point 445 feet west of Third Street to Railroad. Miller Playground  So. Park Street North Beginning at a point 175 feet west of Seventh Street to 245 feet west.  Court Street South Beginning at a point 175 feet west of Seventh Street to 305 feet west. Sixth Street Playground  Franklin Street North Sixth Street to 135 feet east.  Sixth Street East Franklin Street to Fulton Street.  Fulton Street South Sixth Street to 160 feet east. Van Arsdale Playground  New York Avenue West Beginning at a point 75 feet south of Grove Street to 256 feet south.  
Public Schools 
Street Side Location Victor Mravlag #21  Harding Road North Shelley Avenue to 315 feet west.  Shelley Avenue West Harding Road to Edgewood Road.  Edgewood Road South Shelley Avenue to 315 feet west. Elmora School #12  Magie Avenue West Springfield Road to 365 feet south.  Springfield Road South Magie Avenue to Baker Place.  Baker Place East Springfield Road to 365 feet south. Abraham. Lincoln #14  Grove Street West Murray Street to 220 feet south. Alexander Hamilton #72  Cherry Street West Westfield Avenue to 340 feet north.  Westfield Avenue North Cherry Street to 220 feet west. James P. Mitchell #94  Parker Road North Beginning at a point 50 feet west of North Broad Street to 190 feet west. Nicholas Murray Butler #23  Union Avenue East Parker Road to 670 feet north. Robert Morris #18  Cross Avenue West Durant Street to 265 feet south.  Durant Street South Cross Avenue to terminus. Woodrow Wilson #19  Edgar Road West Beginning at a point 198 feet north of So. Elmora Avenue to 405 feet north. Battin Career Center #75  So. Broad Street East South Street to 210 feet north.  South Street North South Broad Street to Williamson Street.  Williamson Street West South Street to 120 feet north.  So. Broad Street East South Street to 420 feet south.  South Street South South Broad Street to Williamson Street.  Williamson Street West South Street to 465 feet south. Elizabeth H.S. #93  South Street North South Pearl Street to 690 feet west.  So. Pearl Street West South Street to Bridge Street (extended).  Pearl Street South Bridge Street (extended) to 400 feet west. Jefferson House #92  Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza East Beginning at point 105 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue to 360 feet north.  Morrell Street West Beginning at a point 165 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue to 285 feet north. Winfield Scott #2  Madison Avenue East Beginning at a point 240 feet north of East Jersey Street to 150 feet north. Marquis De Lafayette #6 and #73  Julia Street North Adams Avenue to Monroe Avenue.  Monroe Avenue East Julia Street to 290 feet north.  Adams Avenue West Julia Street to 290 feet north. Madison Monroe #16  North Avenue North Monroe Avenue to Madison Avenue.  Madison Avenue East North Avenue to 265 feet north.  Monroe Avenue West North Avenue to 205 feet north. Theodore Roosevelt #17 and #74  Bayway South South Broad Street to Ogden Street.  Ogden Street West Bayway to Myrtle Street.  Myrtle Street North Ogden Street to So. Broad Street.  So. Broad Street South Myrtle Street to Bayway. Edison House #61  Summer Street North Green Street to Clarkson Avenue.  Clarkson Avenue West Summer Street to Fillmore Street.  Fillmore Street South Clarkson Avenue to 280 feet west.  Green Street East Summer Street to Garden Street.  Garden Street South Green Street to 100 feet east.  Hetfield Avenue East Beginning at a point 140 feet south of Rte. 1 and 9 to 175 feet south. Peterstown #3  Second Avenue West High Street to So. Seventh Street.  High Street South Second Avenue to 145 feet west.  So. Seventh Street North Second Avenue to 145 feet west. William. F. Halloran #22  Richmond Street North Cole Place to Pulaski Street.  Pulaski Street East Richmond Street to Clifton Street.  Clifton Street South Pulaski Street to Cole Place.  Cole Place West Clifton Street to Richmond Street. Christopher Columbus #15  Third Avenue North South Fifth Street to Spencer Street.  South Fifth Street West Third Avenue to 315 feet north.  Spencer Street East Third Avenue to 345 feet north. Grover Cleveland M.S.  Second Avenue North Loomis Street to 199 feet east.  Loomis Street East First Avenue to Second Avenue.  First Avenue South Loomis Street to Rankin Street.  Rankin Street West First Avenue to 210 feet south. John Marshall #20  Magnolia Avenue North Beginning at a point 160 feet west of Fifth Street to 375 feet west.  Bond Street South Beginning at a point 160 feet west of Fifth Street to 375 feet west. George Washington #1  Broadway South Second Street to Third Street.  Third Street East Broadway to East Jersey Street.  East Jersey Street North Third Street to 460 feet east.  Livingston Street North Second Street to 360 feet west.  Second Street West Livingston Street to Broadway. Benjamin Franklin #13  Third Street East Ripley Place to 110 feet south.  Ripley Place South Third Street to 375 feet east. Mitchell Bldg Annex Trumbull Street South Second Street to 395 feet east.  
Private Schools and Houses of Worship 
Street Side Location Saint Genevieves Church and School  Monmouth Road West Livingston Road to Wyoming Avenue.  Wyoming Avenue South Monmouth Road to Princeton Road.  Princeton Road East Wyoming Avenue to Livingston Road.  Livingston Road North Princeton Road to Monmouth Road. Jewish Education Center  Elmora Avenue West Park Avenue to Wyoming Avenue.  Livingston Road South Elmora Avenue to 255 feet west.  Park Avenue North Elmora Avenue to 355 feet west. Trinity Pentecostal Church and School  Pennington Street North Beginning 96 feet west of Grove Street to 180 feet west. Elmora Hebrew Center  West End Avenue South Beginning 275 feet west of Grove Street to 100 feet west. St. Lukes Evangelical Lutheran Church  Colonia Road South Hillside Road to 200 feet east.  Hillside Road East Colonia Road to 135 feet south. St. Pauls Lutheran Church  Park Avenue South Galloping Hill Road to 250 feet east.  Galloping Hill Road Park Avenue to 210 feet south. Elmora Presbyterian Church  Magie Avenue South Shelley Avenue to Keats Avenue.  Shelley Avenue East Magie Avenue to 180 feet south.  Keats Avenue West Magie Avenue to 190 feet south. N.J. Conf. Assn. of Seventh Day Adventists  Baldwin Place South Palisade Road to 135 feet east.  Palisade Road East Baldwin Place to 115 feet south. St. Hedwig Church and School  Clarkson Avenue West Myrtle Street to 350 feet north.  Myrtle Street North Polonia Avenue to Clarkson Avenue.  Polonia Avenue West Myrtle Street to 250 feet north.  Myrtle Street South Beginning 135 feet east of Thomas Street to 185 feet east. St. James Church  Pearl Street North South Broad Street to 210 feet east.  South Broad Street East Pearl Street to 175 feet north. Elizabeth Congr. of Jehovahs Witnesses  Johnson Avenue West Montgomery Street to 112 feet south.  Montgomery Street South Johnson Avenue to 140 feet west. St. Nicholas Carpatho Russian Greek Catholic Church  Denton Street North South Broad Street to 210 feet east.  South Broad Street East Denton Street to 104 feet north. Serbian Eastern Orthodox Cong. of St. George of Elizabeth Church  South Broad Street East Beginning 104 feet north of Denton Street to 186 feet north. St. Mary School  South Street North South Broad Street to Liberty Street.  South Broad Street West South Street to 280 feet north.  Liberty Street South South Street to 312 feet north. St. Vladimir Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church South Street South Grier Avenue to 155 feet west.  Grier Avenue West South Street to 160 feet south. St. Vladimir School  Grier Avenue West Beginning 321 feet south of Grove Street to 180 feet south. Pentecostal Church  South Broad Street West Beginning 330 feet north of Bayway to 150 feet north. The Korean Church of Elizabeth  Bayway South Bonnett Street to South Broad Street.  South Broad Street West Bayway to Myrtle Street.  Myrtle Street North South Broad Street to Bonnett Street.  Bonnett Street East Myrtle Street to Bayway. St. Mary's Church  Washington Avenue West Beginning 130 feet north of South Street to 227 feet north.  Race Street East Beginning 135 feet north of South Street to 230 feet north. First Presbyterian Church  Broad Street West Caldwell Place to 450 feet south.  Caldwell Place South Broad Street to 380 feet west. Mission Advancement Inc.  Linden Avenue South Beginning 165 feet east of Grove Street to 135 feet east (West End Place, private street). Bender Memorial Academy  Linden Avenue South Beginning at 165 feet west of Grove Street to 200 feet west. Second Macedonian Baptist Church  Fairmount Avenue North Beginning 120 feet east of North Broad Street to 95 feet east. Temple Beth-El  North Broad Street East Clinton Place to 100 feet north.  Clinton Place North North Broad Street to 150 feet east. Church of Christ  North Avenue South Beginning 415 west of Hazard Place to 75 feet west.  Clinton Place North Beginning 415 west of Hazard Place to 106 feet west. Jewish Education Center  North Avenue North Stanton Avenue to 120 feet west.  Stanton Avenue West North Avenue to 175 feet north. Benedictine Academy  North Broad Street East Beginning 430 feet north of North Avenue to 416 feet north.  North Broad Street West Wilder Street to 545 feet south.  Wilder Street South North Broad Street to 285 feet west. St. Catherines School  North Broad Street East Beginning 550 feet north of Country Club Lane to 187 feet north. Evangel Church Assembly of God  North Broad Street West Beginning 485 feet south of DeWitt Road to 104 feet south.  Salem Avenue East Beginning 530 feet east of Dewitt Road to 100 feet south. Jewish Education Center  North Avenue North Roanoke Avenue to 165 feet east.  Roanoke Avenue East North Avenue to 225 feet north. Westminster Presbyterian Church  North Avenue South Westminster Avenue to Salem Avenue.  Salem Avenue West North Avenue to 235 feet south.  Westminster Avenue East North Avenue to 100 feet south. Immaculate Conception Church and School  Union Avenue East Prince Street to 480 feet north.  Prince Street North Union Avenue to 150 feet east.  Westminster Avenue West Beginning 230 feet north of Prince Street to 123 feet north. First Baptist Church  Union Avenue West Prince Street to 250 feet north.  Prince Street North Union Avenue to 220 feet west. Scandinavian Lutheran Church of Elizabeth  Jersey Avenue North Standish Street, to 112 feet east.  Standish Street East West Jersey Street to 150 feet north. The Christian Missionary Church  Westfield Avenue North Stiles Street to 115 feet west.  Stiles Street West Westfield Avenue to 110 feet north. True Jesus Church  Elmora Avenue East Beginning 225 feet south of Muriel Parkway to 80 feet south. Epworth Methodist Episcopal Church  Magie Avenue South Stiles Street to 165 feet west.  Stiles Street West Magie Avenue to 190 feet south. N.J. Conference of Seventh Day Adventists  Fairmount Avenue North Madison Avenue to 170 feet east.  Madison Avenue East Fairmount Avenue to 120 feet north. Blessed Sacrament Church and School  North Avenue South Madison Avenue to Monroe Avenue.  Madison Avenue East North Avenue to 330 feet south.  Monroe Avenue West North Avenue to 265 feet south. David Livingston Baptist Church  First Avenue East Sixth Street to 113 feet north.  Sixth Street North First Avenue to 1125 feet east. St. Anthony Church and School  Third Avenue East Centre Street to South Street.  Centre Street North Third Avenue to 250 feet east.  South Street South Third Avenue to 200 feet east. New Hope Memorial Church  East Jersey Street South Division Street to Miller Street.  Miller Street West East Jersey Street to 80 feet south to terminus.  Division Street East East Jersey Street to 125 feet south. St. Michael Church and School  East Jersey Street South Smith Street to 185 feet west.  Smith Street West East Jersey Street to 112 feet south.  East Jersey Street North Smith Street to Jacques Street.  Smith Street West East Jersey Street to 225 feet north.  Jacques Street East East Jersey Street to 190 feet north. New Bethel Baptist Church  East Jersey Street South Beginning 112 feet east of Smith Street to 75 feet east. German Evangelical Lutheran Church  East Jersey Street South Beginning 62 feet west of Reid Street to 220 feet west. St. Joseph Slovak Church  Division Street West Rebecca Place to East Jersey Street. Holy Temple Church  Lafayette Street North Reid Street to 135 feet west.  Reid Street West Lafayette Street to 112 feet north. Spanish Baptist Church  Route 1 and 9 East East Grand Street to Praise the Lord Plaza.  Praise the Lord Plaza South Route 1 and 9 to 80 feet east.  East Grand Street North Route 1 and 9 to 100 feet east. Advent Sabbath Church Inc.  East Grand Street North Beginning 100 feet east of Route 1 and 9 to 75 feet east. New Zion Baptist Church  Division Street West Anna Street to Flora Street.  Anna Street North Division Street to 105 feet west.  Flora Street South Division Street to 290 feet west. Our Lady of Fatima Church and School  Route 1 and 9 East Magnolia Avenue to Bond Street.  Magnolia Avenue North Route 1 and 9 to 325 feet east.  Bond Street South Route 1 and 9 to 445 feet east.  Bond Street North Beginning 75 feet east of Route 1 and 9 to 150 feet east.  Anna Street South Beginning 75 feet east of Route 1 and 9 to 175 feet east. Temple Bnai Israel  East Jersey Street North Route 1 and 9 to 112 feet west.  Route 1 and 9 West East Jersey Street to Boudinot Place.  Boudinot Place South Route 1 and 9 to 112 feet west. Hope Memorial Presbyterian Church  Emma Street North Route 1 and 9 to 112 feet west.  Route 1 and 9 West Emma Street to Olive Street.  Olive Street South Route 1 and 9 to 179 feet west. Christ Church  Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza East East Jersey Street to 230 feet south.  East Jersey Street South Martin Luther King Jr. Plaza to 245 feet east. Union Baptist Church  William. Street North Madison Avenue to 112 feet east.  Madison Avenue East William. Street to East Grand Street.  East Grand Street Madison Avenue to 205 feet east. Assembly of God Portuguese Church  Dickinson Street North Beginning 70 feet east of Jefferson Avenue to 161 feet east.  Mt. Teman African Methodist Episcopal Church  Madison Avenue West Beginning 236 feet south of East Grand Street to 165 feet south. The Central Baptist Church  East Jersey Street South Beginning 230 feet west of Madison Avenue to 150 feet west. The House of Mercy  East Grand Street South Jefferson Avenue to 145 feet east. La Iglesia Metodista Unita El Redentor  Madison Avenue East Beginning 110 feet south of Mary Street to 95 feet south. St. John Church  Broad Street East Beginning 295 feet south of East Jersey Street to 157 feet south. Second Presbyterian Church  East Jersey Street North Beginning 140 feet east of Broad Street to 88 feet east. Calvary Chapel of New Jersey  East Jersey Street North Beginning 228 feet east of Broad Street to 77 feet east. Elizabeth Cong. of Jehovah  Magnolia Avenue North Linden Street to 105 feet west.  Linden Street West Magnolia Avenue to 162 feet north. Trinity Church  North Broad Street East Chestnut Street to 168 feet north.  Chestnut Street North North Broad Street to 225 feet east. St. Patricks Church and School  Court Street North Second Street to 612 feet west.  Second Street West Court Street to Magnolia Avenue.  Magnolia Avenue South Second Street to 437 feet west. Liberty Baptist Church  Court Street North Beginning 90 feet west of New Point Road to 75 feet west. Mt. Calvary Church of God  First Street East Beginning 62 feet north of Bond Street to 100 feet north. Bethel Holy Church of the Ascension of Christ  Third Street West Beginning 112 feet north of Pine Street to 75 feet north. Sts. Peter and Paul Church and School  Ripley Place North Beginning 112 feet west of Second Street to 200 feet west.  Msgr. Kemensis Place South Beginning 100 feet west of Second Street to 275 feet west. Immaculate Heart Church  East Jersey Street North Beginning 62 feet west of Second Street to 130 feet west. Grace Church  East Jersey Street North Beginning 192 feet west of Second Street to 170 feet west. St. Adalbert Church and School  Third Street East East Jersey Street to Fulton Street.  East Jersey Street South Third Street to 212 feet east.  Fulton Street North Third Street to 212 feet east. Emmanuel Pentacostal Church  East Jersey Street North Third Street to 112 feet west. First Spanish Baptist  Third Street East Franklin Street to 112 feet north.  Franklin Street North Third Street to 87 feet east. Greystone Presbyterian Church  Florida Street East Elizabeth Avenue to 212 feet south.  Elizabeth Avenue South Florida Street to 162 feet east. Sts. Peter and Paul Byzantine Catholic Church  First Avenue South Delaware Street to 116 feet west.  Delaware Street West First Avenue to 165 feet south. Holy Rosary School and Church  Elizabeth Avenue South Beginning 262 feet east of Sixth Street to 250 feet east.  First Avenue North Beginning 264 feet east of Sixth Street to 252 feet east. Fountain of Salvation Church  Atlantic Street East Second Avenue to 62 feet north.  Second Avenue North Atlantic Street to 94 feet east. Sts. Peter and Paul Russian Orthodox Church of Elizabeth  Stiles Street North Beginning 455 feet east of Chilton Street to 100 feet east.  
(Prior code § 141-79) 
10.40.100 - No parking on school days. 
Street Side Location Pennsylvania Avenue West Beginning 107 feet north of Whitehead Place between the hours 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.  
(Ord. No. 4444, § 1, 12-23-2013; Ord. No. 4436, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
10.40.110 - Parking restrictions on trucks, buses and commercial vehicles. 
    A penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the violation of sections 10.40.060 through 10.40.100 is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 4678 , § 1, 2-23-2016) 
Chapter 10.44 - HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES 
Sections: 

10.44.010 - Application fee for permits for handicapped parking spaces. 
    There is established an application fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for permits in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7 issued to persons requesting the designation of a handicapped parking space pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 and an annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. The annual fee shall be due on the 1st day of January no sooner than one year from initial issuance date. The application fee and annual fee for a personalized handicapped parking space for veterans who have been awarded the Purple Heart during military service are exempt from the payment of the application fee and annual fee for a personalized handicapped parking space provided the applicant submits proof of the award of the Purple Heart during military service. 
(Ord. No. 4928 , § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 3715 § 1, 2005: prior code § 141-128A) 
10.44.020 - Spaces designated. 
A.  The city council of the city establishes the following handicapped parking spaces: 
Street Side Hours Location Adams Avenue East - Beginning at a point 187 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (571) Northeast - Beginning at a point 266 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (582) West - Beginning at a point 239 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (586) West - Beginning at a point 174 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 25 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (596) West - Beginning at a point 51 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (615) East - Beginning at a point 194 feet north of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (634) West - Beginning at a point 354 feet south of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (647) East - Beginning at a point 218 feet south of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (727) East - Beginning at a point 398 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (737) East - Beginning at a point 345 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 20 feet southerly thereof Adams Avenue (809) East - Beginning at a point 125 feet north of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (920) West - Beginning at a point 275 feet north of Fanny Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Adams Avenue (923) East - Beginning at a point 293 feet north of Fanny Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Adams Avenue (1030) West - Beginning at a point 184 feet south of Neck Lane and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Alina Street (1379) North - Beginning at a point 45 feet east of Stanton Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Amity Street (221) Northeast - Beginning at a point 262 feet east of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Amity Street (315) West - Beginning at a point 199 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Amity Street (325) North - Beginning at a point 186 feet East of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet East thereof Amity Street (326) South - Beginning at a point 170 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Anna Street North - From a point 240 feet east of the northeast corner of Catherine Street and Anna Street for a distance of 22 feet thereof Anna Street (1030) Northeast - Beginning at a point 207 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Anna Street (1031) Southwest - Beginning at a point 212 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1050) South - Beginning at a point 25 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1056) South - Beginning at a point 90 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1058) South - Beginning at a point 110 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1063) North - Beginning at a point 167 feet east of Jackson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof 1020 Anna Street (1020) South Beginning at a point 230 feet west of Route 1 & 9 and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1071) North - Beginning at a point 60 feet west of Jackson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Anna Street (1074) Northeast - Beginning at a point 51 feet east of Jackson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Anna Street (1139) North - Beginning at a point 134 feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Atlantic Street (11) West - Beginning at a point 134 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Atlantic Street (13) Northeast - Beginning at a point 154 feet northeast of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Atlantic Street (17) West - Beginning at a point 205 feet north of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Atlantic Street (19) West - Beginning at a point 216 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Atlantic Street (37) Northeast - Beginning at a point 111 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Atlantic Street(215) West - Beginning at a point 312 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Atlantic Street (229) West - Beginning at a point 148 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Bank Street (25) North - Beginning at a point 185 feet west of New Point Road and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bellevue Street (45) East - Beginning at a point 228 feet south of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Bellevue Street (45) Northeast - Beginning at a point 154 feet northeast of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Bellevue Street (172) West - Beginning 141 feet south of Pennington Street for a distance of 21 feet thereof Bond Street (212) South - Beginning at a point 159 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (213) North - Beginning at a point 165 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (217) North - Beginning at a point 216 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (331) North - Beginning at a point 388 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (529) North - Beginning at a point 434 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Bond Street (839) Northeast - Beginning at a point 464 feet from Division Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Bond Street (851) North - Beginning at a point 414 feet east of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Bond Street (876) South - Beginning at a point 62 feet east of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Bond Street (919) North - Beginning at a point 235 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (1065) North - Beginning at a point 198 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Bond Street (1082) South - Beginning at a point 170 feet east of Jackson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boudinot Place (1030) South - Beginning at a point 119 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boyle Place (9) Southeast - Beginning at a point 106 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boyle Place (10) North - Beginning at a point 112 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boyle Place (101/2) North - Beginning at a point 134 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boyle Place (15) South - Beginning at a point 190 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Boyle Street (9) Southeast - Beginning at a point 106 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Broad Street East - Beginning at a point 211 feet south of the southwest curbline of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Broad Street West - Beginning at a point 201 feet south of the southwest curbline of West Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Broadway (112) South - Beginning at a point 148 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Broadway (131) North - Beginning at a point 415 feet east of Second Street a handicapped space shall be created on the center median in the area of angle parking directly in front of 131 Broadway thereof Broadway (140) South - Beginning at a point 340 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Broadway (160) South - Beginning at a point 103 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Burnett Street (128) South - Beginning at a point 278 feet east of South Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Burnett Street (130) East - Beginning at a point 250 feet north of South Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Byron Avenue East - Beginning at a point 86 feet south of Magie Avenue and continuing 382 feet northerly thereof Canton Street (802) East - Beginning at a point 314 feet south of Berwick Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Canton Street (808) East - Beginning at a point 254 feet north of Acme Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Catherine Street (25) East - Beginning at a point 335 feet north of Elizabeth Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Catherine Street (27) East - Beginning at a point 329 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Catherine Street (35) East - Beginning at a point 230 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Catherine Street (36) Southwest - Beginning at a point 210 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Catherine Street (152) Northwest - Beginning at a point 152 feet north of Lafayette Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Catherine Street (159) East - Beginning at a point 88 feet south of William Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Catherine Street (205) North - Beginning at a point 61 feet north of East Grand Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Catherine Street (447) East - Beginning at a point 86 feet north of Anna Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Catherine Street (450) West - Beginning at a point 63 feet south of Flora Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Catherine Street (483) (1-F) East - Beginning at a point 42 feet north of Emma Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Catherine Street (485) East - Beginning at a point 65 feet north of Emma Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Cedar Avenue (20) East - Beginning at a point 20 feet north of Hayes Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Cedar Avenue (32) East - Beginning at a point 179 feet north of South Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Cedar Avenue (713) West - Beginning at a point 119 feet north of Applegate Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Cedar Street (181/2) South - Beginning at a point 79 feet east of Hayes Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Center Street (211) Northeast - Beginning at a point 141 feet east of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Center Street (313) Southwest - Beginning at a point 160 feet from Third Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Centre Street (8) East - Beginning at a point 68 feet south of the intersection of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing southerly for a distance of 24 feet Centre Street (309) Southwest - Beginning at a point 113 feet south of Third Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Centre Street (315) Northwest - Beginning at a point 187 feet northwest of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet thereof Centre Street (321) North - Beginning at a point 240 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Cherry Street North - Beginning at a point 32 feet east of Elm Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Cherry Street (53) (First Floor) East - Beginning at a point 92 feet north of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Cherry Street (325) East - Beginning at a point 199 feet south of Sayre Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Cherry Street (353) East - Beginning at a point 129 feet north of Sayre Street and continuing for a distance of 25 feet northerly thereof Cherry Street (364) West - Beginning at a point 178 feet south of Sayre Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Chilton Street South - Beginning 250 feet east of North Avenue continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Chilton Street (20) West - Beginning at a point 122 feet south of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Chilton Street (21) East - Beginning at a point 304 feet north of Rahway Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Chilton Street (155) South - Beginning at a point 58 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Christine Street (13) West - Beginning at a point 17 feet south of First Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Christine Street (13) West - Beginning at a point 168 feet south of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Christine Street (14) East - Beginning at a point 174 feet south of First Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Christine Street (16) South - Beginning at a point 234 feet East of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Christine Street (20) East - Beginning at a point 230 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Christine Street (20) (First Floor) Northwest - Beginning at a point 175.5 feet west of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Christine Street (24) East - Beginning at a point 137 feet one inch north of Second Avenue and continuing 15 feet two inches northerly thereof Christine Street (25) West 
(curbline of Christian Street) - Beginning at a point 70 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Christine Street (212) East - Beginning at a point 164 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Christine Street (228) West - Beginning at a point 194 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Christine Street (232) East - Beginning at a point 126 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Christine Street (315) Northeast - Beginning at a point 192 feet northeast of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet thereof Christine Street (316) East - Beginning at a point 212 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Clark Place (131) North - Beginning at a point 381 feet east of First Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (133) North - Beginning at a point 366 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (139) North - Beginning at a point 298 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (149) North - Beginning at a point 186 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (208) South - Beginning at a point 110 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (212) South - Beginning at a point 178 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (216) South - Beginning at a point 216 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (225) North - Beginning at a point 318 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (227) North - Beginning at a point 340 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (228) South - Beginning at a point 354 feet west of Clark Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Clark Place (239) (2F) North - Beginning at a point 320 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (240) South - Beginning at a point 294 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (241) North - Beginning at a point 297 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Clark Place (304) South - Beginning at a point 58 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clark Place (320) South - Beginning at a point 248 feet west of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clarkson Avenue West - Beginning at a point 41 feet north of Bayway Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Clarkson Avenue (676) East - Beginning at a point 66 feet south of Richmond Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Clinton Place (1242) South - Beginning at a point 86 feet west of Newark Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Clover Street (67) East - Beginning at a point 112 feet north of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Clover Street (68) West - Beginning at a point 115 feet south of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Clover Street (74) East 
(curbline of Garden 
Street) - Beginning at a point 51 feet east of Burnham Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Concord Place (1452) South - Beginning at a point 130 feet east of north Broad Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Court Street (71A) North - Beginning at a point 48 feet west of Watersedge Lane and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (306) Southwest - Beginning at a point 84 feet west from Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (308) Southwest - Beginning at a point 110 feet from Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (321) North - Beginning at a point 262 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (324) South - Beginning at a point 209 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (326) South - Beginning at a point 336 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Court Street (520) South - Beginning at a point 130 feet west of New Point Road and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Court Street (551) North - Beginning at a point 160 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Court Street (553) North - Beginning at a point 140 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Court Street (632) South - Beginning at a point 382 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Court Street (650) South - Beginning at a point 166 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Court Street (652) South - Beginning at a point 137 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Cross Avenue (1012) West - Beginning at a point 25 feet south of Garfield Place and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Cross Avenue (1018) North 
(curbline of Garfield Place) - Beginning at a point 40 feet west of Cross Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Cross Street (851) North - Beginning at a point 261 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof DeHart Place East - Beginning at a point along the east curbline of DeHart Place, 74 feet north of Edgar Place, and continuing for a distance of 22 feet northerly thereof Dehart Place (21) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet South of Second Vine Street and continuing 22 feet South thereof DeHart Place (23) East - Beginning at a point 130 feet south of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof DeHart Place (28) West - Beginning at a point 72 feet south of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof DeHart Place (32) East 
(curbline of Vine 
Street) - Beginning at a point 51 feet south of DeHart Place and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof DeHart Place (37) East - Beginning at a point 72 feet north of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof DeHart Place (61) Northeast - Beginning at a point 35 feet northeast of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof DeHart Place (147) East - Beginning at a point 215 feet south of Grand Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof DeHart Place (9581/2) West - Beginning at a point 107 feet south of New York Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof DeHart Place (960) South - Beginning at a point 88 feet east of New York Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Dehart Place (962) South - Beginning at a point 64 feet east of New York Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Dehart Place (9641/2) South - Beginning at a point 25 feet east of New York Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Delaware Street (20) East - Beginning at a point 38 feet north of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet north thereof Delaware Street (35) West - Beginning at a point 70 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Delaware Street (37) South - Beginning at a point 137 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Delaware Street (40) East - Beginning at a point 106 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Delaware Street (421/2) East - Beginning at a point 200 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Delaware Street (46) East - Beginning at a point 241 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Delaware Street (48) East - Beginning at a point 237 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Delaware Street (206) East - Beginning at a point 88 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Delaware Street (219) West - Beginning at a point 270 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Delaware Street (2211/2) West - Beginning 228 feet north of Third Avenue for a distance of 18 feet thereof Delaware Street (227) West - Beginning at a point 111 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Devine Avenue (643) North - Beginning at a point 72 feet east of Johnson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Devine Avenue (645) North 
(curbline of Devine Street) - Beginning at a point 36 feet east of Johnson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Dewey Place (1078) West - Beginning at a point 278 feet south of Rahway Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Dewitt Road (1) North - Beginning at a point 122 feet west of North Broad Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Dickenson Street (1120) South - Beginning at a point 206 feet east of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Division Street (86) Northeast - Beginning at a point 311 feet from New Point Road and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Doyle Street (425) East - Beginning at a point 170 feet north of Fifth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Grand Street North - Beginning at a point 85 feet east of the east curbline of Commerce Place and continuing for a distance of 66 feet easterly thereof East Grand Street (1006) South - Beginning 97 feet west of Spring Street and continuing 29 feet easterly thereof East Grand Street (1026) South - Beginning at a point 183 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Grand Street (1027) Northeast - Beginning at a point 173.9 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (62) South - Beginning at a distance of 80 feet west of Front Street and continuing 21 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (75) North - Beginning at a point 204 feet east of First Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (78) South - Beginning at a point 127 feet east of Front Street and continuing 33 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (84) South - Beginning at a point 70 feet east of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (79) North - Beginning at a point 165 feet east of First Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (125) North - Beginning at a point 313 feet west of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (134) (Apt. 1) South - Beginning at a point 348 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (137) North - Beginning at a point 340 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (162) East - Beginning at a point 39 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof East Jersey Street (234) South - Beginning at a point 367 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (238) South - Beginning at a point 238 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (244) South - Beginning at a point 238 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (302) East - Beginning at a point 75 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (302) South - Beginning at a point 40 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (316) Southwest - Beginning at a point 208 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (317) North - Beginning at a point 238 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (401) West 
(curbline of Fourth 
Street) - Beginning at a point 50 feet north of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof East Jersey Street (401) (3 rd Floor) West 
(curbline of Fourth Street) - Beginning at a point 72 feet north of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof East Jersey Street (406) South - Beginning at a point 83 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (412) (#3) South - Beginning at a point 158 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (413) North - Beginning at a point 136 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (416) (Apt. 302) South - Beginning at a point 212 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (419) North - Beginning at a point 238 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (420) Southwest - Beginning at a point 246 feet from Fourth Street beginning at a point 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (429) North - Beginning at a point 380 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (452) South - Beginning at a point 132 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (453) North - Beginning at a point 141 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (550) Southwest - Beginning at a point 184 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (559) North - Beginning at a point 63 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (614) South 
(curbline of Marshall Street) - Beginning at a point 165 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (614) South 
(curbline of Marshall Street) - Beginning at a point 189 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (711) North - Beginning at a point 133 feet west of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (844) Southeast - Beginning at a point 262 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (846) South - Beginning at a point 234 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (850) South - Beginning at a point 190 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (8841/2) South - Beginning at a point 44 feet east of Jacques Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof East Jersey Street (1026) South - Beginning at a point 46 feet west of Prospect Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof East Jersey Street (1143) North - Beginning at a point 98 feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Eaton Street South - From a point 148 feet west of Dayton Street to a point 25 feet westerly thereof Edgewood Road (985) North - Beginning at a point 94 feet east of Shelley Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Elizabeth Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 
5:00 p.m. 
Monday 
through 
Friday Beginning at a point 50 feet east of Center Street, continuing for a distance of 20 feet easterly thereof Elizabeth Avenue (921) North - Beginning at a point 115 feet east of Reid Street and continuing 44 feet easterly thereof Elm Street North - On the north curbline of Elm Street starting 173 feet east of Cherry Street and continuing 20 feet easterly thereof Elm Street (152) South - Beginning at a point 398 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Elm Street (156) South - Beginning at a point 339 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Elm Street (159) West - Beginning at a point 209 feet north of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Elm Street (159) North - Beginning at a point 366 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Elm Street (183) North - Beginning at a point 69 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Elmora Avenue East - Beginning at a point 25 feet north of the northeast curbline of West Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Elmora Avenue West - Beginning at a point 25 feet south of the southwest curbline of Pennington Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Elmora Avenue (439) East 
(Northbound) - Beginning at a point 35 feet north of the northerly curbline of Jersey Avenue and extending to a point 22 feet northerly therefrom Elmora Avenue (439) West 
(Southbound) - Beginning at a point 35 feet south of the southerly curbline of Pennington Street and extending to a point 22 feet southerly therefrom Elmora Avenue (1116) West (Southbound) - Beginning at a point 300 feet south of the southerly curbline of Rahway Avenue and extending to a point 22 feet southerly therefrom Elmwood Place (18) South - Beginning at a point 216 feet west of Union Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Ely Street (122) East - Beginning at a point 60 feet north of Eugenia Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Ely Street (126) Northeast - Beginning at a point 20 feet north of Eugenia Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Emma Street (935) Northeast - Beginning at a point 307.5 feet east of Spring Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Emma Street (1014) (2 nd Floor) South - Beginning at a point 173 feet east of Route 1 & 9 and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Emma Street (1017) (Apt. 1) North - Beginning at a point 191 feet west of Route 1 & 9 South and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Emma Street (1019) North - Beginning at a point 215 feet west of Spring Street (South) and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Emma Street (1024) South - Beginning at a point 310 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Erico Avenue (448) East - Beginning at a point 385 feet north of South Elmora and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Erico Avenue (502) East - Beginning at a point 251 feet north of South Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Erie Street (10) East - Beginning at a point 110 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Erie Street (10) Northeast - Beginning at a point 111 feet northeast of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Erie Street (16) Southeast - Beginning at a point 193 feet south of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Erie Street (17) West - Beginning at a point 190 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Erie Street (21) West - Beginning at a point 75 feet north of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Erie Street (201) North - Beginning at a point 35 feet west of Erie Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Erie Street (212) East - Beginning at a point 161 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Erie Street (229) North - Beginning at a point 137 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Eugenia Place (738) South - Beginning at a point 176 feet west of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fairbanks Street (746) (Apt. 2R) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet south of Myrtle Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Fairmount Avenue (1145) Northwest - Beginning at a point 255 feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fanny Street (1019) East 
(curbline of Van 
Buren Avenue) - Beginning at a point 54 feet north of Fanny Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fanny Street (1054) South - Beginning at a point 76 feet east of Adams Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fay Avenue (459) North - Beginning at a point 93 feet west of Kerlyn Court and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fay Avenue (469) East - Beginning at a point 138 feet north of South Elmora and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fay Avenue (475) North - Beginning, at a point 84 feet west of South Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fay Avenue (722) South - Beginning at a point 312 feet east of South Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fay Avenue (728) East - Beginning at a point 198 feet north of Seib Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fifth Street (28) West - Beginning at a point 78 feet south of Marshall Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Fifth Street (50) West - Beginning at a point 63 feet south of Franklin Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof First Avenue (402) West 
(curbline of Amity 
Street) - Beginning at a point 52 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof First Avenue (406) South - Beginning at a point 85 feet west of Atlantic Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof First Avenue (413) South - Beginning at a point 163 feet east of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (417) North - Beginning at a point 65 feet east of Rankin Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (425)* (First Floor) North - Beginning at a point 190 feet east of Loomis Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof *  Due to prohibited parking in front of applicant's address, signs can be placed in front of 427 First Avenue. First Avenue (439) North - Beginning at a point 36 feet east of Loomis Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (455) North - Beginning at a point 116 feet east of South Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (512) Southeast - Beginning at a point 58 feet east of Spencer Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (566) (No. 1) South - Beginning at a point 94 feet west of Palmer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof First Avenue (602) West 
(curbline of Amity 
Street) - Beginning at a point 76 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof First Avenue (615) North - Beginning at a point 36 feet west of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof First Avenue (617) North - Beginning at a point 65 feet East of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet East thereof; First Avenue (635) North - Beginning at a point 413 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof First Avenue (647) North - Beginning at a point 196 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Avenue (650) Southwest - Beginning at a point 130 feet from Christine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof First Street (125) East - Beginning at a point 63 feet north of Livingston Street and continuing 44 feet northerly thereof First Street (425) North 
(curbline of First 
Avenue) - Beginning at a point 190 feet east of Loomis Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof First Street (621) South 
(curbline of First 
Avenue) - Beginning at a point 83 feet east of John Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Flora Street North - From a point 135 feet west of Routes 1 and 9 and continuing for a distance of 22 feet westerly thereof Flora Street (907) North - Beginning at a point 88 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Flora Street (935) North - Beginning at a point 435 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Flora Street (1023) North - Beginning at a point 314 feet west of Routes 1 and 9 south and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Flora Street (1035) North - Beginning at a point 165 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Florida Street (11) West - Beginning at a point 141 feet south of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (15) West - Beginning at a point 203 feet south of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (23) West - Beginning at a point 114 feet north of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Florida Street (30) East - Beginning at a point 37 feet north of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Florida Street (40) East - Beginning at a point 37 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (52) East - Beginning at a point 192 feet south of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (55) West - Beginning at a point 264 feet east of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Florida Street (56) East - Beginning at a point 263 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Florida Street (64) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Florida Street (66) East - Beginning at a point 134 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Florida Street (205) West - Beginning at a point 64 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (211) West - Beginning at a point 141 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Florida Street (229) Northwest - Beginning at a point 122 feet from Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fourth Avenue (467) South - Beginning at a point 86 feet west of Loomis Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (504) South - Beginning at a point 76 feet west of South Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (506) South - Beginning at a point 86 feet west of South Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (531) South - Beginning at a point 35 feet east of Niles Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (551) North - Beginning at a point 62 feet east of Palmer Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fourth Avenue (561) West 
(curbline of Palmer 
Street) - Beginning at a point 25 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Fourth Avenue (565) North - Beginning at a point 50 feet west of Palmer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (575) North - Beginning at a point 25 feet east of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (612) South - Beginning at a point 164 feet west of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (6141/2) South - Beginning at a point 78 feet east of John Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (620) South - Beginning at a point 25 feet east of John Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (622) North - Beginning at a point 40 feet west of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (628) South - Beginning at a point 57 feet west of John Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (629) Northeast - Beginning at a point 83 feet west of John Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (632) South - Beginning at a point 27 feet east of Christine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fourth Avenue (636) North - Beginning at a point 187 feet west of John Street and continuing 17 feet westerly thereof Fourth Avenue (647) Northwest - Beginning at a point 78 feet west of Christine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street North - Beginning at a point 255 feet east of Second Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (113) North - Beginning at a point 164 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (114) South - Beginning at a point 192 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (119) North - Beginning at a point 236 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (120) North - Beginning at a point 264 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (121) North - Beginning at a point 263 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (123) North - Beginning at a point 293 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (130) South - Beginning at a point 388 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (155) North - Beginning at a point 141 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (1571/2) North - Beginning at a point 108 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (1571/2) Northeast - Beginning at a point 94.9 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (233) North - Beginning at a point 417 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (250) South - Beginning at a point 162 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (318) South - Beginning at a point 244 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (322) South - Beginning at a point 290 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (412) South - Beginning at a point 166 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (413) South - Beginning at a point 162 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (430) North - Beginning at a point 460 feet east of Fifth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (454) South - Beginning at a point 125 feet East of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet East thereof Franklin Street (459) North - Beginning at a point 63 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (501) West - Beginning at a point 112 feet north of Franklin Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Franklin Street (507) North - Beginning at a point 88 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (508) South - Beginning at a point 108 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (519) North - Beginning at a point 238 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (520) South - Beginning at a point 263 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (524) South - Beginning at a point 315 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (525) North - Beginning at a point 495 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (537) North - Beginning at a point 339 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (539) North - Beginning at a point 310 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (542) South - Beginning at a point 257 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (545) North - Beginning at a point 240 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (608) Southwest - Beginning at a point 99 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (610) South - Beginning at a point 137 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (613) North - Beginning at a point 162 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (621) North - Beginning at a point 185 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (623) North - Beginning at a point 292 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Franklin Street (627) North - Beginning at a point 463 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (633) North - Beginning at a point 378 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Franklin Street (636) South - Beginning at a point 337 feet west of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fremont Place (1370) #2 South - Beginning at a point 130 feet east of Stanton Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (108) South - Beginning at a point 94 feet west of First Street and continuing 25 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (206) South - Beginning at a point 87 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (224) South - Beginning at a point 314 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (224) South - Beginning at a point 311 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (226) South - Beginning at a point 339 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (226) South - Beginning at a point 460 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (243) North - Beginning at a point 262 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (246) South - Beginning at a point 211 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (250) South - Beginning at a point 162 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (252) South - Beginning at a point 137 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (256) South - Beginning at a point 90 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (312) South - Beginning at a point 163 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (316) South - Beginning at a point 212 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (317) North - Beginning at a point of 216.5 feet west of Third Street and continuing 20 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (324) South - Beginning at a point 321 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (334) South - Beginning at a point 437 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (451) North - Beginning at a point 165 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (455) North - Beginning at a point 111 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (457) North - Beginning at a point 89 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (518) Northeast - Beginning at a point 211 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (518) Northeast - Beginning at a point 221 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (521) North - Beginning at a point 267 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (523) North - Beginning at a point 289 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (524) South - Beginning at a point 299 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (525) North - Beginning at a point 289 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (532) South - Beginning at a point 381 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (540) South - Beginning at a point 288 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (542) South - Beginning at a point 261 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (555) North - Beginning at a point 112 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Fulton Street (606) South - Beginning at a point 70 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (607) North - Beginning at a point 110 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Fulton Street (629) North - Starting at a point 233 feet east of New Point Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (806) South - Beginning at a point 92 feet west of Grier Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Garden Street (820) East - Beginning at a point 267 feet south of Grier Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Garden Street (830) South - Beginning at a point 430 feet east of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (835) Northwest - Beginning at a point 416.5 feet south of Grier Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Garden Street (839) Northeast - Beginning at a point 303 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (839) North - Beginning at a point 317 feet east of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (841) Southeast - Beginning at a point 292 feet southeast of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (843) North - Beginning at a point 271 feet east of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Garden Street (893) North - Beginning at a point 317 feet east of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Geneva Street (20) East - Beginning at a point 161 feet north of Merritt Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Geneva Street (59) West - Beginning at a point 212 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Geneva Street (200) South 
(curbline of Second 
Avenue) - Beginning at a point 25 feet east of Geneva Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Geneva Street (204) Southeast - Beginning at a point 60 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Geneva Street (208) Northwest - Beginning at a point 111.1 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Geneva Street (216) Southeast - Beginning at a point 206 feet from Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Geneva Street (54) Southeast - Beginning at a point 151 feet from Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Glenwood Road (176) West - Beginning at a point 561 feet north of Edgewood Road and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Green Street (529) South - Beginning at a point 368 feet east of Garden Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Grier Avenue (309) Southwest - Beginning at a point 112 feet south of South Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Grier Avenue (517) East - Beginning at a point 125 feet south of Route 1 and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Grier Avenue (538) North - Beginning at a point 66 feet east of U.S. Route 1 & 9 and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Grier Avenue (540) North - Beginning at a point 82 feet west of North 1 and 9 North and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Grier Avenue (548) East - Beginning at a point 163 feet north of Summer Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Grier Avenue (556) North - Beginning at a point 59 feet west of Summer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Grier Avenue (620) East - Beginning at a point 264 feet north of Bayway Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Grier Avenue (631) North - Beginning at a point 93 feet east of Bayway and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Grove Street North - Beginning at a point 58 feet east of Rahway Avenue and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Grove Street South - Beginning at a point 158 feet east of South Broad Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Grove Street (23) Southeast - Beginning at a point 100 feet south of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Grove Street (23) East - Beginning at a point 110 feet south of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Grove Street (40) West - Beginning at a point 34 feet north of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet north thereof Grove Street (76) Northwest - Beginning at a point 191 feet north of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Grove Street (836) South - Beginning at a point 59 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Grove Street (912) South - Beginning at a point 116 feet west of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Grove Street (918) Southwest - Beginning at a point 164 feet from Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Grove Street (952) South - Beginning at a point 147 feet east of New York Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Grove Street (964) West 
(curbline of New York 
Avenue) - Beginning at a point 25 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Hamilton Street (1375) North - Beginning at a point 129 feet east of Stanton Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Hayes Avenue (1) East - Beginning at a point 35 feet north of Cedar Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Hayes Avenue (24) South - Beginning at a point 134 feet East of Rahway Avenue and continuing 22 feet East thereof Henry Street (465) East - Beginning at a point 64 feet north of Flora Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Henry Street (469) East - Beginning at a point 116 feet north of Flora Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Henry Street (1030) South 
(curbline of Emma 
Street*) - Beginning at a point 50 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof *  Signs are to be placed on Emma Street side 50 feet west of Henry Street due to prohibited parking in front of applicant's residence. High Street (21) Northwest - Beginning at a point 162 feet from Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof High Street (211) West - Beginning at a point 120 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof High Street (314) East - Beginning at a point 190 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Hillside Road (72) West - Beginning at a point 238 feet north of Baldwin Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Inslee Place North - Beginning at a point 256 feet east of Third Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (115) North - Beginning at a point 184 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Inslee Place (125) North - Beginning at a point 325 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Inslee Place (132) South - Beginning at a point 420 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Inslee Place (142) South - Beginning at a point 262 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (147) North - Beginning at a point 212 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (148) South - Beginning at a point 187 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (149) 
Apartment 1 North - Beginning at a point 190 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (222) South - Beginning at a point 289 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Inslee Place (252) South - Beginning at a point 133 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Inslee Place (254) South - Beginning at a point 122 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Jackson Avenue (744) West - Beginning at a point 237 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jackson Avenue (942) West - Beginning at a point 285 feet south of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jackson Avenue (950) West - Beginning at a point 161 feet south of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jacques Street (42) West - Beginning at a point 219 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jaques Street (43) East - Beginning at a point 196 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jacques Street (153) North 
(curbline of Lafayette 
Street) - Beginning at a point 56 feet east of Jacques Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Jacques Street (173) East - Beginning at a point 164 feet south of Livingston Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jacques Street (174) East - Beginning at a point 174 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (501) Northeast - Beginning at a point 105 feet northeast of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Jefferson Avenue (564) West - Beginning at a point 211 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (564) West - Beginning at a point 303 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (569) East - Beginning at a point 39 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (642) West - Beginning at a point 218 feet north of Sailer Court and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (643) East - Beginning at a point 170 feet north of Sailer Court and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (743) East - Beginning at a point 290 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (754) East - Beginning at a point 80 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (755) East - Beginning at a point 142 feet south of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Jefferson Avenue (914) West - Beginning at a point 167 feet north of Fanny Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jersey Avenue (351) West 
(curbline of Monroe Avenue) - Beginning at a point 93 feet north of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Jersey Avenue (906) South - Beginning at a point 91 feet west of Standish Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof John Street East - Beginning at a point 246 feet south of First Avenue, and continuing southerly for a distance of 22 feet thereof John Street (23) West - Beginning at a point 170 feet north of the intersection of Second Avenue and continuing northerly for a distance of 22 feet thereof John Street (221) West - Beginning at a point 161 feet south of Second Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof John Street (231) West - Beginning at a point 143 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof John Street (320) East - Beginning at a point 261 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof John Street (324) East - Beginning at a point 215 feet North of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof John Street (334) South - Beginning at a point 70 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof John Street (335) West - Beginning at a point 90 feet south of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof John Street (337) West - Beginning at a point 56 feet North of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Julia Street (1020) South - Beginning at a point 260 feet west of Spring Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Keats Avenue (234) West - Beginning at a point 323 feet south of Magie Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Kenneth Avenue (928) South - Beginning at a point 238 feet west of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Kerlyn Court (30) Northeast - Beginning at a point 120.7 feet north of South Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Kilsyth Road (1009) East - Beginning at a point 105 feet north of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Kilsyth Road (1027) East - Beginning at a point 354 feet north of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Kilsyth Road (1057) East - Beginning at a point 108 feet south of Virginia Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Lafayette Street (954) South - Beginning at a point 134 feet east of Spring Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Lafayette Street (957) North - Beginning at a point 122 feet east of Spring Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Lafayette Street (959) North - Beginning at a point 95 feet east of Jacques Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Lafayette Street (1047) North - Beginning at a point 63 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Lafayette Street (1051) North - Beginning at a point 152 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Lafayette Street (1052) South - Beginning at a point 116 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Laura Street (1016) South - Beginning at a point of 212 feet west of Spring Street and continuing 23 feet westerly thereof Lexington Place (1422) South - Beginning at a point 226 feet west of Stanton Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Liberty Street (111) West - Beginning at a point 125 feet south of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Liberty Street (111) West - Beginning at a point 129 feet south of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Lidgerwood Avenue (451-A) Southwest - Beginning at a point 418 feet from Stewart Place and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Linden Avenue (530) South - Beginning at a point 227 feet east of Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Livingston Street (138) South - Beginning at a point 400 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (161) North - Beginning at a point 110 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Livingston Street (312) Southwest - Beginning at a point 158 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (324) 
(Apartment 2) South - Beginning at a point 313 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (329) North - Beginning at a point 361 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (331) North - Beginning at a point 386 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (401) North - Beginning at a point 33 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (408) South - Beginning at a point 118 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (410) South - Beginning at a point 140 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (417) North - Beginning at a point 217 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (429) North - Beginning at a point 362 feet west of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Livingston Street (441-B) North - Beginning at a point 287 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Livingston Street (458) South - Beginning at a point 60 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Livingston Street (522) (Apt. #2) South - Beginning at a point 291 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (522) South - Beginning at a point 293 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (527) North - Beginning at a point 340 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Livingston Street (842) West 
(curbline of Lafayette Street) - Beginning at a point 35 feet south of Livingston Street and continuing for 44 feet southerly thereof Livingston Street (852) South - Beginning at a point 208 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Loomis Street (309) West - Beginning at a point 150 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Loomis Street (313) West - Beginning at a point 182 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Loomis Street (314) East - Beginning at a point 189 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Loomis Street (322) East - Beginning at a distance of 283 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Loomis Street (324) East - Beginning at a point 194 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Loomis Street (326) East - Beginning at a point 175 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Loomis Street (328) East - Beginning at a point 140 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Loomis Street (331) West - Beginning at a point 42 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Loomis Street (338) South - Beginning at a point 140 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet east thereof Loomis Street (431) West - Beginning at a point 123 feet north of Fifth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Louisa Street (1100) South - Beginning at a point 30 feet west of Madison Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Lowden Street (8) West - Beginning at a point 246 feet south of Sayre Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Lowden Street (12) West - Beginning at point 197 feet north of Westfield Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Lowden Street (18) West - Beginning at a point 163 feet south of Westfield Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Lowden Street (20) West - Beginning at a point 89 feet north of Westfield Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Lyon Place (19) East - Beginning at a point 253 feet north of Rahway Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Lyon Place (27) East - Beginning at a point 256 feet south of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Mack Building (on South Park Street and First Street) North 
(curbline of South 
Park Street) - Beginning at a point 50 feet east of First Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Madison Avenue East - Beginning at a point 96 feet south of Virginia Street and continuing for a distance of 25 feet southerly thereof Madison Avenue East - Beginning at a point 121 feet south of North Avenue and continuing for 22 feet southerly thereof Madison Avenue East - Beginning at a point 143 feet south of North Avenue and continuing for 22 feet southerly thereof Madison Avenue (461) East - Beginning at a point 228 feet north of the intersection of Anna Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet northerly thereof Madison Avenue (550) Northeast - Beginning at a point 35 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Madison Avenue (659) East - Beginning at a point 215 feet south of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Madison Avenue (663) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet south of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Madison Avenue (912) West - Beginning at a point 157 feet North of Fanny Street and continuing 22 feet North thereof Madison Avenue (1048) West - Beginning at a point 190 feet south of Virginia Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Magie Avenue (537) North - Beginning at a point 100 feet west of Lincoln Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (116) South - Beginning at a point 217 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (234) South - Beginning at a point 489 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (239) North - Beginning at a point 314 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Magnolia Avenue (250) South - Beginning at a point 160 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Magnolia Avenue (251) North - Beginning at a point 164 feet East of Third Street and continuing 22 feet East thereof Magnolia Avenue (305) North - Beginning at a point 65 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (307) North - Beginning at a point 90 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (321) Northwest - Beginning at a point 258 west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (534) North - Beginning at a point 446 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (605) North - Beginning at a point 65 feet West of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet West thereof Magnolia Avenue (612) South - Beginning at a point 171 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (627) East - Beginning at a point 377 feet south of Trumbull Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (636) West - Beginning at a point 215 feet south of Trumbull Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (658) Southeast - Beginning at a point 65 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Magnolia Avenue (869) Northeast - Beginning at a point 157.4 feet east of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Magnolia Avenue (915) Northwest - Beginning at a point 184.8 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Magnolia Avenue (1081) North - Beginning at a point 220 feet east of Jackson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Magnolia Avenue (1113) South - Beginning at a point 137 feet west of Madison Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Maple Avenue South - Beginning at a point 398 feet west of Route 1 and continuing for a distance of 22 feet westerly thereof Maple Avenue (413) West - Beginning at a point 160 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Maple Avenue (435) West - Beginning at a point 436 feet South of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Maple Avenue (455) South - Beginning at a point 110 feet west of Garden Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Maple Avenue (511) South - Beginning at a point 45 feet east of Route 1 and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Maple Avenue (541) West - Beginning at a point 382 feet north of Summer Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Maple Avenue (551) South - Beginning at a point 274 feet west of Summer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Maple Avenue (551) West - Beginning at a point 233 feet north of Summer Street continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Maple Avenue (651) West - Beginning at a point 451 feet north of Carteret Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet northerly thereof Marshall Street North - Beginning at a point 297 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street North - Beginning at a point 63 feet east of 5th Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (72) South - Beginning at a point 300 feet west of Front Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (76) South - Beginning at a distance of 185 feet east of First Street and continuing 24 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (108) South - Beginning at a point 117 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (114) South - Beginning at a point 189 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (126) South - Beginning at a point 334 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (130) South - Beginning at a point 382 feet West of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (141) North - Beginning at a point 288 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (145) North - Beginning at a point 237 feet east of Second Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (145) North - Beginning at a point 235 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (152) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (218) South - Beginning at a point 222 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (219) North - Beginning at a point 241 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (222) South - Beginning at a point 283 1/2 feet west of Second Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet thereof Marshall Street (237) North - Beginning at a point 344 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (238) South - Beginning at a point 307 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (247) South - Beginning at a point 214 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (308) South - Beginning at a point 111 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (336) South - Beginning at a point 344 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (429) North - Beginning at a point 265 feet west of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (432) South - Beginning at a point 382 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (443) Northeast - Beginning at a point 230 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (451) North - Beginning at a point 166 feet north of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Marshall Street (455) North - Beginning at a point 110 feet east of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (509) North - Beginning at a point 114 feet north of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Marshall Street (510) South - Beginning at a point 138 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (510) South - Beginning at a point 138 feet west of South Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (520) Southwest - Beginning at a point 262 feet southwest of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Marshall Street (522) 
(Second Floor) South - Beginning at a point 288 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (523) North - Beginning at a point 297 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (524) South - Beginning at a point 329 feet west of Fifth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (533) North - Beginning at a point 382 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (552) South - Beginning at a point 140 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (556) South - Beginning at a point 88 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (557) North - Beginning at a point 87 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (608) South - Beginning at a point 114 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (612) South - Beginning at a point 162 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (614) South - Beginning at a point 189 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (625) North - Beginning at a point 311 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Marshall Street (629) North - Beginning at a point 456 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Marshall Street (638) South - Beginning at a point 312 feet east of Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Martin Street (829) North - Beginning at a point 348 feet west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Martin Street (848) South - Beginning at a point 207 feet east of Bank Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Martin Street (850) South - Beginning at a point 234 feet east of Jefferson Avenue, and continuing 22 feet east thereof Martin Street (852) South - Beginning at a point 216 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Martin Street (855) North - Beginning at a point 161 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Mary Street (1133) Northwest - Beginning at a point 35 feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Mary Street (1146) South - Beginning at a point 230 feet west of Jefferson Avenue, and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof McKinley Street (715) West - Beginning at a point 193 feet south of Bayway and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof McKinley Street (722) East - Beginning at a point 288 feet south of Bayway Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof McLain Street (917) North - Beginning at a point 191 feet west of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof McLain Street (923) North - Beginning at a point 139 feet east of Rosehill Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Meadow Street Southeast - Beginning at a point 90 feet east of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Meadow Street (619) East - Beginning at a point 283 feet north of Fairmont Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Meredith Avenue (933) North - Beginning at a point 239 feet east of Edgar Road and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Meredith Avenue (940) South - Beginning at a point 271 feet east of Lidgerwood Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Meredith Avenue (948) South - Beginning at a point 178 feet east of Lidgerwood Avenue and continuing 19 feet easterly thereof Monroe Avenue West - Beginning at a point 241 feet south of Neck Lane and continuing for a distance of 22 feet southerly thereof Monroe Avenue (500) North 
(curbline of Mary 
Street) - Beginning at a point 60 feet west of Monroe Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Monroe Avenue (560) East - Beginning at a point 134 feet north of Julia Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Monroe Avenue (579) East - Beginning at a point 277 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Monroe Avenue (626) West - Beginning at a point 300 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Monroe Avenue (657) East - Beginning at a point 140 feet south of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Monroe Avenue (818) West - Beginning at a point 245 feet north of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Monroe Avenue (1021) (#1L) East - Beginning at a point 307 feet north of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Mravlag Manor (14H) East - Beginning at a point 160 feet north of Richmond Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Mravlag Manor (23C) - Parking lot behind Building No. 21, between Chetwood Street and Clarkson Avenue, space number 11 Murray Street (103) North - Beginning at a point 41 feet west of Cherry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Murray Street (131) North - Beginning at a point 25 feet west of Lyons Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Murray Street (253) North - Beginning at a point 137 feet east of DeHart Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Murray Street (260) South - Beginning at a distance of 41 feet east of DeHart Place, and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Murray Street (324) South - Beginning at a point 315 feet West of Dehart Place and continuing 22 feet West thereof; and be it Murray Street (741) West - Beginning at a point 219 feet south of Dayton Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Myrtle Street (535) North - Beginning at a point 48 feet east of Polonia Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof New York Avenue (505) South - Beginning at a point 62 feet east of Garden Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Newark Avenue (615) East - Beginning at a point 210 feet north of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Newark Avenue (615) East - Beginning at a point 230 feet north of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Niles Street East - From a point 192 feet north of Fourth Avenue, continuing for a distance of 24 feet northerly thereof Niles Street West - Beginning at a point 74 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Niles Street (19) West - Beginning at a point 233 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Niles Street (34) East - Beginning at a point 86 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Niles Street (36) East - Beginning at a point 88 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Niles Street (217) West - Beginning at a point 212 feet South of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet South thereof Niles Street (225) West - Beginning at a point 242 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Niles Street (227) West - Beginning at a point 200 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Niles Street (231) West - Beginning at a point 151 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Niles Street (317) West - Beginning at a point 236 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof North Avenue (1033) North - Beginning at a point 110 feet east of North Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof North Avenue (1048) South - Beginning at a point 180 feet east of Adams Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof North Avenue (1048) South 
(curbline of Newark 
Avenue) - Beginning at a point 158 feet east of Adams Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof North Avenue (1126) South - Beginning at a point 53 feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof North Broad Street (611) East - Beginning at a point 106 feet north of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof North Broad Street (615) East - Beginning at a point 245 feet north of and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof North Spring Street (29 1/2) East - Beginning at a point 408 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Norwood Terrace (611) (Second Floor) North - Beginning at a point 72 feet west of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Norwood Terrace (624) South - Beginning at a point 316 feet west of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Norwood Terrace (655) North - Beginning at a point 288 feet east of Williamson Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Norwood Terrace (657) North - Beginning at a point 262 feet east of Williamson Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Norwood Terrace (661) North - Beginning at a point 50 feet west of Montgomery Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Oakwood Place South - Beginning at a point 130 feet west of the southwest corner of Union Avenue and Oakwood Place and continuing southerly for a distance of 29 feet Ogden Street East - Beginning at a point 149 feet southerly from the intersection of Myrtle Street for a distance of 22 feet southerly thereof Ogden Street (726) (Fl. 2) East - Beginning at a point 116 feet north of Myrtle Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Ogden Street (751) East - Beginning at a point 227 feet south of Myrtle Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Ogden Street (755) West - Beginning at a point 94 feet north of Allen Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Olive Street (920) South - Beginning at a point 260 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet west thereof Olive Street (926) South - Beginning at a point 341 feet west of Henry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Olive Street (947) North - Beginning at a point 154 feet east of Routes 1 and 9 and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Olive Street (1011) North - Beginning at a point 138 feet west of Rt. 1 & 9 south and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Olive Street (1027) North - Beginning at a point 331 feet west of Route 1 and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Orchard Street (152) West - Beginning at a point 292 feet north of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Orchard Street (204) East - Beginning at a point 65 feet south of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Palmer Street (20) East - Beginning at a point 242 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Palmer Street (218) East - Beginning at a point 246 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Palmer Street (220) East - Beginning at a point 237 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Palmer Street (229) (Fl. 2) West - Beginning at a point 175 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Palmer Street (327) North - Beginning at a point 167 feet east of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Park Place (152) West - Beginning at a point 25 feet north of S. Park Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Park Place (162) West - Beginning at a point 62 feet south of Court Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Parkview Terrace (805) North - Beginning at a point 76 feet west of Bellevue Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pennington Street South - From a point 390 feet west of Bellevue Street, continuing for a distance of 22 feet westerly thereof Pennington Street (317) North - Beginning at a point 208 feet west of Dehart Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pennington Street (329) North - Beginning at a point 415 feet west of DeHart Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pennington Street (350) South - Beginning at a point 129 feet east of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Pennington Street (854) Southeast - Beginning at a point 90 feet east of Standish Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Pennsylvania Avenue (565) East - Beginning at a point 633 feet north of Whitehead Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Pershing Avenue (55) East - Beginning at a point 136 feet south of Murray Street and continuing 25 feet southerly thereof Pine Street North - Beginning at a point 66 feet east of Front Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet easterly thereof Pine Street (227) North - Beginning at a point 338 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pine Street (231) South - Beginning at a point 67' feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Pine Street (236) South - Beginning at a point 331 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Pine Street (254) South - Beginning at a point 69 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Pine Street (320) South - Beginning at a point 263 feet West of Third Street and continuing 22 feet West thereof Pine Street (326) South - Beginning at a point 315 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pine Street (332) South - Beginning at a point 406 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Pine Street (336) North - Beginning at a point 456 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Port Avenue (78) North - Beginning at a point 162 feet east of First Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Port Avenue (113) South - Beginning at a point 180 feet west of First Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Port Avenue (132) South - Beginning at a point 390 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Port Avenue (142) South - Beginning at a point 262 east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Port Avenue (148) Southeast - Beginning at a point 189 feet southeast of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet thereof Prospect Street (11A) East - Beginning at a point 153 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Prospect Street (32) Southwest - Beginning at a point 201 feet south of Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Prospect Street (44) (Apt. 1) West - Beginning at a point 142 feet south of West Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Race Street (121) West - Beginning at a point 262 feet south of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Race Street (142) West - Beginning at a point 363 feet north of South Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Race Street (159) West - Beginning at a point 160 feet North of South Street and continuing 22 feet North thereof Rankin Street (12) East - Beginning at a point 148 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rankin Street (14) East - Beginning at a point 169 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rankin Street (30) East - Beginning at a point 244 feet North of Second Avenue, and continuing 22 feet North thereof Rankin Street (39) West - Beginning at a point 114 feet west of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rankin Street (41) West - Beginning at a point 94 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rankin Street (205) North - Beginning at a point 60 feet northeast of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Rankin Street (208) East - Beginning at a point 100 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rankin Street (227) West - Beginning at a point 173 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Rebecca Place (816) South - Beginning at a point 156 feet west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rebecca Place (819) North - Beginning at a point 174 feet East of Division Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Rebecca Place (822) South - Beginning at a point 235 feet west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rebecca Place (823) Northwest - Beginning at a point 224 feet two inches west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rebecca Place (827) North - Beginning at a point 285 feet west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rebecca Place (829) Northwest - Beginning at a point 299.4 feet west of Division Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Rebecca Place (836) South - Beginning at a point 344 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Rebecca Place (847) North - Beginning at a point 215 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Rebecca Place (851) North - Beginning at a point 155 feet east of Smith Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Redcliffe Street (324) Northeast - Beginning at a point 188 feet northeast of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet thereof Reid Street East - Beginning at a point 266 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Reid Street (18) West - Beginning at a point 219 feet north of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Reid Street (41) East - Beginning at a point 197 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Reid Street (45) East - Beginning at a point 147 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Reid Street (120) West - Beginning at a point 262 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Reid Street (122) West - Beginning at a point 310 feet south of Lafayette Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Reid Street (157) East - Beginning at a point 95 feet north of Lafayette Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Reid Street (167) East - Beginning at a point 234 feet south of East Grand Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Reid Street (174) West - Beginning at a point 62 feet north of William Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Richmond Street (542) South - Beginning at a point 250 feet east of Clarkson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Ripley Place (133) North - Beginning at a point 416 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Ripley Place (140) South - Beginning at a point 273 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Ripley Place (151) North - Beginning at a point 148 feet west of Second Street and continuing 13 feet easterly thereof Ripley Place (224) 
(Apt. 2R) South - Beginning at a point 487 feet east of Third Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Roosevelt Street (911) North - Beginning at a point 115 feet west of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Roosevelt Street (914) Northeast - Beginning at a point 157 feet east of Washington Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Roosevelt Street (921) North - Beginning at a point 196 feet east of Rosehill Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Roosevelt Street (923) North - Beginning at a point 155 feet east of Rosehill Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Roosevelt Street (925) North - Beginning at a point 130 feet east of Rosehill Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Rosehill Place (403) West - Beginning at a point 38 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rosehill Place (404) East - Beginning at a point 58 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rosehill Place (405) West - Beginning at a point 60 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Rosehill Place (410) East - Beginning at a point 105 feet north of Stewart Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Rosehill Place (440-A) East - Beginning at a point 297 feet north of Garden Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Rosehill Place (446) East - Beginning at a point 222 feet north of Garden Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Sayre Street (10) South - Beginning at a point 109 feet west of Morris Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Sayre Street (46) South - Beginning at a point 111 feet west of Lowden Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Sayre Street (66) South - Beginning at a point 49 feet East of Watson Avenue and continuing 22 feet East thereof Sayre Street (102) North - Beginning at a point 44 feet east of Cherry Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Sayre Street (106) South - Beginning at a point 81 feet west of Cherry Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Sayre Street (135) North - Beginning at a point 426 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Sayre Street (160) East - Beginning at a point 86 feet north of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Second Avenue (226) South - Beginning at a point 72 feet west of Geneva Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Second Avenue (528) South - Beginning at a point 105 feet west of Spencer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Second Avenue (532) South - Beginning at a point 37 feet East of Niles Street and continuing 22 feet East thereof Second Avenue (571) Northeast - Beginning at a point 81 feet east of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Second Avenue (610) West - Beginning at a point 55 feet south of John Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Second Avenue (620) North - Beginning at a point 50 feet East of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet North thereof Second Avenue (802) South - Beginning at a point 50 feet West of High Street and continuing 22 feet West thereof Second Avenue (844) South - Beginning at a point 65 feet west of Centre Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Second Street (234) West - Beginning at a point 37 feet north of Pine Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Second Street (343) East - Beginning at a point 70 feet south of Trumbull Street and continuing for a distance of 22 feet southerly thereof Second Street (651) North 
(curbline of Second Avenue) - Beginning at a point 90 feet east of South Seventh Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Sheridan Avenue (947) East - Beginning at a point 78 feet south of Alina Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Sheridan Avenue (1120) South 
(curbline of Hampton 
Place) - Beginning at a point 255 feet west of Madison Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Smith Street (38) West - Beginning at a point 279 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Smith Street (46) West - Beginning at a point 175 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Smith Street (117) East - Beginning at a point 62 feet south of Rebecca Place and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Smith Street (120) West - Beginning at a point 25 feet south of Rebecca Place and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Smith Street (138) West - Beginning at a point 118 feet south of Lafayette Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Broad Street (409) North - Beginning at a point 110 feet west of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof South Broad Street (762) East - Beginning at a point 45 feet North of Allen Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Fifth Street (22) Northwest - Beginning at a point 267 feet north of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Fifth Street (23) West - Beginning at a point 276 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Fifth Street (24-A) East - Beginning at a point 264 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Fifth Street (26) East - Beginning at a point 231 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Fifth Street (321) West - Beginning at a point 244 feet north of Fourth Avenue continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Fifth Street (336) East - Beginning at a point 45 feet north of Fourth Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Fifth Street (426) East - Beginning at a point 162 feet north of Fifth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Park Street (144) South - Beginning at a point 239 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof South Park Street (150) South - Beginning at a point 151 feet east of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Park Street (153) Northeast - Beginning at a point 140 feet northeast of Second Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Park Street (319) North - Beginning at a point 225 feet west of Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof South Park Street (324) South - Beginning at a point 319 feet west of Third Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof South Park Street (545) North - Beginning at a point 236 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Park Street (561) North - Beginning at a point 40 feet east of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Park Street (614) South - Beginning at a point 193 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 21 feet easterly thereof South Park Street (617) North - Beginning at a point 202 feet west of Sixth Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof South Pearl Street (335) West 
(curbline of Pearl 
Street) - Beginning at a point 60 feet north of Montgomery Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Reid Street (21) West - Beginning at a point 140 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Second Street (23) West - Beginning at a point 115 feet north of Merritt Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Second Street (56) East - Beginning at a point 260 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Seventh Street West - Beginning at a point 272 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 25 feet northerly thereof South Seventh Street (10) East - Beginning at a point 104 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Seventh Street (18) East - Beginning at a point 209 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Seventh Street (25) East - Beginning at a point 114 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Seventh Street (28) South - Beginning at a point 114 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Seventh Street (223) (2 nd Floor) West - Beginning at a point 292 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Seventh Street (310) East - Beginning at a point 143 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Seventh Street (322) East - Beginning at a point 217 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Seventh Street (329) West - Beginning at a point 31 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Seventh Street (329) West - Beginning at a point 151 feet north of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Spring Street East - Beginning at a point 198 feet north of the junction of South Spring Street and South Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Spring Street (15) West - Beginning at a point 164 feet south of Elizabeth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Spring Street (314) East - Beginning at a point 192 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Street (214) South - Beginning at a point 194 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof South Street (622) East - Beginning at a point 291 feet north of Pearl Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Street (646) South - Beginning at a point 302 feet east of Williamson Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof South Street (916) East - Beginning at a point 190 feet north of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof South Street (920) South - Beginning at a point 155 feet east of Rosehill Place and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Spencer Street East - Beginning at a point 145 feet south of First Avenue and continuing for a distance of 25 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street West - Beginning at a point 170 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (14) Southeast - Beginning at a point 169 feet south of First Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (25) West - Beginning at a point 185 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Spencer Street (28) East - Beginning at a point 161 feet north of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Spencer Street (39) North 
(curbline of Second Avenue) - Beginning at a point 25 feet west of Spencer Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Spencer Street (215) West - Beginning at a point 193 feet south of Second Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (221) Northwest - Beginning at a point 256 feet from Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (223) West - Beginning at a point 291 feet south of Second Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (308) East - Beginning at a point 104 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 18 feet southerly thereof Spencer Street (419) West - Beginning at a point 239 feet south of Fourth Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Springfield Road (322) West - Beginning at a point 43 feet north of Cleveland Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Stiles Street (135) Southeast - Beginning at a point 397 feet southeast of Cherry Street and continuing 22 feet southeasterly thereof Stiles Street (225) West - Beginning at a point 205 feet north of Gibson Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Stiles Street (238) East - Beginning at a point 135 feet north of Gibson Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Third Avenue (209) North - Beginning at a point 119 feet west of South Second Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Third Avenue (425) West 
(curbline of Rankin Street) - Beginning at a point 62 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Third Avenue (465) North - Beginning at a point 60 feet west of Loomis Street and continuing 22 feet west thereof Third Avenue (467) North - Beginning at a point 113 feet east of South Fifth Street and continuing 25 feet easterly thereof Third Avenue (529) East - Beginning at a point 85 feet south of Niles Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Third Avenue (553) North - Beginning at a point 70 feet east of Palmer Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Third Avenue (572) South - Beginning at a point 37 feet east of Amity Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Third Avenue (601) West 
(curbline of Amity 
Street) - Beginning at a point 52 feet north of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Third Avenue (621) North - Beginning at a point 36 feet west of John Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Third Avenue (632) 
(Apt. #8) Southwest - Beginning at a point 22 feet west of Christine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Third Avenue (656) East - Beginning at a point 51 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Third Avenue (802) Southeast - Beginning at a point 35 feet southeast of High Street and continuing 22 feet thereof Third Avenue (811) North - Beginning at a point 62 feet east of Center Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Third Avenue (904) West - Beginning at a point 101 feet north of Reid Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Third Avenue (914) Southeast - Beginning at a point 109.5 feet south of Third Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Third Street (156-8) West - Beginning at a point 162 feet north of South Park Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Third Street (212) West - Beginning at a point 40 feet south of Bond Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Third Street (621) Northeast - Beginning at a point 10 feet north of John Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Thomas Street East - Beginning at a point 264 feet south of Bayway and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Thomas Street (715) West - Beginning at a point 222 feet south of Bayway and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Thomas Street (716) East - Beginning at a point 234 feet south of Bayway Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Trumbull Street (630) South - Beginning at a point 76 feet west of Magnolia Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Trumbull Street (744) South - Beginning at a point 52 feet east of Court Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Trumbull Street (746) South - Beginning at a point 68 feet west of Court Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Trumbull Street (750) South - Beginning at a point 119 feet west of Court Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Union Avenue (454) West - Beginning at a point 35 feet north of Elmwood Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Van Buren Avenue (718) West - Beginning at a point 252 feet north of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Van Buren Avenue (720) West - Beginning at a point 290 feet north of Louisa Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Vine Street (210) South - Beginning at a point 210 feet west of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Vine Street (321) North - Beginning at a point 280 feet west of DeHart Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Vine Street (327) North - Beginning at a point 305 feet west of DeHart Place and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Vine Street (436) East - Beginning at a point 55 feet north of Clover Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Vine Street (739) East 
(curbline of Pershing Avenue) - Beginning at a point 35 feet north of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Vine Street (804) South - Beginning at a point 44 feet west of Bellevue Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Vine Street (812) South - Beginning at a point 66 feet east of Watson Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Walnut Street (469) East - Beginning at a point 227 feet south of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Walnut Street (472) West - Beginning at a point 172 feet south of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Walnut Street (475-476) West - Beginning at a point 129 feet south of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Walnut Street (480) West - Beginning at a point 64 feet south of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Walnut Street (515) East - Beginning at a point 186 feet north of Mary Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Walnut Street (550) West - Beginning at a point 663 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Walnut Street (598) West - Beginning at a point 40 feet south of Fairmount Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Washington Avenue West - Beginning at a point 80 feet south of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet south thereof Washington Avenue (116) East - Beginning at a point 179 feet north of Eugena Place and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (141) West - Beginning at a point 361 feet north of South Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (155) West - Beginning at a point 171 feet north of South Street and continuing 44 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (327) West - Beginning at a point 112 feet north of McLain Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (334) East - Beginning at a point 309 feet north of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (347) North 
(curbline of Grove 
Street) - Beginning at a point 112 feet 7 inches north of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Washington Avenue (408) North 
(curbline of Boyle 
Place) - Beginning at a point 50 feet east of Washington Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Washington Street (155) West - Beginning at a point 171 feet south of Pearl Street and continuing 44 feet southerly thereof Watson Avenue (39) East - Beginning at a point 103 feet north of Vine Street and continuing 22 feet northerly thereof Watson Avenue (60) South 
(curbline of Murray 
Street) - Beginning at a point 25 feet west of Murray Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Waverly Place (1259) North - Beginning at a point 297 feet east of North Broad Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street (128) South - Beginning at a point 343 feet east of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street (138) Southwest - Beginning at a point 194 feet southeast of Chilton Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof West Grand Street (424) South - Beginning at a point 324 feet west of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof West Jersey Street (230)-in front of the Medical Arts Building South - Beginning at a point 441 feet west of Chilton Street and continuing 26 feet westerly thereof Westfield Avenue (83) North - Beginning at a point 91 feet west of Lowden Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Westfield Avenue (280) South - Beginning at a point 411 feet east of Grove Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Westfield Avenue (644) South - Beginning at a point 543 feet west of Elmora Avenue and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Westfield Avenue (893) Northwest - Beginning at a point 159 feet northwest of Hillside Road and continuing 22 feet thereof Westminster Avenue (711) East - Beginning at a point 222 feet south of Scotland Road and continuing 44 feet thereof William Street South - Beginning at a point 234 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 25 feet westerly thereof William Street (957) North - Beginning at a point 130 feet west of Reid Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof William Street (1009) North - Beginning at a point 112 feet east of Routes 1 and 9 South and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof William Street (1022) South - Beginning at a point 256 feet east of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof William Street (1054) South - Beginning at a point 138 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof William Street (1069) North - Beginning at a point 315 feet west of Catherine Street and continuing 21 feet westerly thereof William Street (1074) South - Beginning at a point 372 feet east of Madison Avenue and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof William Street (1079) North - Beginning at a point 291 feet east of Madison Avenue and continuing 22 feet easterly thereof Williams Street (952) South - Beginning at a point 174 feet west of Reid Street and continuing 22 feet westerly thereof Williamson Street (322) East - Beginning at a point 55 feet south of Norwood Terrace and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Williamson Street (332) East - Beginning at a point 55 feet south of Norwood Terrace and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof Winfield Scott Plaza West - Beginning at a point 124 feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing 22 feet southerly thereof  
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
(Ord. No. 5122, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5120, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5119, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5118, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5117, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5116, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5115, § 1, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 5113, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5112, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5111, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5109, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5108, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5107, § 1, 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5106, § 1, 12-26-2018; Res. dated 12-26-2018; Ord. No. 5103, § 1, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 5102, § 1, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 5101, § 1, 12-11-2018; Res. dated 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 5098, § 1, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 5097, § 1, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 5096, § 1, 11-27-2018; Res. dated 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 5092, § 1, 11-13-2018; Res. dated 11-13-2018; Ord. No. 5089, § 1, 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 5088, § 1, 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 5087, § 1, 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 5086, § 1, 10-23-2018; Res. dated 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 5079, § 1, 10-9-2018; Ord. No. 5078, § 1, 10-9-2018; Ord. No. 5077, § 1, 10-9-2018; Res. dated 10-9-2018; Ord. No. 5076, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5075, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5074, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5073, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5072, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5071, § 1, 9-25-2018; Res. dated 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 5068, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5067, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5066, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5065, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5064, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5063, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5062, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5061, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5060, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5059, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5058, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5057, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5056, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5055, § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5054, § 1, 9-11-2018; Res. dated 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 5048, § 1, 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 5047, § 1, 8-28-2018; Res. dated 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 5041, § 1, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 5040, § 1, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 5039, § 1, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 5038, § 1, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 5037, § 1, 7-24-2018; Res. dated 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 5035, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5034, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5033, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5032, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5031, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5030, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5029, § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5028, § 1, 6-26-2018; Res. dated 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 5023, § 1, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 5022, § 1, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 5021, § 1, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 5020, § 1, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 5019, § 1, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 5018, § 1, 6-12-2018; Res. dated 6-26-2018; Res. dated 5-22-2018; Res. dated 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 5009, § 1, 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 5008, § 1, 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 5007, § 1, 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 5006, § 1, 4-24-2018; Res. dated 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 5002, § 1, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 5001, § 1, 4-10-2018; Res. dated 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 4998, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4997, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4993, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4992, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4991, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4990, § 1, 3-27-2018; Res. dated 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 4987, § 1, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 4986, § 1, 3-13-2018; Res. dated 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 4984, § 1, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 4983, § 1, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 4982, § 1, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 4981, § 1, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 4980, § 1, 2-27-2018; Res. dated 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 4974, § 1, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 4973, § 1, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 4972, § 1, 2-13-2018; Res. dated 2-13-2018; Res. dated 1-23-2018; Ord. No. 4968, § 1, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 4967, § 1, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 4965, § 1, 12-27-2017; Ord. No. 4964, § 1, 12-27-2017; Res. dated 12-27-2017; Ord. No. 4959, § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4958, § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4957, § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4956, § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4955, § 1, 12-12-2017; Res. dated 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 4951, § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4950, § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4949, § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4948, § 1, 11-28-2017; Res. dated 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 4932, § 1, 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 4931, § 1, 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 4930, § 1, 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 4929, § 1, 11-13-2017; Res. dated 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 4927, § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 4926, § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 4925, § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 4924, § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 4922, § 1, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 4921, § 1, 10-10-2017; Res. dated 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 4918, § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 4917, § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 4916, § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 4908, § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4907, § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4906, § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4905, § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4904, § 1, 9-12-2017; Res. dated 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4896, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4895, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4894, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4893, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4892, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4891, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4890, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4889, § 1, 8-22-2017; Res. dated 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 4887, § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4886, § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4884, § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4883, § 1, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4882, § 1, 7-25-2017; Res. dated 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 4877, § 1, 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4872, § 1, 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4871, § 1, 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4870, § 1, 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4869, § 1, 6-27-2017; Res. dated 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 4864, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4863, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4862, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4861, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4860, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 4859, § 1, 6-13-2017; Res. dated 6-13-2017; Res. dated 5-23-2017; Ord. No. 4843, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4842, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4841, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4840, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4839, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4838, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4837, § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4835, § 1, 4-25-2017; Res. dated 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 4824, § 1, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 4823, § 1, 4-11-2017; Res. dated 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 4817, § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4816, § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4815, § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4814, § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4813, § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 4808, § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 4807, § 1, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 4806, § 1, 2-28-2017; Res. dated 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 4803, § 1, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 4801, § 1, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 4800, § 1, 2-14-2017; Res. dated 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 4797, § 1, 1-24-2017; Res. dated 1-24-2017; Res. dated 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 4796, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4795, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4794, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4793, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4792, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4791, § 1, 12-27-2016; Ord. No. 4790, § 1, 12-27-2016; Res. dated 12-27-2016; Res. dated 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 4784, § 1, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 4778, § 1, 11-9-2016; Res. dated 11-9-2016; Ord. No. 4770, § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4769, § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4768, § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4767, § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4766, § 1, 10-25-2016; Res. dated 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 4761, § 1, 10-11-2016; Ord. No. 4760, § 1, 10-11-2016; Ord. No. 4759, § 1, 10-11-2016; Res. dated 10-11-2016; Ord. No. 4757, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4756, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4755, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4754, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4752, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4751, § 1, 9-27-2016; Res. dated 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 4750, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4749, § 1, 9-13-2016; Res. dated 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-23-2016; Ord. No. 4741, § 1, 8-23-2016; Ord. No. 4740, § 1, 8-23-2016; Ord. No. 4739, § 1, 8-23-2016; Res. dated 8-23-2016; Res. dated 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 4736, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4735, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4734, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4733, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4732, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4731, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4730, § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 4729, § 1, 6-28-2016; Res. dated 6-14-2016; Ord. No. 4726, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4724, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4723, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4722, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4721, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4720, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4719, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4718, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4717, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4716, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4715, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4714, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 4712, § 1, 5-10-2016; Res. dated 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 4709, § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4707, § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4706, § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4705, § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4704, § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4703, § 1, 4-26-2016; Res. dated 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 4699, § 1, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 4698, § 1, 4-12-2016; Res. dated 4-12-2016; Res. dated 3-22-2016; Ord. No. 4692, § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 4691, § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 4690, § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 3-8-2016; Res. dated 3-8-2016; Res. dated 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 4672, § 1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 4671, § 1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 4668, § 1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 4667, § 1, 2-9-2016; Res. dated 2-9-2016; Res. dated 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 4656, § 1, 12-22-2015; Res. dated 12-22-2015; Ord. No. 4653, § 1, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 4652, § 1, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 4651, § 1, 12-8-2015; Res. dated 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 4644, § 1, 11-24-2015; Res. dated 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 4639, § 1, 11-10-2015; Ord. No. 4638, § 1, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 4637, § 1, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 4636, § 1, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 4635, § 1, 10-27-2015; Res. dated 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 4620, § 1, 9-8-2015; Res. dated 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4613, § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4612, § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4611, § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 4610, § 1, 8-25-2015; Res. dated 8-25-2015; Res. dated 7-28-2015; Ord. No. 4600, § 1, 6-23-2015; Ord. No. 4599, § 1, 6-23-2015; Res. dated 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4591, § 1, 5-26-2015; Res. dated 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4584, § 1, 5-12-2015; Res. dated 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 4-28-2015; Res. dated 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 4563, § 1, 4-14-2015; Res. dated 4-14-2015; Res. dated 3-24-2015; Res. dated 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 4549, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 4546, § 1, 2-10-2015; Res. dated 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 4539, § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4538, § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4537, § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4536, § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4535, § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4534, § 1, 1-27-2015; Res. dated 1-27-2015; Res. dated 1-13-2015; Res. dated 12-23-2014; Ord. No. 4525, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 12-9-2014; Res. dated 12-9-2014; Res. dated 11-26-2014; Ord. No. 4521, § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4520, § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4518, § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 4514, § 1, 11-12-2014; Ord. No. 4513, § 1, 11-12-2014; Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 11-12-2014; Ord. No. 4511, § 1, 11-12-2014; Res. dated 11-12-2014; Ord. No. 4506, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 4505, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 4504, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 4503, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 4502, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 4501, § 1, 10-28-2014; Res. dated 10-28-2014; Res. dated 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 4493, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4492, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4491, § 1, 9-23-2014; Res. dated 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 4477, § 1, 9-9-2014; Res. dated 9-9-2014; Res. dated 8-26-2014; Res. dated 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 4468, § 1, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 4467, § 1, 6-24-2014; Res. dated 6-10-2014; Res. dated 5-27-2014; Res. dated 5-13-2014; Ord. No. 4460, § 1, 4-22-2014; Res. dated 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 4458, § 1, 4-8-2014; Res. dated 4-8-2014; Res. dated 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 4450, § 1, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 4449, § 1, 2-11-2014; Res. dated 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 4446, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 4445, § 1, 1-14-2014; Res. dated 12-23-2013; Ord. No. 4440, § 1, 11-12-2013; Res. dated 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 4439, § 1, 11-12-2013; Res. dated 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 4430, § 1, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 4429, § 1, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 4428, § 1, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 4419, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4418, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4417, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4416, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4413, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4412, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4411, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4410, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4409, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4408, § 1, 9-10-2013; Res. dated 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 4400, § 1, 8-27-2013; Ord. No. 4399, § 1, 8-27-2013; Ord. No. 4398, § 1, 8-27-2013; Res. dated 8-27-2013; Res. dated 7-23-2013; Ord. No. 4390, § 1, 6-25-2013; Ord. No. 4389, § 1, 6-25-2013; Ord. No. 4386, § 1, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 4385, § 1, 6-11-2013; Res. dated 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 4383, § 1, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 4382, § 1, 5-28-2013; Res. dated 5-14-2013; Res. dated 4-23-2013; Res. dated 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 4367, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 4365, § 1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 4364, § 1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 4363, § 1, 3-26-2013; Res. dated 3-26-2013; Res. dated 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 4358, § 1, 2-13-2013; Ord. No. 4357, § 1, 2-13-2013; Res. dated 2-13-2013; Res. dated 1-22-2013; Res. dated 1-8-2013; Res. dated 12-11-2012; Res. dated 11-28-2012; Ord. No. 4347, § 1, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 4345, § 1, 11-27-2012; Res. dated 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 4342, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4341, § 1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4340, § 1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4338, § 1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 11-13-2012; Res. dated 10-23-2012; Res. dated 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 4330, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 4329, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 4328, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 4327, § 1, 9-11-2012; Res. dated 9-11-2012; Res. dated 8-28-2012; Res. dated 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 4315, § 1, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 4314, § 1, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 4313, § 1, 6-26-2012; Res. dated 6-26-2012; Res. dated 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 4308, § 1, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 4307, § 1, 5-22-2012; Res. dated 5-22-2012; Res. dated 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 4299, § 1, 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 4298, § 1, 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 4297, § 1, 4-10-2012; Res. dated 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 4295, § 1, 3-27-2012; Res. dated 3-27-2012; Ord. No. 4292, § 1, 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 4291, § 1, 3-13-2012; Res. dated 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 4289, § 1, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 4288, § 1, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 4287, § 1, 2-28-2012; Res. dated 2-14-2012; Res. dated 1-24-2012; Ord. No. 4278, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4277, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4276, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4275, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4274, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 1-10-2012; Res. dated 12-27-2011; Ord. No. 4266, § 1, 12-13-2011; Res. dated 12-13-2011; Res. dated 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. 4256, § 1, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. 4255, § 1, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. 4254, § 1, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. 4253, § 1, 10-25-2011; Res. dated 10-11-2011; Res. dated 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 4244, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4242, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 8-23-2011; Res. dated 8-23-2011; Res. dated 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 4229, § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 4228, § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 4227, § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 4226, § 1, 7-26-2011; Res. dated 6-28-2011; Res. dated 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 4220, § 1, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 4219, § 1, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 4217, § 1, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 4216, § 1, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 4215, § 1, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 4214, § 1, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 4213, § 1, 5-10-2011; Res. dated 5-10-2011; Res. dated 4-26-2011; Ord. No. 4210, § 1, 4-12-2011; Res. dated 4-12-2011; Ord. No. 4208, § 1, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 4206, § 1, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 3-22-2011; Res. dated 3-22-2011; Res. dated 3-8-2011; Res. dated 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 2-8-2011; Res. dated 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 4183, § 1, 1-11-2011; Ord. No. 4182, § 1, 12-28-2010; Res. dated 12-28-2010; Ord. No. 4178, § 1, 12-14-2010; Res. dated 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-9-2010; Res. dated 11-9-2010; Res. dated 10-26-2010; Res. dated 10-12-2010; Res. dated 9-28-2010; Ord. No. 4155, § 1, adopted September 14, 2010; Res. dated 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 4148, § 1, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 4147, § 1, 8-24-2010; Res. dated 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 7-27-2010; Res. dated 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 4139, § 1, 6-22-2010; Ord. No. 4136, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 4135, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 4134, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 4133, § 1, 5-25-2010; Res. dated 5-25-2010; Res. dated 5-11-2010; Res. dated 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 4121, § 1, 3-23-2010; Res. dated 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 4118, § 1, 3-9-2010; Res. dated 3-9-2010; Res. dated 2-23-2010; Res. dated 2-9-2010; Res. dated 1-26-2010; Res. dated 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 12-22-2009; Res. dated 12-22-2009; Ord. No. 4087, § 1, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 11-24-2009; Res. dated 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 4084, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 4083, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 11-10-2009; Res. dated 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 4075, § 1, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 4074, § 1, 10-13-2009; Res. dated 10-13-2009; Res. dated 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 4067, § 1, 9-8-2009; Res. dated 9-8-2009; Res. dated 8-25-2009; Res. dated 7-28-2009; Ord. No. 4052, § 1, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 4051, § 1, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 4050, § 1, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 4049, § 1, 6-23-2009; Res. dated 6-9-2009; Res. dated 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 4045, § 1, 5-6-2009; Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 4-14-2009; Res. dated 3-24-2009; Res. dated 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 3-10-2009; Res. dated 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 4016, § 1, 1-27-2009; Ord. No. 4013, § 1, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 4012, § 1, 1-13-2009; Res. dated 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-12-2008; Res. dated 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 4000, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3999, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3997, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3996, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3995, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 3994, § 1, 10-28-2008; Res. dated 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 3989, § 1, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 3988, § 1, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 3987, § 1, 9-23-2008; Res. dated 9-23-2008; Res. dated 9-9-2008; Res. dated 8-26-2008; Res. dated 7-22-2008; Ord. 3976 § 1, 2008; Res. dated 6-24-2008; Res. dated 6-10-2008; Ord. 3973 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3972 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3970 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3969 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3968 § 1, 2008; Res. dated 5-13-2008; Res. dated 4-22-2008; Res. dated 3-25-2008; Res. dated 2-26-2008; Res. dated 2-13-2008; Ord. 3954 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3953 § 1, 2008; Res. dated 1-22-2008; Ord. 3950 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3949 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 12-26-2007; Ord. 3944 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3943 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3942 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 12-11-2007; Res. dated 11-27-2007; Ord. 3939 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3938 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3937 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 10-23-2007; Ord. 3930 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3926 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 9-25-2007; Ord. 3924 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 8-28-2007; Ord. 3908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3907 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3900 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 6-26-2007; Res. dated 6-12-2007; Ord. 3895 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 5-8-2007; Ord. 3894 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3889 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3888 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 4-24-2007; Res. dated 4-10-2007; Ord. 3886 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 3-27-2007; Ord. 3883 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3882 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 3-13-2007; Res. dated 2-27-2007; Ord. 3881 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3880 § 1, 2007; Res. dated 2-13-2007; Res. dated 1-23-2006; Ord. 3873 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3872 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3871 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 12-12-2006; Res. dated 11-28-2006; Res. dated 11-14-2006; Res. dated 10-24-2006; Ord. 3855 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 10-10-2006; Res. dated 9-27-2006; Res. dated 9-12-2006; Res. dated 7-25-2006; Ord. 3835 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3834 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 6-27-2006; Ord. 3826 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3825 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 6-13-2006; Ord. 3821 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 5-23-2006; Res. dated 5-09-2006; Ord. 3814 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 4-25-2006; Res. dated 4-11-2006; Res. dated 3-28-2006; Ord. 3807 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3806 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3805 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 3-14-2006; Ord. 3800 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3799 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3798 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3797 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 2-28-2006; Ord. 3789 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 2-14-2006; Ord. 3785 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3784 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 1-24-2006; Ord. 3783 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3782 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3781 § 1, 2006; Res. dated 12-27-2005; Ord. 3772 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3771 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3769 § 1, 2005; Res. dated 12-13-2005; Res. dated 11-22-2005; Res. dated 11-09-2005; Res. dated 10-25-2005; Res. dated 10-11-2005; Ord. 3762 § 1, 2005; Res. dated 9-27-2005; Ord. 3756 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3746 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3745 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3744 § 1, 2005; Res. dated 8-23-2005; Ord. 3738 § 1, 2005; Res. dated 7-26-2005; Ord. 3734 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3733 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3732 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3729 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3725 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3715 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3714 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3712 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3711 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3710 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3709 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3708 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3700 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3690 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3689 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3680 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3679 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3677 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3676 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3671 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3670 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3666 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3665 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3660 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3651 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3645 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3643 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3642 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3641 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3640 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3639 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3623 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3622 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3621 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3619 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3618 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3614 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3613 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3612 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3611 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3607 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3605 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3604 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3603 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3600 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3593 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3587 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3586 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3585 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 12-23-2003; Ord. 3579 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3578 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3577 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 11-25-2003; Res. dated 11-12-2003; Ord. 3557 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3555 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3554 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3552 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; Res. dated 10-14-2003; Ord. 3546 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3545 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 9-23-2003; Res. dated 9-09-2003; Res. dated 8-26-2003; Res. dated 6-24-2003; Ord. 3535 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3528 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3527 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3526 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 6-10-2003; Ord. 3522 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 5-27-2003; Res. dated 5-13-2003; Ord. 3515 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3514 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3513 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3511 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 4-08-2003; Res. dated 3-25-2003; Res. dated 3-11-2003; Ord. 3499 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3497 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 2-25-2003; Res. dated 2-11-2003; Ord. 3489 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3488 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3487 § 1, 2003; Res. dated 1-28-2003; Res. dated 1-14-2003; Ord. 3203 § 1, 1999; Ord. 3201 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code §§ 141-128 and 143-14) 
10.44.030 - Violations and penalties of handicapped parking regulations. 
    Penalties for violations of the handicapped parking regulations shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and up to ninety (90) days community service on such terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof. 
A.  The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
B.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3550 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 143-14A) 
10.44.040 - Fines and penalties for handicapped parking space violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any individual who has requested the personalized designation of a handicapped parking space pursuant to this chapter to park or cause to be parked any vehicle for which a handicapped parking permit or placard has been issued at any other curbside parking space within a radius of two hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the tax lot of the individual's residence. 
B.  An individual whose vehicle is parked in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. For any subsequent offense, the personalized handicapped parking space designation shall be revoked and the individual shall not be eligible to apply for another designation pursuant to this chapter for a period of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 4728 , § 1, 6-14-2016) 
Chapter 10.48 - SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 

10.48.010 - No parking during snow emergency. 
A.  Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof as follows: 
City Streets 
Street Side Location Bailey Avenue West Entire Length Bayway Rt. No. 1 Circle to Trenton Avenue Berkeley Place West Entire Length Broad Street Entire Length Cherry Street Rahway Avenue to Morris Avenue Chilton Street Rahway Avenue to Elmora Avenue Cleveland Avenue East Entire Length Crawford Place North Entire Length Decker Avenue South Entire Length Donald Place East Entire Length East Grand Street Route No. 1 to Broad Street East Jersey Street New Point Road to Broad Street Elizabeth Avenue Entire Length Elmora Avenue Westfield Avenue to Rahway Avenue Emerson Avenue South Entire Length Floral Avenue East Entire Length Gebhardt Place East Entire Length Glenwood Road West Entire Length Halstead Road East Entire Length Hillside Road West Between Magie Avenue and Palisade Road Melrose Terrace North Entire Length North Avenue Route No. 1 to Newark Avenue Rahway Avenue City line to Cherry Street South Broad Street South Street to Garden Street South Elmora Avenue Rahway Avenue to Bayway Circle Westfield Avenue Magie Avenue to Cherry Street West Grand Street Cherry to Broad Street West Jersey Street Cherry to Broad Street Wilson Terrace North Entire Length Winthrop Place North Entire Length  
County Roads 
Street Location Grove Street Between U.S. Route 1 and Pearl Street Jersey Avenue Entire length Lidgerwood Avenue Between a point 100 feet southwest of the southwest curbline of South Elmore Avenue and a point 100 feet northeast of the northeast curbline of South Elmora Avenue Magie Avenue Between a point 100 feet northwest of the northwest curbline of Elmora Avenue and Westfield Avenue Morris Avenue Between the Union township line and Westfield Avenue North Broad Street Between a point 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of King Street and the Hillside township line North Broad Street Between a point 100 feet north of the northerly curbline of North Avenue and a point 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of North Avenue North Broad Street Between a point 100 feet north of the northerly curbline of Salem Avenue and Newark Avenue Orchard Street Entire length Pearl Street Between South Broad Street and Grove Street South Broad Street Between Elizabeth Avenue-Rahway Avenue and a point 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of South Street South Broad Street Between a point 100 feet north of the northerly curbline of Grove Street and a point 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of Grove Street South Broad Street Between Garden Street and Bayway West Grand Street Between the Roselle borough line and Cherry Street West Jersey Street Between Elmora Avenue and Cherry Street  
B.  The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic. 
(Prior code § 121-12) 
10.48.020 - Removal and storage of unoccupied vehicles-Costs. 
    Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 121-13) 
10.48.030 - Effectiveness of provisions. 
    The effectiveness of this chapter is contingent on signs being erected as required by law. 
(Prior code § 121-14) 
10.48.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the New Jersey Statutes, every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than sixty dollars ($60.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 55, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 121-15) 
Chapter 10.52 - CITY HALL PARKING 
Sections: 

10.52.010 - Parking prohibited-Hours-Exception. 
    No person shall park any vehicle in the City Hall yard at any time between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless said person has official business to conduct with any department head or public official, board or body in city hall. 
(Prior code § 64-18) 
10.52.020 - City employees excepted. 
    This chapter shall not affect any employees working in City Hall for any city department. 
(Prior code § 64-19) 
10.52.030 - Enforcement by police department. 
    Regulations prescribed herein shall be subject to enforcement by the police department. 
(Prior code § 64-20) 
10.52.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Prior code § 64-21) 
10.52.050 - Parking prohibited. 
    Both sides of city lane, the thoroughfare leading into the city yard, are designated as "No Parking Zones," and "No Parking" signs shall be erected in accordance with specifications adopted by the director of the division of motor vehicles. 
(Prior code § 64-27) 
Chapter 10.56 - POLICE DEPARTMENT PARKING LOT 
Sections: 

10.56.010 - Definitions applicable. 
    Whenever any words and phrases are used in this ordinance, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(Prior code § 64-31) 
10.56.020 - Parking spaces, dimensions, lot boundaries designated. 
    The parking lot which is the subject of this chapter is known as Elizabeth Police and Municipal Court Complex and is located along the northerly right-of-way line of Police Plaza (formerly East Grand Street), between Commerce Place and Jefferson Avenue. 
    The parking area contains one hundred six (106) delineated parking spaces with each parking space having the dimensions of eight feet, six inches, by eighteen (18) feet and is more particularly described as follows: 
    Within that area of the police and municipal court complex bounded on the north by the Elizabeth Parking Authority Lot #2; bounded on the east by Jefferson Avenue; bounded on the south by Police Plaza (formerly East Grand Street), and bounded on the west by Commerce Place. 
(Prior code § 64-32) 
10.56.030 - Parking limited to authorized vehicles-Permit, identification required. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by any per-son, to be parked in such area without the person first obtaining a permit from the Elizabeth police department authorizing the parking of the vehicle in the area. Vehicles permitted to be parked shall be properly identified. 
(Prior code § 64-33) 
10.56.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) days, either or both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 56, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 64-34) 
10.56.050 - Removal of unauthorized vehicles-Assessment of costs. 
    Any vehicle parked on this lot illegally as aforementioned shall be towed away at the owner's expense by the city of Elizabeth or its agent. 
(Prior code § 64-35) 
Chapter 10.60 - BUS STOPS 
Sections: 

10.60.010 - Bus stops established. 
    The city council of the city establishes and adopts bus stops within the city as designated on the attached list entitled Schedule I, Bus Stops. 
(Prior code § 143-5) 
10.60.020 - Terms and conditions. 
    The attached schedule of bus stops is adopted by city council, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
A.  Regulatory Type R7-107 "No Parking Bus Stop" signs shall be installed at the beginning and end of the bus stop locations. 
B.  The curbs within the bus stop locations shall be painted yellow. 
C.  No white pavement markings supported by the message "Bus Stop" shall be used to indicate the bus stop location. 
(Prior code § 143-6) 
10.60.030 - Schedule-Bus stops. 
A.  City Streets. 
1.  Along Trumbull Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Second Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Second Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
2.  Along Trumbull Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
    Second Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Second Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
3.  Along Trumbull Street, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Third Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred (100) feet easterly therefrom; 
b.  Between First Street and Second Street, mid-block, beginning two hundred fourteen (214) feet west of the westerly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred thirty-five (135) feet westerly therefrom. 
4.  Along Trumbull Street, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at: 
    First Street and Second Street, mid-block, beginning one hundred and five (105) feet west of the prolongation of First Street and extending one hundred thirty-five (135) feet westerly therefrom. 
5.  Along First Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Marshall Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Marshall Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Franklin Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Franklin Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of East Jersey Street and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Broadway, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
e.  Court Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Court Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
f.  Inslee Place, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Inslee Place and extending northerly to the southerly curbline of Trumbull Street. 
6.  Along First Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  South Park Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of South Park Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Broadway, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of East Jersey Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  Franklin Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Franklin Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
7.  Along East Jersey Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  First Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Second Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Second Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Third Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred twenty-five (125) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Fourth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fourth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
e.  Fifth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fifth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
f.  Reserved; 
g.  Seventh Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Seventh Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly therefrom; 
h.  Division Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Division Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
i.  Smith Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Smith Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
j.  Beginning one hundred eighty-eight (188) feet west of the westerly curbline of Jacques Street and extending one hundred ten (110) feet westerly thereto; 
k.  Reid Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Reid Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
l.  Spring Street (U.S. Route No. 1), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Spring Street (U.S. Route No. 1) and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
m.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
n.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
o.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
p.  Third Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly therefrom. 
8.  Along East Jersey Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Broad Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Broad Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred twenty-five (125) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  East Scott Place, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of East Scott Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
e.  Spring Street (U.S. Route No. 1), far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
f.  Reid Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Reid Street extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
g.  Jacques Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jacques Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
h.  Smith Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Smith Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
i.  Division Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Division Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
j.  Seventh Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Seventh Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
k.  Reserved; 
l.  Fifth Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Fifth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
m.  Fourth Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fourth Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
n.  Third Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
o.  Second Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Second Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
p.  First Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
9.  Along Magnolia Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    First Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
10.  Along Magnolia Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
    First Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
11.  Along Elizabeth Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  First Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of First Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Second Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Second Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Third Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
d.  Fourth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fourth Street and extending westerly one hundred five (105) feet thereof; 
e.  Fifth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fifth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
f.  Sixth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Sixth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
g.  New Point Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of New Point Road and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
h.  Jacques Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Jacques Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
i.  Spring Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
j.  East Scott Place (Martin Luther King Plaza), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of East Scott Place (Martin Luther King Plaza) and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
k.  Jefferson Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
12.  Along Elizabeth Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  South Broad Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of South Broad Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Bridge Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Bridge Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  South Spring Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of South Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Second Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Second Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
e.  First Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of First Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
f.  Sixth Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Sixth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
g.  Fifth Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Fifth Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
h.  Fourth Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fourth Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
i.  Third Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
j.  Florida Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Florida Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
k.  South Second Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of South Second Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
l.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline extended of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred (100) feet easterly therefrom. 
13.  Along Seventh Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of East Jersey Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  New Point Road, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of New Point Road and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
14.  Along New Point Road, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Marshall Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Marshall Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
15.  Along Smith Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Elizabeth Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Elizabeth Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at northerly curbline of East Jersey Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Lafayette Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Lafayette Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
16.  Along Jacques Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Livingston Street, far side, beginning at southerly curbline of Livingston Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Lafayette Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Lafayette Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
17.  Along Livingston Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Livingston Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Livingston Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
18.  Along East Grand Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Reid Street, near side, beginning at easterly curbline of Reid Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Spring Street (U.S. Rt. No. 1), near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
d.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
e.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
19.  Along East Grand Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at easterly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Spring Street, (U.S. Rt. No. 1), near side, be-ginning at the westerly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
e.  Reid Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Reid Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
20.  Along East Broad Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Chestnut Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Chestnut Street and extending south to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Magnolia Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending south to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
21.  Along East Broad Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Magnolia Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending south to a point one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  North Broad Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of North Broad Street and extending north to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
22.  Along Anna Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Jackson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
e.  Spring Street (U.S. Rt. No. 1), far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
23.  Along Anna Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Henry Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Henry Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Spring Street (13.5. Rt. No. 1), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Catherine Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
d.  Monroe Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Monroe Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
e.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
f.  Catherine Street, near side, beginning the easterly curbline of Catherine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly therefrom. 
24.  Along Henry Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Anna Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Anna Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Flora Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Flora Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
25.  Along Henry Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Olive Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Olive Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Flora Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Flora Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
26.  Along Olive Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Henry Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Henry Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Spring Street (U.S. Et. No. 1), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Jackson Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
27.  Along Olive Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Jackson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Spring Street (U.S. Rt. No. 1), far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Spring Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
28.  Along Jackson Avenue, northbound the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Laura Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Laura Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Julia Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Julia Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Fairmount Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Fairmount Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Louisa Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Louisa Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
29.  Along Jackson Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Fairmount Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Fairmount Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Julia Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Julia Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
30.  Along Adams Avenue southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  North Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of North Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Louisa Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Louisa Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
31.  Along Monroe Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  North Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of North Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Fanny Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Fanny Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Alina Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Alina Street and extending one hundred (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Virginia Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Virginia Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
32.  Along Monroe Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Fanny Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Fanny Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
33.  Along Madison Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Virginia Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Virginia Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Alina Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Alina Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
34.  Along Fanny Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
    Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
35.  Along North Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Newark Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Newark Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Jefferson Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Monroe Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Monroe Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Van Buren Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Van Buren Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
e.  Route 1, near side, beginning the westerly curbline of Route 1 and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly therefrom. 
f.  Kilsyth Road, near side, beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curb line of Kilsyth Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly therefrom. 
36.  Along North Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Van Buren Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Van Buren Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Jackson Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Madison Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Madison Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
37.  Along Rahway Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Broad Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Broad Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Elizabethtown Plaza, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Elizabethtown Plaza and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
38.  Along Broad Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Elizabeth Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Elizabeth Avenue and extending two hundred (200) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Caldwell Place, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Caldwell Place and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Between East Jersey Street and East Grand Street, full block, beginning at the north curbline of East Jersey Street and extending to the southerly curbline of East Grand Street; 
d.  Between East Grand Street and East Broad Street, full block, beginning at the north curbline of East Grand Street and extending to the southerly curbline of East Broad Street. 
39.  Along Broad Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Beginning at the southerly curbline of Railroad Place and extending to the northerly curbline of West Grand Street between Railroad Place and West Grand Street, full block; 
b.  Between East Grand Street and West Jersey Street, full block, beginning at the southerly curbline of East Grand Street and extending to the northerly curbline of West Jersey Street; 
c.  West Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of West Jersey Street and extending two hundred seventy (270) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  Caldwell Place, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Dickinson Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
40.  Along Union Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
    West Grand Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of West Grand Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
41.  Along Union Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    West Grand Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of West Grand Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
42.  Along West Grand Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Cherry Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
43.  Along West Grand Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
    Cherry Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
44.  Along Washington Avenue, southbound on the east side thereof at: 
a.  Pearl Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Pearl Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  South Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of South Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
45.  Along Washington Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Grove Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Grove Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  South Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of South Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
46.  Along Edgar Road, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Grove Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Grove Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Garden Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Garden Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  South Elmora Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly side of South Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  Kenneth Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Kenneth Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
47.  Along Edgar Road, northbound on the easterly curbline thereof at: 
a.  Myrtle Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Myrtle Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  South Elmora Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of South Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Garden Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Garden Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
48.  Along Grove Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
49.  Along Morris Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
    Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
50.  Along Morris Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (130) feet southerly thereof. 
51.  Along North Broad Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet southerly thereof. 
52.  Along Cherry Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), far side, be-ginning at the northerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Orchard Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Orchard Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Stiles Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Stiles Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Morris Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Morris Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
53.  Along Cherry Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Morris Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Morris Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Stiles Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Stiles Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  Orchard Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Orchard Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  Westfield Avenue (Rt. No. 28), near side, be-ginning at the northerly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
54.  Along Bailey Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Elmora Avenue (Rt. No. 439), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Springfield Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Springfield Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Monmouth Road, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Monmouth Road and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
55.  Along Bailey Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Springfield Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Springfield Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Elmora Avenue (Rt. No. 439), near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
56.  Along Monmouth Road, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Magie Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Magie Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Bailey Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Bailey Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  Magie Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Magie Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
57.  Along Summit Road, southerly on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Glenwood Road, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Glenwood Road and extending one hundred (120) feet southerly thereof. 
58.  Along Park Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Halstead Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Halstead Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Kipling Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Kipling Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Galloping Hill Road, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Galloping Hill Road and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
59.  Along Third Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Pine Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Pine Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Broadway, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Jersey Street and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
d.  Broadway, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly therefrom; 
e.  Magnolia Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
f.  Pine Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Pine Street and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
g.  Ripley Place, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Ripley Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly therefrom. 
60.  Along Third Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Pine Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Pine Street and extending to a point one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Broadway, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  Broadway, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
d.  Magnolia Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
e.  Pine Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Pine Street and extending one hundred (100) feet northerly therefrom; 
f.  Ripley Place, far side, beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Ripley Place and extending one hundred (100) feet southerly therefrom. 
61.  Along Magnolia Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Third Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending to a point one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  New Point Road, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of New Point Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
62.  Along Magnolia Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Sixth Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Sixth Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  New Point Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of New Point Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Third Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Third Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
63.  Along Fifth Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Broadway, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
64.  Along Fifth Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
    Broadway, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Broadway and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
65.  Along Sixth Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Magnolia Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Magnolia Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
66.  Along South Park Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Sixth Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Sixth Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
67.  Along South Park Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
    Seventh Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Seventh Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
68.  Along Seventh Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
    South Park Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of South Park Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof. 
69.  Along Seventh Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
    East Jersey Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of East Jersey Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
70.  Along Sixth Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
    South Park Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of South Park Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
71.  Along West Jersey Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Broad Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Broad Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
72.  Along West Jersey Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Cherry Street (Rt. No. 27), far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Price Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Price Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
73.  Along Westminster Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof, beginning twenty-five (25) feet north of its intersection with Parker Road and continuing for a distance of one hundred (100) feet northerly thereof. 
74.  Along Edgar Road, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Gibbons Court, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Gibbons Court and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Garden Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Garden Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  Lidgerwood Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Lidgerwood Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
75.  Along Bayway Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at: 
    Amboy Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Amboy Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly therefrom. 
76.  Along Bayway Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at: 
    Between Amboy Avenue and South Front Street, mid-block, beginning one hundred ninety (190) feet south of the southerly curbline of Amboy Avenue and extending one hundred thirty-five (135) feet southerly therefrom. 
77.  Along Rahway Avenue (Route 27), westbound, on the northerly side thereof at: 
    Clover Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Clover Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly therefrom. 
B.  County Roads. 
1.  Along West Jersey Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Cherry Street (Rt. No. 27), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Chilton Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Chilton Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  DeHart Place, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of DeHart Place and extending to a point one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
d.  Grove Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Grove Street, and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
e.  Elmora Avenue (Rt. No. 439), far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
f.  Bellevue Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Bellevue Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
g.  Standish Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Standish Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
2.  Along West Jersey Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Standish Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Standish Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Acme Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Acme Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
c.  Berwick Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Berwick Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
d.  Elmora Avenue (Rt. No. 439), far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Elmora Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
e.  Grove Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Grove Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
f.  DeHart Place, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of DeHart Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
g.  Chilton Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Chilton Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
3.  Along Galloping Hill Road, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Browning Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Browning Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Magie Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Magie Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
4.  Along Magie Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Coolidge Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Coolidge Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Edgewood Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Edgewood Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Browning Avenue, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Browning Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof; 
d.  Shelley Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Shelley Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
e.  Halstead Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Halstead Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
f.  Summit Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Summit Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
g.  Princeton Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Princeton Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
5.  Along Magie Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Verona Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Verona Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
6.  Along Orchard Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Cherry Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof; 
b.  Morris Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Morris Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly thereof. 
7.  Along Orchard Street, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Westfield Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Westfield Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Chilton Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Chilton Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof; 
c.  Cherry Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Cherry Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet easterly thereof. 
8.  Along Morris Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Orchard Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Orchard Street and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof. 
9.  Along Morris Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  Irvington Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Irvington Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet westerly thereof. 
10.  Along North Broad Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Fairmount Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Fairmount Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Waverly Place, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Waverly Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  North Avenue (Rt. No. 439), far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of North Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Country Club Lane, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Country Club Lane and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
e.  King Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of King Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly thereof; 
f.  Lexington Place, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Lexington Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
11.  Along North Broad Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  King Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of King Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Wilder Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Wilder Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  North Avenue (Route No. 439), far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of North Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  DeWitt Road, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of DeWitt Road and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
e.  Salem Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Salem Avenue and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof. 
12.  Along West Grand Street, westbound on the northerly side thereof at: 
a.  West End Place, near side, beginning two hundred (200) feet east of the easterly curbline of West End Place and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet easterly thereof. 
13.  Along South Broad Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at: 
a.  Rahway Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Rahway Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Pearl Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Pearl Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly therefrom; 
c.  South Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of South Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
d.  Grove Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Grove Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
e.  Garden Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Garden Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet northerly thereof; 
f.  Summer Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Summer Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
14.  Along South Broad Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at: 
a.  Denton Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Denton Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Summer Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Summer Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
c.  Garden Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Garden Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Grove Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Grove Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
e.  South Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of South Street and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
f.  South Pearl Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of South Pearl Street and extending one hundred twenty (120) feet southerly therefrom; 
g.  Between South Pearl Street and Elizabeth Avenue, midblock, beginning at a point one hundred sixty-eight (168) feet north of the northerly curbline of South Pearl Street and extending two hundred (200) feet northerly thereof. 
15.  Along Pearl Street, easterly on the southerly side thereof at: 
a.  Washington Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Washington Avenue and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet easterly thereof; 
b.  Washington Avenue, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Washington Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet westerly therefrom. 
16.  Along Lidgerwood Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side at: 
a.  Spofford Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Spofford Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof; 
b.  Bayway, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Bayway and extending one hundred five (105) feet southerly thereof. 
17.  Along Lidgerwood Avenue, southbound, on the easterly side at: 
a.  Rosehill Place, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Rosehill Place and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
b.  Stewart Place, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Stewart Place and extending one hundred (100) feet southerly thereof; 
c.  Meredith Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Meredith Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof; 
d.  Spofford Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Spofford Avenue and extending one hundred five (105) feet northerly thereof. 
C.  State Roads. (Reserved) 
D.  U.S. Highways. 
1.  Route U.S. Highway No. 1 southbound, on the westerly side at Lafayette Street (far side) beginning at the southerly curbline of and extending one hundred (100) feet southerly therefrom. 
2.  Along Route U.S. 1 & 9, northbound, on the easterly side at: 
a.  East Jersey Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28761), beginning at the northerly curb line of East Jersey Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom; 
b.  William Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28762), beginning at the northerly curb line of William Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom; 
c.  Anna Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28763), beginning at the northerly curb line of Anna Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom; 
d.  Olive Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28764), beginning at the northerly curb line of Olive Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom; 
e.  Between Julia Street and Fairmount Avenue, mid-block, (NJ Transit ID# 28765), beginning at a point 310 feet north of the northerly curb line of Julia Street and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom; 
f.  North Avenue (CR 624), near side, (NJ Transit ID# 28766), beginning at the southerly curb line of North Avenue (CR 624) and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom; 
3.  Along Route U.S. 1 & 9, southbound, on the westerly side at: 
a.  Neck Lane, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28767), beginning at the southerly curb line of Neck Lane and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
b.  North Avenue (CR 624), far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28768), beginning at the southerly curb line of North Avenue (CR 624) and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
c.  Fairmount Avenue , far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28769), beginning at the southerly curb line of Fairmount Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
d.  Julia Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28770), beginning at the southerly curb line of Julia Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
e.  Olive Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28771), beginning at the southerly curb line of Olive Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
f.  Anna Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28772), beginning at the southerly curb line of Anna Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
g.  East Grand Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# UNKNOWN), beginning at the southerly curb line of East Grand Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom; 
h.  Lafayette Street, far side, (NJ Transit ID# 28773), beginning at the southerly curb line of Lafayette Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom. 
(Res. dated 12-8-2015 ; Res. dated 9-8-2015 ; Res. dated 11-9-2010; Res. dated 6-19-2007; Res. dated 9-12-2006; Res. dated 5-09-2006; Res. dated 4-25-2006; Res. dated 12-23-2003; amended by resolution; prior code § 143-7) 
Chapter 10.64 - LOADING ZONES AND TAXI STANDS 
Sections: 

10.64.010 - Loading zones established. 
A.  A loading zone is established on the north side of Fairmount Avenue, beginning at a point thirty-five (35) feet west of the westerly curbline of Newark Avenue (New Jersey Route 27), extending to a point fifty (50) feet westerly thereof. 
B.  A loading zone on the north side of Virginia Street, beginning at a point one hundred (100) feet west of Sherman Avenue intersection and extending one hundred fifty (150) feet westerly from the point of beginning, is established. 
C.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Bayview Avenue, north side, extending easterly from the eastern curbline of South Front Street to the Arthur Kill, eight hundred thirty (830) feet more or less. 
D.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: East Broad Street, south side, beginning one hundred twenty-four (124) feet from the westerly curbline of Chestnut Street to a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet westerly thereof. 
E.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Meadow Street, east side, beginning at a point fifty (50) feet south of the southerly curbline of Louisa Street and extending to a point thirty-eight (38) feet southerly therefrom. 
F.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Magnolia Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point one hundred forty-two (142) feet west of the southwest corner of Magnolia Avenue and Catherine Street, extending to a point two hundred thirty-six (236) feet westerly therefrom. 
G.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: West Grand Street, south side, beginning at a point one hundred (100) feet westerly from the intersection of Price Street for a distance of fifty-three (53) feet westerly thereof in front of premises known as 64-70 West Grand Street. 
H.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Loomis Street, east side, along the curbline of Loomis Street, beginning at a point ninety-seven (97) feet south of First Avenue and continuing for a distance of eighty-five (85) feet southerly therefrom. 
I.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Court Street, north side, beginning at a point ninety-six (96) feet west of Seventh Street and continuing for a distance of eighty (80) feet westerly thereof. 
J.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: beginning at a point along the west curbline of Second Street, starting one hundred fifty-seven (157) feet south of Clark Place and continuing fifty-six (56) feet southerly thereof. 
K.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: beginning at a point along the west curbline of Jefferson Avenue twenty-five (25) feet south of East Jersey Street and continuing two hundred seven (207) feet southerly thereof. 
L.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday: in front of 114 South Park Street; beginning at a point along the south curbline of South Park Street one hundred eighty-five (185) feet west of First Street and continuing seventy-three (73) feet westerly thereof. 
M.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: along the north curbline of Fairmount Avenue, west of Newark Avenue; beginning at a point twenty-five (25) feet west of Newark Avenue, (Route No. 27), and continuing for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet westerly thereof. 
N.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along the west curbline of Commerce Place; beginning at a point one hundred twenty-nine (129) feet north of the north curbline of East Grand Street and continuing for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet northerly to a point ten (10) feet south of the existing fire hydrant. 
O.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along the west curbline of Commerce Place; beginning at a point sixty (60) feet north of the north curbline of East Grand Street and continuing for a distance of fifty (50) feet northerly. 
P.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along the western curbline of First Street starting at a point fifty-one (51) feet north of East Jersey Street and continuing twenty-two (22) feet northerly thereof. 
Q.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along the southeast curbline of Centre Street, starting at a point sixty-four (64) feet from the southwest curbline of Second Avenue and continuing fifty (50) feet in a southwest direction. 
R.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: on the north side of Pearl Street, beginning at a point twenty-five (25) feet west of the intersection of the west curbline of Washington Avenue and extending seventy (70) feet westerly from the point of beginning. 
S.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: on the east side of Fifth Street beginning at a point thirty (30) feet north of the curbline of Elizabeth Avenue and extending fifty (50) feet northerly thereof between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
T.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: on the north side of Fulton Street, beginning at a point ninety-six (96) feet west of Third Street and extending forty (40) feet westerly thereof between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
U.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along Center Street east side, beginning at a point fifty (50) feet south of Third Avenue and extending southerly for a distance of thirty (30) feet (Caribe Portuguese Bakery). 
V.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: along the south side of Magnolia Avenue, beginning at a point fifty (50) feet from the west curbline of Division Street, continuing for a distance of fifty-five (55) feet westerly thereof. 
W.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: on the southwest corner of Jefferson Avenue and proceed sixty-two (62) feet in a southerly direction for the day care center opening on Jefferson Avenue and Dickenson Street. 
X.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: Pennsylvania Avenue eastside, beginning at a point three hundred forty-two (342) feet south of the east curbline of Fairmount Avenue and extending one hundred eighty-three (183) feet southerly thereof. 
Y.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: in front of Leiria Bakery, Inc., 114 Inslee Place, between the hours of 4:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, on Inslee Place, south side, beginning at a point one hundred eighty-six (186) feet west of southerly curbline of First Street and extending fifty-three (53) feet westerly thereof. 
Z.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: in front of Millenium 300 Auto Body Shop, 549-551 Pennsylvania Avenue between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., on Pennsylvania Avenue, east, beginning at a point three hundred seventy-eight (378) feet north of the easterly curbline of Whitehead Place and extending sixty-nine (69) feet northerly thereof. 
AA.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone no parking: between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Livingston Street, south side beginning at a point sixty-four (64) feet east of the south curbline of Miller Street and extending one hundred nine (109) feet easterly thereof. 
BB.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: to be created on Travers Avenue in the rear of Twin City Supermarket. Along the east curbline of Travers Avenue beginning at a point thirteen (13) feet south of Virginia Street and continuing for a distance of one hundred ninety-five (195) feet southerly thereof. 
CC.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: establish a loading zone, along the south side of East Jersey Street, beginning at a point two hundred sixty (260) feet east of the easterly curbline of Fifth Street and extending seventy-five (75) feet easterly thereof. 
DD.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: establish a loading zone, along the eastern curbline of Mulberry Street beginning at a point fifty (50) feet north of Westfield Avenue and continuing fifty-seven (57) feet northerly thereof. 
EE.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone no parking: in front of Arco Electric Company, 22 South Seventh Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on South Seventh Street, beginning at a point one hundred thirty-nine (139) feet north of the easterly curbline of Second Avenue and extending forty-six (46) feet northerly thereof. 
FF.  The following described location is designated as a loading zone: in front of 701 Monroe Avenue, for the use of the Daisy Supermarket, along the east curb line of Monroe Avenue, Beginning at a point twenty-five (25) feet north of Louisa Street and Continuing for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet northerly thereof, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
GG.  The following described location is hereby designated as a loading zone: in front of 224 Rahway Avenue, for the use of Super Value Liquors, along the south curb line of Rahway Avenue, beginning at a point one hundred sixty-six (166) feet east of DeHart Place and continuing for a distance of twenty-seven (27) feet easterly thereof, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
HH.  The following described location is established as a designated loading zone in front of 740 Lidgerwood Avenue, Elizabeth, New Jersey: along the east curb line of Lidgerwood Avenue beginning at a point forty-eight (48) feet south of Meredith Avenue and continuing for a distance of one hundred (100) feet south thereof. 
II.  The following described location is established as a designated loading zone: on the Second Avenue side of the Rankin Street Deli located at the corner of Rankin Street and Second Avenue, as follows: Second Avenue on the north side beginning at a point thirty-five (35) feet east of Rankin Street, continuing thirty-five (35) feet east thereof, between the hours 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
JJ.  The following described location is established as a designated loading zone: So. Fifth Street, on the east side, location beginning one hundred eighty-seven (187) feet north of Fourth Avenue continuing forty (40) feet north thereof, for the Armando and Paola Deli, located at 320 South Fifth Street, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
KK.  The following described location is established as a designated loading zone: on Reid Street, on the west side, beginning fifty-eight (58) feet north of Elizabeth Avenue continuing fifty (50) feet northerly thereof, for Avenue Furniture, 941 Elizabeth Avenue, between the hours 8:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
LL.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone in front of the Elizabethport Presbyterian Center, 100-104 Magnolia Avenue: along the south curb line of Magnolia Avenue beginning at a point thirty-eight (38) feet west of First Street and continuing for a distance of seventy-three (73) feet westerly thereof. 
MM.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: on the east side of Pennsylvania Avenue, beginning one hundred forty-eight (148) feet north of Whitehead Place and continuing ninety (90) feet northerly thereof, for New Jersey Dairy Express, Inc., 527-539 Pennsylvania Avenue. 
NN.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: on the north side of East Grand Street beginning ninety-seven (97) feet east of Oak Street and continuing sixty-four (64) feet easterly thereof (Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.), for S & B Refrigeration, 1011-1015 E. Grand Street. 
OO.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: on the west side of Linden Avenue, beginning thirty-five (35) feet south of Elmora Avenue and continuing fifty-three (53) feet southerly thereof, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
PP.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: in front of 824 Livingston Street beginning forty (40) feet west of the property's driveway on the north side of Livingston Street thereof (from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.), for California Surplus Inc. 
QQ.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: on the side of 551 New Point Road beginning fifty (50) feet east of Sixth Street and continuing eighty-three (83) feet easterly on Broadway thereof (from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.), for SGF Freight Services. 
RR.  The following described location is hereby established as a designated loading zone: between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday-Friday, on the north side of Cherry Street, beginning at a point forty-four (44) feet west of the westerly curb line of Orchard Street, extending to a point fifty-five (55) feet westerly thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5100 , § 1, 12-11-2018; Res. dated 6-14-2016 ; Res. dated 12-8-2015 ; Res. dated 8-25-2015 ; Res. dated 11-25-2014 ; Res. dated 8-27-2013; Res. dated 6-11-2013; Res. dated 3-26-2013; Res. dated 2-26-2013; Res. dated 4-24-2012; Res. dated 3-27-2012; Res. dated 11-22-2011; Res. dated 10-11-2011; Res. dated 11-9-2010; Res. dated 10-12-2010; Res. dated 4-27-2010; Res. dated 5-8-2007; Res. dated 11-14-2006; Res. dated 5-23-2006; Res. dated 5-9-2006; Res. dated 3-14-2006; Res. dated 11-22-2005; Res. dated 9-13-2005; Res. dated 9-23-2003; Res. dated 3-25-2003; prior code § 143-1) 
10.64.020 - Erection of signs. 
    The appropriate department is directed to erect appropriate signs designating the area a loading zone. 
(Prior code § 143-2) 
10.64.030 - Taxi stands established. 
A.  North Avenue. 
1.  City council of the City of Elizabeth establishes a taxicab stand as follows: along the southerly curb line of North Avenue, beginning at a point two hundred ninety-five (295) feet west of Jefferson Avenue and continuing for thirty-five (35) feet westerly thereof. 
2.  This taxicab stand is established with the stipulation that twenty-four (24) hour service be available at all times, and if such service is not afforded by the public, the establishment of this taxicab stand will be rescinded. 
B.  Elmora Avenue. 
1.  City council of the City of Elizabeth establishes a taxicab stand as follows: along the southerly curb line of Elmora Avenue, beginning at a point two hundred (200) feet east of West Grand Street and continuing for thirty-five (35) feet easterly thereof. 
2.  This taxicab stand is established with the stipulation that twenty-four (24) hour service be available at all times and if such service is not afforded by the public, the establishment of this taxicab stand will be rescinded. 
C.  Bayway. 
1.  City council of the City of Elizabeth establishes a taxicab stand as follows: along the northerly curb line of Bayway, beginning at a point fifty (50) feet east of Polonia Avenue and continuing for thirty-five (35) feet easterly thereof. 
2.  This taxicab stand is established with the stipulation that twenty-four (24) hour service be available at all times and if such service is not afforded by the public, the establishment of this taxicab stand will be rescinded. 
D.  Elizabeth Avenue. 
1.  City council of the City of Elizabeth establishes a taxicab stand as follows: along the northerly curb line Elizabeth Avenue, beginning at a point thirty-five (35) feet west of South Second Street and continuing for thirty-five (35) feet westerly thereof. 
2.  This taxicab stand is established with the stipulation that twenty-four (24) hour service be available at all times and if such service is not afforded by the public, the establishment of this taxicab stand will be rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 5003 , §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2018; prior code § 143-3) 
10.64.040 - Prohibition of parking, standing, loading and unloading of trucks, tractor trailers, or vans on certain streets. 
    No truck, tractor trailer, or van shall park, stand, load or unload on Virginia Street between Jefferson Avenue and Monroe Avenue. This prohibition shall include the area between the curb line of the street to and including the sidewalk area. In addition to the aforementioned prohibition, the use of the loading dock adjacent to the northeasterly sideline of Virginia Street between Jefferson Avenue and Madison Avenue for the loading and unloading of trucks, tractor-trailers and vans is prohibited between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and is prohibited entirely on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 4570 , § 1, 4-28-2015) 
Chapter 10.68 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 

10.68.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city without first obtaining from the central license bureau a license therefor. 
(Prior code § 57-1) 
10.68.020 - License issuance, renewal-Operation upon streets authorized. 
A.  The supervisor of licenses of the city is authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle licenses, which licenses shall be issued to be effective March 1, 1942, and shall be renewed on the first day of March annually thereafter. The license shall be replaced when lost, stolen or mutilated or when it becomes necessary to issue a new registration. Licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycles, for which such licenses have been issued, upon the streets, alleys and public highways in the city, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof. 
B.  All persons twelve (12) years of age and younger are authorized and permitted to operate licensed bicycles on the sidewalks in the city. 
(Prior code § 57-2) 
10.68.030 - Deputy inspectors authorized-Powers, conditions of service. 
    The license inspector is further authorized to deputize such inspectors who are employees of the board of education as in his or her judgment are necessary for the proper execution of the terms of the this section. Such inspectors shall serve without compensation and shall be empowered to inspect bicycles, accept license fees and issue licenses in accordance with conditions of this section. 
(Prior code § 57-3) 
10.68.040 - License plates, or license stickers, registration required. 
    The city shall provide a license plate or license sticker of suitable material, together with a registration card; the license plates or license stickers and registration cards shall bear numbers sta.m.ped thereon in numerical order. Such license plates or license stickers shall be suitable for attachment upon the rear mudguard of bicycles. It shall be the duty of the license inspector to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license fee herein provided for. The license inspector shall also keep a record of the date of issue of each license and the number thereof. 
(Prior code § 57-4) 
10.68.050 - Bicycle dealers-Reports, information required. 
    All persons in the city engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the central license bureau, giving the name and ad-dress of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased and fra.m.e number thereof, the size, and the number of the plate found thereon. 
    All persons engaged in the business of selling new or second-hand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the central license bureau, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each buyer, together with a description including fra.m.e number and the number of the license plate attached thereto, if any. 
(Prior code § 57-5) 
10.68.060 - Transfer of ownership-Report required. 
    It is the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the central license bureau the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration thereof within five days of the sale or transfer. 
(Prior code § 57-6) 
10.68.070 - Serial numbers protected-Substitution of license plates prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame license pursuant to this chapter. It also is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in which such license, seal or registration card is operative, provided, however, that nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the central license bureau from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. The substitution of plates not in conformity with the ordinance codified herein is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 57-7) 
10.68.080 - Inspections, impounding authorized -Recovery fee. 
    The license inspector of the city may inspect any bicycle on any public highway or public place at any time to ascertain whether or not it has a registration tag properly displayed on it or whether the bicycle is in proper mechanical condition to be operated safely, and in the event a bicycle is being used or operated without the aforesaid tag or is in such condition as to be unfit for safe operation, the central license bureau may impound and confiscate the bicycle until such time as the person or persons owning it have procured the necessary registration tag or have rendered the bicycle safe for use, and have also paid one dollar ($1.00) for the release of the bicycle. 
(Prior code § 57-8) 
10.68.090 - Fees for licenses and transfers. 
    The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be one dollar ($1.00) and shall be paid upon receipt of the license. Such license may be transferred when the ownership of the bicycle is transferred, and a fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be paid for the registration of such transfer only when the license plate is so mutilated that it is necessary for a new license plate to be issued. The fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Prior code § 57-9) 
10.68.100 - Disposition of revenue. 
    All moneys collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the city treasurer of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Prior code § 57-10) 
10.68.110 - Rules and regulations for operation authorized. 
    The central license bureau is further authorized to make such rules and regulations for the operation of bicycles on the public streets in the city as in its judgment will be conducive to the safety and protection of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic; provided, however, that the rules and regulations do not conflict with any existing statutes of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 57-11) 
10.68.120 - Bicycle equipment requirements. 
A.  Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front, and with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the rear. In addition to the red lamp, a red or white reflector of any type shall be mounted on the rear mudguard or on the seat mount and on the front and rear of each pedal, all of which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beam's of head lamps on a motor vehicle, as defined in Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated. 
B.  No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
C.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Prior code § 57-12) 
Chapter 10.72 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.72.010 - Certain lights prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to operate or maintain any illuminated rotating or revolving light or similar device that is designed or operated so as to appear similar to: 
A.  Warning lights of an emergency vehicle; 
B.  Traffic control devices; or 
C.  Official warning signals. 
(Prior code § 141-1) 
10.72.020 - Stationary lights regulated-Pedestrians and motorists protected. 
    It is unlawful to maintain, permit or operate any light which illuminates a building or a sign, or which is used for advertising purposes, if the rays from said light are so focused as to interfere with the vision of the operator of a motor vehicle or with the vision of a pedestrian crossing motor vehicle traffic. 
(Prior code § 141-2) 
10.72.030 - Flame devices prohibited-Scope of prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or is in control of a motor vehicle to operate any motor vehicle in the city where such motor vehicle is equipped with any device designed to expel flame or gaseous substances capable of combustion from the exhaust pipe or any other part of the motor vehicle, where such flame or combustible gas is or may be propelled beyond the frame or body of such motor vehicle. The prohibition contained in this section shall apply to motor vehicles in motion or parked upon any street, avenue, alley or other public place in the city and shall be equally applicable whether such device is operated by the motor of such motor vehicle or by a separate machine, engine or other device. 
(Prior code § 141-8) 
10.72.040 - Reimbursement of costs-Trucks and bridges. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and guidelines for reimbursement to the city for the costs incurred by the city as the result of a truck or trucks driving under a bridge, without sufficient clearance, so as to hit or become immobilized beneath said bridge. 
B.  Definitions. 
    "Bridge" means any bridge or underpass within the limits of the city. 
    "Person" means any natural person or persons, corporation, partnership, association or any other organization. 
C.  Liability-Reimbursement of Costs. Any person or persons, who intentionally, negligently or in any way cause a truck to go under a bridge without sufficient clearance shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the city department of public works, police department, fire department, department of health and human services or other city agency. Such costs as herein provided shall include, but not be limited to the following: labor costs for city personnel or any other outside agency, public or private; administrative costs; the costs of running or using equipment; the costs of materials used, and any other cost incidental thereto for the purpose of meeting the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such payment shall be remitted to the city within ten (10) days of such notice of payment; such notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered. 
D.  Other Applicable Laws. This chapter is not intended to preempt or be inconsistent with any other law or regulations, but is intended solely for the recoupment of costs heretofore provided. This chapter shall be in addition to any other penalties or remedies as provided by law. 
E.  Administration and Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the director of the department of public works, who shall be deemed the enforcement officer. 
F.  Notice of Violations. Whenever the enforcement officer or designee determines that there have been expenses incurred, which are reimbursable to this chapter he or she shall notify the owner of the truck of the costs incurred by the city. 
G.  Violations and Penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
H.  The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 141-85) 
10.72.050 - Work safety zones. 
A.  Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The council finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force performing these operations. 
    The city of Elizabeth in the county of Union, in the state of New Jersey, adopts the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as the M.U.T.C.D., except as supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance operation of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of this section. 
B.  Pre-Construction Meetings. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of a public utility, as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the traffic division of the Elizabeth police department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting at least three days in advance of any construction in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of construction of work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section three days prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the traffic division of the Elizabeth police is in violation of this section. 
C.  Hazardous Conditions. The person, contract or utility shall provide the traffic division with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the police department to correct such hazardous conditions, the reasonable fees for such emergency service by the city shall be charged to the person, contractor, or utility responsible for such conditions. 
D.  Road Closings and Detours. Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the Elizabeth police department (traffic division). 
E.  Traffic Directors. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites when determined by the Elizabeth police department, traffic division that same is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic. Traffic directors shall be outside of their vehicles and visible at all times when posted at construction or maintenance sites except where otherwise required by the nature of the construction or maintenance site. 
F.  Stop Work. The traffic division of the Elizabeth police department shall have the authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment or authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment or vehicles, stored material within the street right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section. 
G.  Site Preparation. It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles, or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction, signs, lights, devices, and pavement markings are installed. 
H.  Emergency Repair Work. In the case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance operations or emergency utility work must be performed that will obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the city, the person, contractor or utility, performing such operation shall notify the Elizabeth police department of such emergency operation. The person, contractor, or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency, and the location and hours of operation. 
    All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work the person, contractor, or utility shall comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while performing such emergency repair work. 
I.  Hours. There shall be no construction, maintenance operation, or utility work on any roadway in the city before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the traffic division of the Elizabeth police department. If it is determined by the officer in charge (of the police traffic department) that the construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
J.  Violations and Penalties. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, for a first offense pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of prior code Chapters 141 and 143 of the code of the city of Elizabeth are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city of Elizabeth contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "Autism Research and Treatment Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 144 and two dollars ($2.00) to each fine imposed and collected for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city of Elizabeth for the "New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund," as authorized by P.L. 2003, c. 183. 
    The violation and penalty provisions of this title of the code of the city are amended to increase the penalty provisions of all parking and moving violations of the code of the city contained in such chapters to add the amount of one dollar ($1.00) to each fine imposed and collected for the violations of the aforesaid chapters of the code of the city for the "New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund," as authorized by the "Brain Injury Research Act, P.L. 2003, c. 200." 
(Ord. 3608 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 3549 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code § 141-148A) 
10.72.060 - Sale of motor vehicles on public rights-of-way prohibited; exceptions. 
    The placement of "for sale" signs on motor vehicles located on the public rights-of-way of the city and the sale of motor vehicles on the public rights-of-way of the city shall be prohibited, except that a resident may place one "for sale" sign on and conduct the sale of one motor vehicle located on a public right-of-way provided that the motor vehicle is owned by and registered with the state motor vehicle commission to a resident of the city at the address where the motor vehicle is offered for sale. The motor vehicle shall be properly insured. The license plates on the motor vehicle shall not be dealer license plates. No more than two sales within a 12-month period may be made by any resident. 
(Ord. No. 4079, § 1, 11-10-2009) 
Chapter 10.76 - SCOOTERS 
Sections: 

10.76.010 - Definitions. 
    "Scooter" means a vehicle that typically has two wheels with a low footboard between them, is steered by a handle bar, and is propelled by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other on the footboard. 
    "Motorized scooter" means a scooter that is propelled by a small motor located on the vehicle. 
(Ord. 3270 § 1, 2000: prior code Ch. 56 (part)) 
10.76.020 - Helmet requirement. 
A.  No person shall operate or ride on a scooter or motorized scooter unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4 Bicycle Helmet Standard) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. 
B.  This requirement shall apply at all times while a scooter or motorized scooter is operated on any property open to the public or used by the public for pedestrian and/or vehicular purposes. 
(Ord. 3270 § 2, 2000: prior code Ch. 56 (part)) 
10.76.030 - Violation. 
A.  A person who violates any requirement of this chapter for the first offense shall be issued a warning by the enforcing official. Any subsequent violation shall fall under the general penalty provisions of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
B.  The parent or legal guardian of a minor child who violates any requirement of this chapter, after being warned upon a first offense, may be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3270 § 3, 2000: prior code Ch. 56 (part)) 
Chapter 10.77 - MOTOR SCOOTERS 
Sections: 

10.77.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms or words will have the following definitions, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    "Motorized scooter" means a self-propelled device that typically has at least two wheels, is steered by a handle bar, may or may not have a seat, and is propelled by a small electric or gas-powered motor. This definition shall not include a moped, motorbike, dirt bike and/or motorcycle, all of which are regulated and/or licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, et seq. 
(Ord. 3658 § 1, 2004) 
10.77.020 - Motorized scooters prohibited in or on the public streets, sidewalks, parks, paths, places of public business and recreation. 
    No person shall operate a motor scooter on any public street, sidewalk, park, path and/or place of public business and recreation. 
(Ord. 3658 § 2, 2004) 
10.77.030 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  A person who violates any requirement of this chapter for the first offense shall be issued a warning by the enforcing official. Any subsequent violation shall fall under the general penalty provisions of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
B.  If the violator of this chapter is a minor, the warning provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be given to the parent or guardian of the violator. 
C.  The parent or legal guardian of a minor child who violates any requirement of this chapter, after being warned upon a first offense, may be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the code of the city of Elizabeth for subsequent violations. 
D.  In addition to the penalties provided for in subsections A, B and C of this section, upon a second or subsequent violation of this chapter, members of the Elizabeth police department shall be empowered to confiscate any illegally operated motor scooters for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3658 § 3, 2004) 
10.77.040 - Severability. 
    If any section or provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, same shall not effect the validity or constitutionality of any other part or portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3658 § 4, 2004) 
10.77.050 - Inconsistent ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter be and the same are repealed. 
(Ord. 3658 § 5, 2004) 
10.77.060 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be twenty (20) days after its final passage by city council and approval by the mayor at the time and manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 3658 § 6, 2004) 
Chapter 10.80 - PEDESTRIANS CROSSING 
Sections: 

10.80.010 - Mid-block crossings. 
    Mid-block crossings are established in the city of Elizabeth as follows: 
Name of Street Location Amboy Avenue Between Bayway Avenue and Myrtle Street beginning 54 feet north of Myrtle Street and being 21 feet wide and extending westerly therefrom. 
Crosswalk stop signs shall be placed 50 feet north of Myrtle Street on the east side curb line; 79 feet north of Myrtle Street on the east side curb line; and 79 feet north of Myrtle Street on west side curb line; stop for pedestrian signs, shall be placed 12 feet north of Myrtle Street on east side curb line; and 98 feet north of Myrtle Street on west side curb line. West Grand Street Beginning at a point 185 feet east of the easterly curbline of Union Street and extending 10 feet easterly therefrom Jefferson Avenue Beginning at a point 255 feet north of the northerly curbline of Dickenson Street and extending 10 feet northerly therefrom 655 Livingston Street Beginning at a point approximately 154 feet southeast of easterly curbline of Seventh Street and extending ten feet southeasterly therefrom. 
Warnings sings of pedestrian crossing ahead 100 feet in both directions, as well as Stop for Pedestrian signs ten feet from crosswalk in both directions, and additional signage placed for No Parking with 25 feet on both sides of said crosswalk.  
(Ord. No. 4530 , § 1, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4490 , § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. 3510 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3467 § 1, 2002: prior code § 141A-1) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - STREET, SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Maintenance, repair and lighting of certain undedicated streets. 
A.  The following streets, within the city, which are currently undedicated, are authorized to be repaired, maintained and have snow, ice, and other obstructions, removed therefrom and lighting shall also be provided, as well as garbage collected at the curb of such streets, notwithstanding the fact that such streets shall not have been taken over by this municipality or dedicated and accepted as a public street or highway: 
1.  Browning Avenue. Between Galloping Hill Road and Kipling Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Galloping Hill Road with the southeasterly sideline of Browning Avenue, thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue, north forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east 240.15 feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Browning Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Kipling Road if lines were extended, thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Kipling Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue, if lines were extended, thence 
c.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west 239.89 feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Galloping Hill Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Galloping Hill Road south forty-six (46) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
2.  Browning Avenue. Between Kipling Road and Coolidge Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Kipling Road with the southeasterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue north forty-two (42) degrees five minutes east two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Browning Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Coolidge Road if lines were extended, thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue, south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west two hundred (240) feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Kipling Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Kipling Road south forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
3.  Browning Avenue. Between Coolidge Road and Harding Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the southeasterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue north forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Browning Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Harding Road if lines were extended, thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Harding Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the northeasterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Coolidge Road south forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
4.  Browning Avenue. Between Harding Road and Edgewood Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Harding Road with the southeasterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue, north forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Browning Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Edgewood Road, if lines were extended, thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Edgewood Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Browning Avenue south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Harding Road with the northwesterly sideline of Browning Avenue if lines were extended, thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Harding Road south forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
5.  Shelley Avenue. Between Kipling Road and Coolidge Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Kipling Road with the southeasterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Shelley Avenue north forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Shelley Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Coolidge Road (if lines were extended), thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the northwesterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Shelley Avenue south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Kipling Road with the northwesterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Kipling Road south forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
6.  Shelley Avenue. Between Coolidge Road and Harding Road: beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the southeasterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence running: 
a.  Along the sideline of Shelley Avenue, north forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes east two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of said sideline of Shelley Avenue with the southwesterly sideline of Harding Road (if lines were extended), thence, 
b.  North forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes west fifty (50) feet to a point of intersection of the southwesterly sideline of Harding Road with the northwesterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Shelley Avenue, south forty-two (42) degrees fifty-one (51) minutes west two hundred forty (240) feet to a point of intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Coolidge Road with the northwesterly sideline of Shelley Avenue (if lines were extended), thence, and 
d.  Along the sideline of Coolidge Road south forty-seven (47) degrees nine minutes east fifty (50) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
    The above descriptions are written in accordance with a map entitled "Blocks 30 to 42 inclusive Fifth Allotment of a Map of Property at Elmora, in the City of Elizabeth, N.J., Owned by the Elmora Realty Company." 
7.  Berkeley Place (Formerly Palmer Place). Beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly sideline of Emerson Avenue with the southeasterly sideline of Berkeley Place, thence running: 
a.  Along the southeasterly sideline of Berkeley Place north forty-five (45) degrees east 189.12 feet to a point of terminus in the city line of Elizabeth and Union Township, thence, 
b.  Along the city line of Elizabeth and Union Township, north thirty-five (35) degrees forty-three (43) minutes west 40.54 feet to a point being the intersection of said city line with the northwesterly sideline of Berkeley Place, thence, 
c.  Along the sideline of Berkeley Place south forty-five (45) degrees west 195.66 feet to a point of intersection of the northwesterly sideline of Berkeley Place with the northeasterly sideline of Emerson Avenue, thence, and 
d.  Along the line of Emerson Avenue, south forty-five (45) degrees east forty (40) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
B.  In addition to the streets serviced by the provisions of subsection A. hereof, and which are not shown on the official map of this municipality, same may, at the option of the city, be suitably improved in accordance with any requirements established under Article 5 of the "Municipal Land Use Law", p. 1975, C. 291, SS 23-27 (C. 40:55D-32 to C. 40:55D-36), as same may be amended and supplemented and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-81) 
12.04.020 - Paving-Assessment procedures. 
    All assessments imposed for paving or repaving any road, street, avenue, highway or alley, made under and by virtue of the provisions of an Act entitled "An Act Concerning Municipalities," approved March 27, 1917, and the supplements thereto and amendments thereof, may be paid in full or in five installments of not less than twenty (20) percent each, with interest on the deferred installments at the rate of five percent per annum. The first installment shall be due within forty (40) days after the confirmation of the assessment by the director of public works and the remaining installments in one, two, three and four years after date of confirmation; provided, however, that in case any such installments be in default and remain unpaid for thirty (30) days from and after the time when the same shall become due and payable, the installment or installments so in default shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of confirmation of said assessment. 
(Prior code § 126-1) 
12.04.030 - Sidewalks, curbs and driveways-Improvements-Assessment of abutting owners. 
    In any public streets, avenues, alleys and lanes in the city, the grade of which has been established or which may hereafter be established, curbs shall be set or reset, and sidewalks laid, relaid, altered, repaired and maintained, at the expense of the abutting landowners, as now provided by law and the provisions of this chapter, or the supplements thereto and amendments thereof. 
(Prior code § 126-7) 
12.04.040 - Sidewalks, curbs and driveways-Supervision, compliance with regulations required. 
    All curbstone, sidewalks or flagging hereafter set, reset, laid, relaid, altered or repaired shall be done under the supervision, and in compliance with the regulations of the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 126-8) 
12.04.050 - Sidewalks, curbs and driveways-Prohibited removal. 
    No curbs or sidewalks or any part of same in any part of the city shall hereafter be taken up or removed therefrom for any purpose whatever without written permission from the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 126-9) 
12.04.060 - Sidewalk construction specifications-Compliance required. 
    All sidewalks in any street, avenue, alley or lane, or section thereof, in the city, where the grade has been or may hereafter be established, shall be laid to such width as the director of public works shall direct, with flat oblong stones of the best hard blue or gray granite, hewn and laid closely together, or cement sidewalk construction according to city specifications. In the event that application is made to the director of public works for the construction of any sidewalk to be constructed with any material other than as aforementioned or by any other method desired and as aforementioned, then in that event, a complete set of plans and specifications shall be prepared in detail by a licensed engineer or a licensed architect and submitted to the city engineer of the city, who may either approve or disapprove of the plans and specifications. 
(Prior code § 126-10) 
12.04.070 - Driveway construction specifications-Compliance required. 
    All private cartways or driveways crossing any of the paved or flagged sidewalks in any street, avenue, alley or lane in the city shall be paved or flagged to such width as the director of public works shall by resolution direct, in part with flat oblong stones of blue or gray granite, and the remaining part of such cartway across the sidewalk shall be paved or flagged with flat oblong stones, hewn and laid closely together, or the whole to be of cement sidewalk construction according to city specifications. In the event that application is made to the director of public works for the construction of any driveway to be constructed with any material other than as aforementioned or by any other method desired and as aforementioned, then in that event, a complete set of plans and specifications shall be prepared in detail by a licensed engineer or a licensed architect and submitted to the city engineer of the city, who may either approve or disapprove of the plans and specifications. 
(Prior code § 126-11) 
12.04.080 - Sidewalk construction-Maintenance required. 
    The owner, owners or occupants of any dwelling house, store or other building, or lot or lots of ground, fronting or abutting on any public street, avenue, alley or lane in the city which has been graded, shall, at his, her or their charges and expenses, well and sufficiently lay the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises, for such widths as the director of public works may provide, and keep and maintain the same in good repair. 
(Prior code § 126-12) 
12.04.090 - Additional maintenance required. 
    In all cases, the land lying between the curb and the sidewalk, and the sidewalk and fence line, must be maintained at a uniform grade or surface for the entire width thereof, and shall be neatly and sufficiently covered with gravel, broken stone, screenings, grass and sodding, as shall be required by the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 126-13) 
12.04.100 - Service of notice to repair-Assessment of costs. 
    From and after the adoption and approval of this chapter, the director of public works may, by resolution, cause a notice in writing to be served upon the owners or occupants of any land abutting on any public street, avenue, alley or lane, requiring the owners or occupants to set, curb or lay sidewalk, or cause the existing curb or sidewalk to be reset, relaid, altered or repaired, within a period of not less than thirty (30) days after the date of service of the notice; whenever any lands are unoccupied and the owner or owners thereof cannot be found within the city, the same shall be mailed, postpaid, to his or her post office address if the same can be ascertained; in case such owner or owners are nonresidents or his or her post office address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four weeks, once a week, in a newspaper of the city; and in case the owner or occupants of such land shall not comply with the requirements of such notice, the director of public works shall, upon filing due proof of service or publication of such notice, cause the required work to be done, and the cost of same shall be certified to the comptroller of the city, to become a lien upon the abutting lands in front of which such work was done, to the extent that assessments for local improvements are liens, and shall bear interest from the date it is certified to the comptroller, at the same rate of interest as other assessments; and in addition thereto, the city may maintain an action to recover the amount against the owner or owners of the lands, in any court having competent jurisdiction thereof. 
(Prior code § 126-14) 
12.04.110 - Disposal of old concrete or slate sidewalks-Fee for disposal. 
    In order to avail property owners the means to dispose of broken, unwanted sidewalks, the city will offer the following disposal service to its property owners, providing the work is accomplished by the owner himself and not a contractor. 
    Disposal of concrete and/or slate sidewalks will be provided to property owners wishing to reconstruct same, provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  A permit to construct new sidewalks has been issued by the director of public works upon payment of the designated fee; 
B.  A permit shall be issued only after the owner has paid to the city a fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) per ten (10) cubic yard lot. Each additional lot or portion thereof shall be an additional sixty dollars ($60.00). The director of public works shall adjust this fee from time to time as necessary and appropriate. 
C.  The site is not part of an improvement subject to planning board approval; 
D.  The subject debris must be from that portion of land within the road right-of-way and within the city; 
E.  The property in question is not for commercial use; 
F.  All debris is to be broken into pieces no larger than twelve (12) inches and stacked neatly at the curb. 
(Ord. No. 4149, §§ 41, 65, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 126-15) 
12.04.120 - Incinerator ash paving material prohibited. 
    The use of incinerator ash or incinerator ash conglomerate as a paving material is prohibited on any public or private road, street, or any other paved area within the city. 
(Prior code § 126-39) 
Chapter 12.08 - STREET EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Excavations 

12.08.010 - Opening of streets prohibited-Exception. 
    Hereafter, no opening, trench, sewer or connection therewith which shall require excavations to be made in public streets, avenues, public alley, easement, or other right-of-way accepted or maintained by the city as a public street, as well as any state or county road or highway over which the city has acquired jurisdiction by agreement, shall be made by any person or corporation, provided this chapter shall not apply to any corporation having power or authority under any acts of the legislature to lay and construct pipes and conduits in the public streets, avenues, lanes, or highways. 
(Prior code § 126-22) 
12.08.020 - Permit required procedure for excavations, connections. 
    No person shall make any excavation in or tunnel under any street without first obtaining a permit from the department of public works/engineering division and notification to the police department, traffic division. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work immediately, provided that the application therefor is made simultaneously with the commencement of the work or as soon thereafter as is practical. When issued, the permit shall be retroactive to the date on which the work has begun. All permits shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 126-23) 
12.08.030 - Denial of permit-Appeal. 
    The city engineer is authorized to refuse the issuance of any permit if such refusal is in the best interest of the public safety, public convenience or public health. If a permit is refused by the city engineer, an appeal may be taken to the city council. The city council, after hearing the applicant and the city engineer and other evidence as may be produced, may either direct the issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 126-24) 
12.08.040 - Applications for permits. 
    Applications for permits shall be made to the department of public works/engineering division and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street number, if any, of the abutting property; 
C.  The city tax map block and lot number of the property for the benefit of which the opening is to be made; 
D.  Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made; 
E.  Character and purpose of the work proposed; 
F.  Time when the work is to be commenced and completed; 
G.  Each application shall be accompanied by a set of plans or a sketch showing the exact location and dimensions of all openings; 
H.  The name and address of the workman or contractor who is to perform the work; and 
I.  A statement that the applicant agrees to replace at his or her own cost and expense, the street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk in the same state and condition in all things as they were at the time of the commencement of the work. 
(Prior code § 126-25) 
12.08.050 - Issuance of permit. 
    Permit shall be issued under the authority of, and by the city engineer and in accordance with the provisions of the section and the regulations which the city engineer may establish. The city engineer shall determine the initial time limit during which the permit shall be valid. 
(Prior code § 126-26) 
12.08.060 - Contents of permit-Filing. 
    Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the name of the street, and the location where the excavations are to be made, the dimensions of the opening, and the period during which the permit shall be valid. The original of each permit shall remain on file in the city engineer's office, 
(Prior code § 126-27) 
12.08.070 - Fee schedule. 
    The application fee for utility opening shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The permit fee shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). All fees shall be in check or money order payable to the city. These fees are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 42, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 126-28) 
12.08.080 - Utility opening permit-Fee. 
A.  In addition to the fee described in Subsections A., B. and C., whenever any person makes an application for a permit which will require the city to apply for a utility opening permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:7-44.1 and N.J.A.C 16:41-3.1, that person shall pay to the city a fee equal to the fee imposed on the city by the New Jersey Department of Transportation for obtaining a utility opening permit. Further, should the applicant request that the city prepare any required plans, drawings or specifications necessary for the application of a utility opening permit, a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be imposed for the preparation of the aforesaid plans, drawings and/or specifications. 
B.  The applicant shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents, against all suits and costs of every name and description and from any and all damages and injuries arising out of the work to be performed. 
C.  The applicant shall comply with all of the conditions set forth by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as stated in Section 41-3.2(b) et seq., of Title 16 of the New Jersey Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 43, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 36-7) 
12.08.090 - Regulations governing private sewers. 
    Where there is no sewer in the street on which a building faces and it is necessary to construct a private sewer to connect with the sewer on an adjacent street or avenue, it must be laid outside of the curb, under the roadway of the street, and not through yards or under houses without a special permit from the division of housing and inspections. 
(Prior code § 36-14) 
12.08.100 - Bond or cash deposit required. 
    No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed a bond in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per square yard of opening as determined by the city engineer. The city engineer may waive the requirements of this subsection in the case of a public utility upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting any claims against it up to the amount of the bond which would otherwise be required. The bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the state of New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows: 
A.  To indemnify and hold harmless the city from all loss, damage, claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of any litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting from any work done by the applicant under the permit. 
B.  To indemnify the city for any expense incurred in enforcing any of the provisions of this section. 
C.  To indemnify any person who sustains personal injuries or damage to his/her property as a result of any act or omission of the applicant, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of any work under the permit. 
D.  The bond shall also be conditioned upon the applicant's restoring the surface and foundation of the street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the city engineer. 
E.  One bond may be accepted in cover a number of excavations by the same applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period of two years. 
(Ord. 3311 § 1, 2001; prior code § 126-29) 
12.08.110 - Insurance. 
A.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the city engineer with satisfactory proof that he is insured against injury to persons and damage to property caused by any act or omission of the applicant, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of the work to be performed under the permit. 
B.  The insurance shall cover all hazards likely to arise in connection with the work, including but not limited to collapse and explosion, and shall also insure against liability arising from completed operations. An original workmen's compensation and employer's liability insurance certificate with statutory limits applicable to area in which work is being performed. An original contractor's comprehensive general liability insurance certificate with limits for: bodily injury liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident, and property damage liability of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) each accident with five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) aggregate. An original automobile and truck insurance certificate, one person in any one accident one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), two or more persons in any one accident one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The city engineer may waive the requirements of this section in the case of a public utility upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting claims against it up to the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which would otherwise be required. 
(Prior code § 126-29.1) 
12.08.120 - Rules and regulations. 
    All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
A.  All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other necessary precautions for the protection of persons or property. 
    Permittee is responsible for providing any pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic control where the work involves the diversion of traffic flow as required by the police department. 
B.  All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of interference with pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic on the street affected. 
C.  The city engineer may, upon application by the permittee, extend the time limit during which the permit shall be valid. 
D.  All refuse and material shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours. 
E.  All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee, and shall be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner prescribed by the department of public works/engineering division. Where the public works inspector determines that the excavated materials are unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill the excavation with bank run gravel or crushed stone. 
F.  If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with rammed concrete composed of one part cement to ten (10) parts sand. 
G.  If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
H.  If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or any extension granted by the city engineer, or is not performed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this subsection and any other regulations that may be established by the city engineer, then the city engineer may instruct the department of public works to complete the work and restore the surface of the street. The cost of completing the work and restoring the street shall be charged to the permittee and may be deducted from his deposit or recovered by an action in court of competent jurisdiction. 
I.  All excavation work shall be done in accordance with the OSHA Construction Safety Orders. 
(Prior code § 126-29.2) 
12.08.130 - Rules and regulations for restoration of surface. 
    In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in accordance with: 
A.  No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation or surface until the public works inspector has determined that settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area properly prepared for restoration. 
B.  The street surface shall be restored so as to extend six inches beyond the excavation on all sides, and the existing pavement edge shall be saw cut. 
C.  Possession of Permit. A copy of the permit together with a plan endorsed with the approval of the city engineer shall be kept in possession of the person actually performing the work and shall be exhibited on demand to any duly authorized employee of the department of public works or to any police officer of the city. 
D.  Revocation of Permit. The city engineer may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Violation of any provision of this section or any other applicable rules, regulation, law or ordinance; 
2.  Violation of any condition of the permit issued; and 
3.  Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy, unsanitary or declared by any provision of this revision to constitute a nuisance. 
    The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as that set forth in this revision for the revocation of licenses, except that the initial hearing shall be before the city engineer with a right of appeal to the city council; and the city engineer may provide in his decision that the revocation shall not become effective if the permittee corrects the violation within a specified period of time. 
E.  Modification of Permit Conditions. In a special case the city council may by resolution impose special conditions to which the issuance of the permit may be subject, or may decide that any provision of this section shall not apply or shall be altered. 
(Prior code § 126-29.3) 
12.08.140 - Permit or license not required for laying of pipe or conduit outside of buildings and inside property lines. 
    Anything in this code or any other chapter, rule, regulation or enactment of the city or any of its personnel not withstanding, no individual or corporation shall be required to obtain a permit or license in order to engage in the occupation of laying or installing pipe or conduit of any nature outside of buildings and inside property lines. 
(Prior code § 36-55) 
Article II - Obstructions 

12.08.150 - Street obstructions prohibited. 
    No person shall encumber or obstruct any street, highway, abutting sidewalk or gutter by placing thereon any advertisements or displays of food, clothing, appliances or merchandise. 
(Prior code § 126-46) 
12.08.160 - Removal of obstructions authorized-Assessment of removal costs. 
    The director of public works is authorized and empowered to execute the removal of any such impediment or obstruction at any time after five hours' due notice is given the person causing the obstruction or impediment. The cost of removal by the municipality shall be certified to the department of public works by the city engineer. The director of public works shall examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against such real estate so abutting upon such sidewalk or gutter thereof, and the amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon such real estate and be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected, with interest, by the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. 
(Prior code § 126-47) 
12.08.170 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any individual issued a permit by the city to operate a newspaper stand. 
B.  All newspaper stands which do not extend beyond three feet of the adjoining building line. 
C.  All public market places licensed and regulated by the department of public works, division of public buildings, markets and docks. 
D.  Permits issued under the building code of the city pertaining to building materials and construction equipment. 
(Prior code § 126-48) 
12.08.180 - Open-flame warning devices prohibited. 
    The use of open-flame warning devices, commonly known as kerosene-fueled, bomb-type warning flares, or any facsimile thereof, regardless of shape or size or type of fuel used, shall be prohibited for use by any person as warning signals on any sidewalk, street, roadway or area to which the general public may have access. 
(Prior code § 126-55) 
12.08.190 - Approved warning devices required. 
    Illuminated warning devices for use during sidewalks or road repairs, excavations, hazardous areas, etc., shall be of an approved flasher-type electric warning signal energized by battery, and/or removable key-type kerosene lanterns securely fastened. 
(Prior code § 126-56) 
12.08.200 - Exception in extenuating circumstances-Notification required. 
    In case of extenuating or extreme circumstances, where building materials, rubble or debris have been placed in a portion of the street, oil-fueled lanterns other than above specified may be used as warning devices for not more than one period of darkness, upon condition that the police department of the city be immediately notified of the extenuating circumstances that make it necessary to set up such warning signals. 
(Prior code § 126-57) 
12.08.210 - Warning flares for disabled vehicles. 
    In the event of disablement of vehicles on public roads, signals may be set up in area by electric flash lamps, oil lanterns or warning flares (fusees); however, warning flares (fusees) shall not be used for more than one period of darkness, upon condition that the police department of the city be immediately notified of the extenuating circumstances that make it necessary to set up such warning signals. 
(Prior code § 126-58) 
Chapter 12.12 - STREET CLOSURES FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Closing of school streets authorized. 
    The mayor of the city is authorized to close by regulation any public or private school street wherein a safety problem exists. 
(Prior code § 125-1) 
12.12.020 - Powers of mayor-Hours closed. 
    Whenever the mayor of the city finds that a safety problem exists for ingress or egress to any public or private school, or whenever he or she seeks to provide recreational facilities for children attending such school, or whenever such circumstances exist in combination due to lack of suitable area surrounding such school, he or she may, by regulation, close such portion of any street within the block upon which such school is located, not to exceed one hour between 7:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., two hours between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and one hour between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., on any day or days upon which such school is in session, for the purpose of ingress or egress to such school and/or for the use by the pupils of such school for recreational purposes. 
(Prior code § 125-2) 
12.12.030 - Signs required. 
    There shall be posted warning signs in such street indicating that said street is so closed and the purpose thereof. 
(Prior code § 125-3) 
Chapter 12.16 - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Time limit for removal of snow from sidewalks. 
    The owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person having charge of any building or lands bordering upon any street, square, highway or public place within the city that is or may be graded, curbed and flagged shall cause the sidewalk in front of the property to be cleared of snow, ice or sleet, to a width of at least four feet, within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same shall be formed or fall thereon. 
(Prior code § 121-1) 
12.16.020 - Ice on sidewalks-Removal or covering required. 
    Whenever ice shall form on any sidewalk or any part thereof, the owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person having charge of any building or lands as aforesaid shall, within the space of one hour thereafter, during the daytime, cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient for travel by removing the ice therefrom or by covering the same with sand or some other suitable substance. 
(Prior code § 121-2) 
12.16.030 - Clearance of gutters required. 
    The owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person having charge of any building or lands bordering on any street, square, highway or public place in the city where there is any footway or sidewalk having a paved gutter shall at all times keep such paved gutter free from snow, ice or sleet so as to permit the free passage of water through same. 
(Prior code § 121-3) 
12.16.040 - Removal from sidewalks by city-Assessment of expense. 
    After the expiration of the time limit as aforesaid for the removal of such snow, ice or sleet, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause the same to be removed, and the costs and expenses paid and incurred for the removal of snow, ice or sleet, as aforesaid, shall be certified by the director of public works to the comptroller or the board of assessment and revision of taxes, with a statement of the amount due in each case, and if found correct, the cost as shown thereon shall be charged against the lands abutting or bordering such sidewalk or gutter. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such land and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner as taxes. 
(Prior code § 121-4) 
12.16.050 - Off-street parking areas-Snow removal required-Time limit. 
    The owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person having charge of any building or lands within the city which has located thereon any off-street parking areas shall cause such off-street parking areas to be cleared of snow, ice or sleet within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same shall be formed or shall fall thereon. 
(Prior code § 121-5) 
12.16.060 - Ice on off-street parking areas-Removal or sanding required. 
    Whenever ice shall form on any off-street parking area or on any part thereof, the owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person having charge of any building or lands as aforesaid shall, within the space of one hour thereafter, during the daylight, cause such area to be made safe and convenient for travel by removing the ice therefrom or by covering the same with sand or some other suitable substance. 
(Prior code § 121-6) 
12.16.070 - Removal from parking areas by city-Assessment of expense. 
    After the expiration of the time limit as aforesaid for the removal of such snow, ice or sleet, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause the same to be removed and the cost and expenses paid and incurred for the removal of snow, ice or sleet, as aforesaid, shall be certified by the director of public works to the comptroller or the assessor, with a statement of the amount due in each case, and if found correct, the cost as shown thereon shall be charged against the lands upon which the off-street parking is located. The amount so charged upon such land shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner as taxes. 
(Prior code § 121-7) 
12.16.080 - Handicapped parking spaces. 
    No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces reserved for handicapped drivers and no tenant, contractor or other person may block access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by the plowing, piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces. 
(Prior code § 121-8) 
12.16.090 - Prohibited deposits. 
    No person shall sweep, throw or deposit any snow or ice in that part of the street or highway which has or is being plowed, swept, cleaned or cleared by the municipality for the passage of traffic. 
(Prior code § 121-11) 
Chapter 12.20 - MISCELLANEOUS STREET USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Fires and Chemical Deposits 

12.20.010 - Fires on streets prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to build or aid in building or to maintain or aid in maintaining a bonfire or any other kind of a fire, or to burn paper, boxes, barrels or any other article or material, upon the pavement of any street paved or coated with asphalt. 
(Prior code § 126-64) 
12.20.020 - Certain chemical deposits prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to throw, spill or place, or cause to be thrown, spilled or placed, upon the pavement of any street paved or coated with asphalt any petroleum oil, kerosene oil, naphtha or any other kind of oil, without the consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 126-65) 
Article II - Signs and Banners 

12.20.030 - Prohibited placement-Exception. 
    It is unlawful to place or hang, or cause to be placed or hung over any of the public streets, avenues or highways of the city any sign, flag or banner without the permission of the city council, provided that this chapter shall not apply to the placing or hanging of flags over the sidewalk of any streets, avenues or highways, from the front of any buildings. 
(Prior code § 126-68) 
Article III - Repair and Cleaning of Vehicles 

12.20.040 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all words and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1. 
(Prior code § 126-72) 
12.20.050 - Repair upon highway unlawful except in emergency. 
    Except where necessary to render emergency road service, it is unlawful for any person to repair any automobile, truck or other vehicle upon any highway, sidewalk, street, roadway or right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 126-73) 
12.20.060 - Washing or cleaning upon highway unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to wash or clean any commercial motor vehicle upon any highway, sidewalk, street, roadway or right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 126-74) 
12.20.070 - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Prior code § 126-75) 
Chapter 12.24 - MAILBOXES 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Definitions. 
    "Apartment building" means any place for residence where there are multiple family residential units with at least four families. 
    "Mailbox" means any public or private box or boxes in which mail is placed for delivery by the post office. This includes, but is not limited to, rows of boxes that are grouped together in close rows, clusters or units. 
(Prior code § 91B-1) 
12.24.020 - Placement of mailboxes. 
    No mailbox, mailboxes or cluster of mailboxes shall be placed outside of an apartment building where an indoor location for mailboxes has already been previously provided for or established in an existing building. 
(Prior code § 91B-2) 
12.24.030 - Exemptions. 
    Apartment buildings with less than four families, apartment buildings with no previous indoor location for mail delivery and new apartment buildings built after the passage of this chapter, shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 91B-3) 
Chapter 12.28 - NEWSPAPER STANDS 
Sections: 

12.28.010 - Operation restricted-Permit required. 
    No firm, association of persons or corporation shall place, maintain or use any table, box, stand or other structure within the street lines of any street or upon any sidewalk, street or highway or of any part thereof, in the city, for the sale, display or storage of newspapers, magazines or periodicals. No person shall place, maintain or use any table, box, stand or other structure for the sale, display or storage of newspapers, magazines or periodicals, within the street lines of any street or upon any sidewalk, street or highway or any part thereof, in the city, without first having obtained a permit therefor as provided herein. 
(Prior code § 97-1) 
12.28.020 - Conditions for issuance of permits to individuals. 
    The central license bureau is authorized to issue permits to individuals, but not to any firm, association of persons or corporation, to place, maintain and use newspaper stands for the purpose aforementioned within the sidewalk space of the city, subject, however, to the following limitations, restrictions and conditions: 
A.  No person shall be granted a permit to place, maintain or use more than one newspaper stand, nor shall a permit be issued to any person who is under sixteen (16) years of age or who has not resided within the city at least one year prior to the application for such permit. 
B.  The person to whom the license is granted must own and operate the newspaper stand, and the license cannot be sold, assigned or in any manner be used by the holder thereof for another who has any interest or ownership in the newspaper stand. Nothing herein contained shall prevent an owner or operator of a newspaper stand and the holder of a license from employing persons to assist him or her in the conduct and operation of such newspaper stand, provided that the employment is under his direct supervision and control. 
C.  Newspaper stands shall be of such form, design, dimensions, color and material as shall be prescribed or approved by the central license bureau. No newspaper stand shall be permitted which has any lettering or advertising painted thereon or attached thereto. 
D.  No newspaper stand shall be more than three feet six inches wide, eight feet long and six feet high, and the license inspector may, in his or her discretion, prescribe the size of all such stands in proportion to the width and area of the sidewalk location occupied. Any stand existing and in use at the time of the passage of this chapter which does not conform with the size prescribed herein may be continued in its present position and use until such time as it is removed or requires reconstruction, at which time it shall be made to conform to the size required by this chapter. 
E.  No newspaper stand shall be maintained or used, nor shall a permit be granted therefor, at any location without the written consent of the owner or owners of the abutting property. 
F.  No publication of any kind prohibited by the laws of the state of New Jersey or of the United States, or which is now or will hereafter be barred from the United States mails by any postal regulation made pursuant to the federal statutes, shall be displayed or sold from any newspaper stand. No merchandise of any kind whatsoever other than newspapers, magazines or periodicals shall be displayed or sold from any newspaper stand. 
G.  No permit shall be granted for any newspaper stand which shall be located or used or maintained within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant. 
H.  No permit or any renewal thereof shall be granted to any person to place, maintain or use any newspaper stand until such person shall first have filed with the license inspector a surety bond or liability insurance policy in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) indemnifying the city against all loss, liability or damage which may result from the construction or maintenance of such newspaper stands or their appurtenances, upon which surety bond or insurance policy any person injured by the construction or maintenance of the stand or its appurtenances may sue. The surety bond or insurance policy shall be approved by the license inspector as to sufficiency of surety, and by the city attorney as to form and manner of execution. 
(Prior code § 97-2) 
12.28.030 - Information, compliance required-Revocations. 
    Before any permit is issued by the central license bureau for any newspaper stand, the license inspector may require the applicant to furnish him or her such information in such form as he shall prescribe. The license inspector may attach to any permit granted, conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and other conditions not inconsistent with this chapter may be from time to time prescribed by the license inspector. The license inspector may revoke any permit at any time, and thereupon the newspaper stand shall be immediately removed. 
(Prior code § 97-3) 
12.28.040 - Cleanliness, good conduct required-Loitering prohibited. 
    Each person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall keep the sidewalk in the vicinity of his or her stand clean and free from refuse matter and shall not use any racks, barrels, boxes, loose boards, booths or any other structures other than the stand aforementioned, as permitted by the central license bureau. The owner shall not allow any loitering at the newspaper stand, and he or she shall conduct himself or herself and his or her business in an orderly and reasonably quiet manner. No newspapers, magazines, periodicals or any other material shall be placed, kept or stored on any part of the sidewalk except the part covered by the stand. All such stands shall be kept securely locked during the hours when the same are not open for business, and the license inspector may in his or her discretion, order the relocation of all such stands, in the public interest. 
(Prior code § 97-4) 
Chapter 12.32 - NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 

12.32.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Bus stop" means any autobus pick-up/drop-off area designated and established according to Chapter 10.60, et seq. of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Crosswalks" mean any cut sidewalk or curbline or specific area designed and constructed to facilitate easier access for the public to cross a right-of-way, including corner and midblock crossings. 
    "Curbline" means a rim or edge of stone or concrete, usually about six inches wide, that separates a street from a sidewalk in the right-of-way. 
    "Fire hydrant" means an upright pipe with a spout, nozzle or other outlet, located in the right-of-way, for drawing water from a main outlet or pipeline and used in emergency situations to fight fires. 
    "Handicapped ramps" mean any cut sidewalk or curbline specifically designed and constructed to facilitate easier access for handicapped persons in the public rights-of-way. 
    "Newspaper vending machine(s) and/or newsrack(s)" means any self-service complimentary or coin/money-operated, cubicle-shaped box, crate, container, carton or storage bin that has a door, window or latch and which contains or offers to the public any printed material that includes, but is not limited to, newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or advertisements, whether commercial or noncommercial. 
    "Right-of-way" means any and all areas dedicated for public use, including, but not limited to, a street, roadway, curbline or sidewalk designated and used for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
    "Sign/sign post" means any municipally installed and owned identification marker and/or post for mounting such identification marker, including, but not limited to, any warning, advertisement, traffic sign, stop sign, directional placard and street identification. 
    "Traffic signal" means any municipally installed and owned electric device used for regulating traffic, including, but not limited to, a traffic light, signal or electric box used for powering and/or monitoring such device. 
(Ord. 3765 § 2, 2005) 
12.32.020 - Registration required/purpose. 
    Any owner of a newspaper vending machine located within a right-of-way in the city of Elizabeth must register on a form provided by the bureau of central licensing when erecting and/or placing a newspaper vending machine in the city. 
    The registration form shall request the following information: name, address and telephone number of the owner and location of the machine. 
    There shall be no fee, administrative charge or insurance requirement for the registration. 
    Registration shall either occur prior to placement of the newspaper vending machine or no later than sixty (60) days after the placement of the machine and shall not be considered a prior restraint for placement of the machine. Once the owner of a newspaper vending machine registers with the city of Elizabeth, he or she must continue to register on an annual basis one year subsequent to the date of registration. 
    Registration is to ensure that the city can adequately inventory the machines, locate owners and ensure that the machines comply with this chapter. 
    The owner of a newspaper vending machine must notify the bureau of central licensing if the box is removed or relocated. 
(Ord. 3765 § 3, 2005) 
12.32.030 - Machine/box requirements. 
    To prevent newspaper vending machines from being easily overturned, which may cause a dangerous condition and/or a litter problem in the city, all machines/boxes must be freestanding, constructed of durable metal or plastic, must be heavy enough to prevent easy overturning and must have a spring-loaded latch or door that automatically closes. 
    Newspaper vending machines must not be affixed, bolted or chained to any traffic signal, sidewalk, sign, sign post, parking meter, public garbage can, fire pull box, tree or fire hydrant so as not to obstruct or damage the object by this ancillary use. 
(Ord. 3765 § 4, 2005) 
12.32.040 - Location requirements. 
    Upon a sidewalk and within the public rights-of-way, so as not to obstruct the egress or ingress or line of sight of pedestrians and vehicles, the following regulations shall govern the placement of newspaper vending machines: 
A.  On the same side of the right-of-way, no newspaper vending machine shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the following: 
1.  A street corner (measured from the apex of the corner); 
2.  Fire hydrant; 
3.  Handicapped ramp located on a street corner; and 
4.  Crosswalk located on a street corner. 
B.  On the same side of the right-of-way, no newspaper vending machine shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the following: 
1.  Bus stop (measured from the perimeter boundary of the stop); 
2.  Taxi stand (measured from the perimeter boundary of the stand); 
3.  Midblock handicapped ramp; and 
4.  Midblock crosswalk. 
C.  No newspaper vending machine shall be located less than six inches away from the boundary of any curbline and shall not obstruct the sidewalk. 
D.  The owner of the newspaper vending machine may be required to temporarily remove and/or relocate the machine, upon written request of the city, during road or streetscape construction. 
(Ord. 3765 § 5, 2005) 
12.32.050 - Abandonment of newspaper vending machines. 
    Newspaper vending machines that are abandoned often become an eyesore for neighborhoods in a municipality. They transform into makeshift garbage cans. Also, graffiti and criminal activities gravitate toward them. The city of Elizabeth desires to protect the aesthetics of the city and the quality of life of its residents. 
    A newspaper vending machine shall be considered abandoned and subject to removal if: 
1.  It remains empty for a period of sixty (60) days; and/or 
2.  The owner of any newspaper vending machine fails to register within the time period set forth in Section 12.32.020 of this chapter. 
    If the city is unable to locate the owner of the machine after conducting its due diligence, it shall remove the machine and impound it until the owner can be reached and the machine can be claimed. If the owner of the machine has not been successfully located within ninety (90) days after removal, the machine will be disposed of in accordance with solid waste disposal regulations. Due diligence shall be described as a reasonable attempt to locate the owner. An attempt shall be made to contact the owner by regular and certified mail. A located owner of a vending machine in violation of this section shall have five business days from receipt of notice to comply with this chapter or be subject to removal. 
(Ord. 3765 § 6, 2005) 
12.32.060 - Maintenance/graffiti. 
    Newspaper vending machines shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times, so as to ensure that the city can maintain proper aesthetics. They must be free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas. They must be free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas. They must be free from cracks, dents or graffiti. 
    In the event that a newspaper vending machine does not meet the maintenance/graffiti standards set forth in this chapter, the bureau of central licensing shall immediately notify the owner by regular and certified mail. The owner shall have five business days to remedy the defect. If the owner fails to remedy the defect, he or she may be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 12.32.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3765 § 7, 2005) 
12.32.070 - Compliance of existing newspaper vending machines. 
    Within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this chapter, all owners of existing newspaper vending machines must fully comply with the requirements found in this chapter. Full compliance includes the registration requirement specified in Section 12.32.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3765 § 8, 2005) 
12.32.080 - Penalty. 
    In addition to the specific remedies prescribed in this chapter, the general penalty provision found in Chapter 1.12.010 of the code of the city of Elizabeth shall apply. 
(Ord. 3765 § 9, 2005) 
Chapter 12.36 - PARADES 
Sections: 

12.36.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey." 
(Prior code § 100-1) 
12.36.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    "License inspector" means the license inspector of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    "Parade" means any assemblage of persons engaged in a march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind or of any duration, or any similar display, either by pedestrians, vehicles or other means of conveyance, in, upon or along any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place in the city following a certain route, whether predetermined or not. 
    "Parade permit" means a permit, as required by this chapter. 
    "Permittee" means any person to whom a parade permit, or alternative parade permit, for a parade is issued. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Prior code § 100-2) 
12.36.030 - Permit required-Exceptions. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade in the city unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the license inspector, except that no permit shall be required: 
A.  For funeral processions; 
B.  For school activities on school property under the immediate direction and supervision of proper school authorities; 
C.  For students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate supervision and direction of the proper school authorities; 
D.  For activities of any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
E.  For lawful activity, as permitted under the National Labor Relations Act regarding picketing; 
F.  For religious processions of any organized and recognized religious organization; or 
G.  Bona fide veterans' organizations during the conduct and sponsorship of parades during legal holidays. 
(Prior code § 100-3) 
12.36.040 - Application for permit. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application in quadruplicate with the license inspector on forms provided by such officer. 
A.  Filing Period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the license inspector not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. The application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized. 
B.  Contents of Application. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
2.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
3.  If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the license inspector a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the parade permit on his or her behalf. 
4.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
5.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
6.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
7.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of vehicles, where possible. 
8.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
9.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the proposed streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places to be traversed. 
10.  The specific location of any assembly area or areas for such parade. 
11.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
12.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
13.  Any additional information which the license inspector shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a parade permit should be issued in accordance with the standards hereinafter enumerated. 
C.  Late Applications. The license inspector, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
D.  There shall be paid to the chief license inspector, at the time of filing the application for a parade permit, a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) to cover the expenses incident to processing the application, the fee to be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 44, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 100-4) 
12.36.050 - Review by other departments. 
    Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a parade permit, the license inspector shall immediately forward a copy of the application to the director of the department of public works of the city, to the police chief of the city and to the fire chief of the city for their investigation, review and report. Such reports shall be sent to the license inspector within thirty-six (36) hours of receipt of a copy of the application. 
(Prior code § 100-5) 
12.36.060 - Standards for issuance of permit. 
A.  The license inspector shall issue a parade permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as shall be obtained from the reports of the director of the department of public works of the city, the police chief of the city and the fire chief of the city, he finds that: 
1.  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
2.  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
3.  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
4.  The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at the assembly point or points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
5.  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment enroute to a fire. 
6.  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute. 
7.  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit; provided, however, that the prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations participating in the parade and shall not apply to political candidates running for public office. 
8.  There is not outstanding an approved parade permit for another parade for the same date; provided however, that more than one parade permit for the same date may issue if it appears from an examination of the applications for parade permits that more than one parade may be conducted simultaneously or separately, giving due regard to the standards set forth hereinabove in this section. 
9.  The provisions of Section 12.36.150 of this chapter have been fulfilled. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter will be construed to prohibit any lawful activity under the National Labor Relations Act regarding picketing. 
(Prior code § 100-6) 
12.36.070 - Denial of permit-Notice. 
    The license inspector shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three business days after the filing thereof and shall, within said time, notify the applicant of his or her action, and, in the event of a denial of the permit, the reasons therefor. The notice of approval or rejection and the reasons therefor shall be in writing and shall be mailed by certified mail to the address set forth on the application for the applicant or shall be by personal service. In case more than one application shall be received for parades on the same date, the application first received shall be reviewed first and shall be granted if it complies with all the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 100-7) 
12.36.080 - Appeal of denial. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the mayor of the city. The appeal shall be taken within two days after receipt by the applicant of a notice of denial by serving upon the city clerk, either personally or by certified mail, a notice of appeal from the denial by the license inspector of an application for a parade permit. The mayor of the city shall hold a hearing and shall act upon the appeal as soon as practicable after receiving notice of the appeal, but in any event no later than five days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The mayor shall determine the appeal using as his or her guide the standards for the issuance of parade permits set forth above in Section 12.36.060. 
(Prior code § 100-8) 
12.36.090 - Alternative permit. 
    The license inspector, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative parade permit shall, within two days after notice of the action of the license inspector, file a written notice of acceptance by delivering same to the license inspector. An alternative parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 100-9) 
12.36.100 - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
A.  Starting time and termination time of the parade; 
B.  Minimum speed at which the parade may travel; 
C.  Maximum speed at which the parade may travel; 
D.  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
E.  The route of the parade and the portions of the streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
F.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof and the number of persons, animals or motor vehicles that will be in the parade; 
G.  Date of the parade; and 
H.  Such other information as the license inspector shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 100-10) 
12.36.110 - Notice to other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the license inspector shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
A.  The mayor; 
B.  The city clerk; 
C.  The city attorney; 
D.  The fire chief; 
E.  The police chief; 
F.  The director of the department of public works; 
G.  The license inspector; 
H.  The postmaster; and 
I.  The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade. 
(Prior code § 100-11) 
12.36.120 - Duties of permittee. 
    A parade permittee hereunder shall comply with all parade permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman, or other person heading or leading such activity, shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Prior code § 100-12) 
12.36.130 - Interference with parades. 
    No person shall: 
A.  Unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade, nor shall any person join or participate in any parade unless is authorized to do so by the organization conducting the parade. 
B.  Drive any vehicle, whether propelled by motor, engine or otherwise, between the vehicles, animals or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or such persons or animals are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
C.  Park or leave unattended any vehicle on any street, highway, sidewalk or alley, park or other public place within the city on the route of a parade where parking has been prohibited by the chief of police, or his designee, and where signs to such effect have been posted. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 100-13) 
12.36.140 - Revocation of permit. 
    The license inspector shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder if the applicant fails to comply with the standards for issuance of a parade permit as hereinabove set forth. 
(Prior code § 100-14) 
12.36.150 - Indemnification. 
A.  The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made, by filing such application, do represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to or death of persons, arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the parade or its participants. 
B.  Before the license inspector may issue a parade permit to any person, that person must execute an indemnification agreement substantially as follows: 
    "The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they do jointly and severally indemnify and hold harmless the City of Elizabeth against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to or death of persons, arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the parade or its participants." 
(Prior code § 100-15) 
12.36.160 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Prior code § 100-16) 
Chapter 12.40 - PUBLIC TELEPHONES 
Sections: 

12.40.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Provider" means the person(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities who own and/or operate any public telephone placed in the city sidewalks and any other entity responsible for its maintenance or operation. 
    "Public telephone" means any self-service or coin-operated telephone available for use by the public and associated facilities such as enclosures, pedestals, and cable, located in or over the surface of any city sidewalk or street. 
    "Sidewalks" means the public sidewalks, and other public rights-of-way dedicated to the city for public use for pedestrian use in the city. 
    "Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Prior code § 109-1) 
12.40.020 - Permit requirement. 
    No person, partnership or corporation or other entity (unless otherwise expressly authorized to place its facilities in the sidewalks or streets under applicable laws, regulations or ordinances) may place, maintain or operate any public telephone in, on or about the sidewalks and streets of the city without having first obtained a permit from the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 109-2) 
12.40.030 - Application for permit. 
A.  Applications for such permits shall be made on a form specified by the city and shall be submitted to the city, department of health and human services, division of license, or its designated representative. The applications shall include the name and address of the applicant and the providers as defined above, the location for the public telephone(s) for which a permit is sought, a description of the public telephone, in sufficient detail to describe the size, location, type of equipment and means of installation. 
B.  The division of licensing shall forward a copy of the application and plan to the city engineer, construction official, chief of the police department, zoning officer, and the director of the department of public works for review and recommendations before the issuance of a permit. 
C.  Approval of the location and means of installation of the telephone shall be by the city council of the city, provided that the necessary installation application has been submitted to and approved by the construction official and provided that the city engineer, and zoning officer, director of public works and the chief of the police department have approved the application and plan. 
D.  Upon the written request of the chief of the police department acting on behalf of the city, the provider shall remove any public telephone when the chief of the police department certifies that receipt of incoming calls at that public telephone adversely impacts the city's law enforcement objectives. 
E.  All applications for a permit submitted pursuant to this section shall be immediately forwarded to the city council by the director of the department of health and human services, division of license. 
(Prior code § 109-3) 
12.40.040 - Location and placement of public telephones. 
A.  No public telephone shall be installed on residential properties. 
B.  No public telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance: 
1.  Endangers the safety of persons or property; 
2.  Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles; 
3.  Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any residence or place of business; or 
4.  Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location; 
5.  Is within three hundred (300) feet of any other pay telephone on the same side of the street and within line of sight of such other pay telephone on a sidewalk in a business district as described in the zoning ordinance of the municipality; 
6.  Is in front of street addresses where there appears to be continuous criminal activity. Continuous criminal activity means reports to the police or more than four criminal incidents at an address in a month prior to the date of the application or more than ten (10) reported criminal incidents in a year prior to the date of the application. 
C.  Public telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk but shall not be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals, hydrants, or mailboxes. 
D.  Provide the city four times a year with a current updated list of all public telephones which it operates. 
(Prior code § 109-4) 
12.40.050 - Permit fee. 
    There shall be a non-refundable initial permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) due upon filing an application with the division of licenses. Thereafter, there shall be an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each public telephone, the annual fee to be due and payable on October 1. Upon transfer of ownership, there shall be a transfer fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the chief license inspectors shall approve all transfers prior to their taking effect. 
(Ord. 3394 § 1, 2002: prior code § 109-5) 
12.40.060 - Operation. 
A.  Public telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without charge: 
1.  Calls to the 911 emergency number; and 
2.  Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the police and fire departments. 
B.  Current telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted on the telephone booth if applicable. 
C.  Toll rate quotations must be available from the operator upon request. 
D.  All public telephones shall be installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Prior code § 109-6) 
12.40.070 - Standards for installation and maintenance. 
A.  Each public telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to everyone using the public telephone, the name of the provider(s) of the public telephone and the telephone number to report a malfunction, secure a refund, or to provide any notice provided for in this chapter. 
B.  Public telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, every public telephone shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
1.  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas. 
2.  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas. 
3.  Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations; and any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading. 
4.  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen, the telephone receiver is attached to the telephone. 
(Prior code § 109-7) 
12.40.080 - Removal/relocation and renovation of permits and applications. 
A.  The provider of any public telephone for which a permit has been granted under this chapter shall notify the chief license inspector in writing of any removal or location of such public telephone thirty (30) days prior to the removal or relocation of any public telephone. 
B.  Upon the receipt of a written complaint by a citizen or an authorized representative of the police department that the relocation and use of a public telephone constitutes a threat to the health and welfare of the community, the chief license inspector shall conduct a hearing after providing written notice of same at least ten (10) days in advance thereof to all affected parties to ascertain whether the location and use of the public telephone constitutes a threat to the health and welfare of the community. If the chief license inspector finds by clear and convincing evidence presented that the location and use of the public telephone constitutes a threat to the health and welfare of the community, he or she shall revoke any permit issued by him or her for the use of the public telephone. He or she may also order such other relief as he or she deems fair, including requiring the public telephone to be restricted to outgoing calls only. 
C.  A "threat to the health and welfare of the community" shall mean the existence of continuous criminal activity as set forth in Section 12.40.040 above. 
(Prior code § 109-8) 
12.40.090 - Violations. 
    Installation of any public telephone without a permit in violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for ninety (90) days or both. 
A.  If any violation of this chapter is not corrected by the violator within ten (10) days of receipt of notice from the city of such violation, then the city may revoke the per-mit for such public telephone and require the public telephone to be immediately removed. 
B.  If such public telephone is not immediately removed within ten (10) days of such written notice of revocation from the city, then such public telephone shall be locked or removed by the city at the expense of the provider and the city shall have no liability whatsoever in connection with any such removal or locking of such public telephone or any resulting loss or damage to such public telephone. 
C.  Each and every day the provider fails to remove the public telephone shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 109-9) 
12.40.100 - Liability. 
    The provider of any public telephone located in the sidewalks or streets shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any claims and liabilities for bodily injuries or damage to real or tangible personal property caused by any dangerous condition of the provider's public telephone or by any negligent acts or omissions of the provider in connection with the installation or maintenance of its public telephones. In addition, the provider shall maintain in effect comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with respect to such public telephones, at all times during which such public telephones are located within the sidewalks or streets of the city, or the provider shall furnish to the city satisfactory evidence that it is self-insured in accordance with applicable laws and that it has sufficient resources satisfactory to the city to support such self-insurance program. 
(Prior code § 109-10) 
12.40.110 - Application of chapter to existing pay telephones. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing public telephones. The provider of existing public telephones shall have ninety days (90) from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to comply with the provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 109-11) 
Chapter 12.42 - CLOTHING STORAGE BINS AND RECEPTACLES 
Sections: 

12.42.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Clothing storage bin and receptacle" means and includes but not be limited to any cubicle, box, crate, container, carton or storage bin that exists so that members of the public may place into it clothing and any other household wares, under the auspices of collecting for the poor or under-privileged. 
    "Right-of-way" means any and all area dedicated for public use including, but not limited to, a street, roadway, curbline or sidewalk designated and used for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 3933 § 2, 2007) 
12.42.020 - Prohibition. 
    No person, individual, corporation or entity, may place or locate or cause to be placed or located, any clothing bin or storage receptacle in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 3933 § 3, 2007) 
12.42.030 - Removal. 
    Any clothing storage bin and receptacle located in the public right-of-way in such a manner that it endangers the public health, safety and welfare, shall immediately be removed and impounded. 
    If the city is unable to locate the owner of the bin after conducting its due diligence, it shall remove the bin and impound it until the owner can be reached and the bin can be claimed. If the owner of the bin has not been successfully located within thirty (30) days after removal, the bin will be disposed of in accordance with solid waste disposal regulations. Due diligence shall be described as a reasonable attempt to locate the owner. An attempt shall be made to contact the owner by regular and certified mail. 
(Ord. 3933 § 4, 2007) 
12.42.040 - Penalty. 
    In addition to the specific remedies prescribed herein, the general penalty provision found in Section 1.12.010 of the code of the city of Elizabeth shall apply. 
(Ord. 3933 § 5, 2007) 
Chapter 12.44 - SOUND TRUCKS 
Sections: 

12.44.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Sound truck" means any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment. 
    "Sound-amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound-amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(Prior code § 122-1) 
12.44.020 - Registration, information required for noncommercial use. 
    No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes in the city, before filing a registration statement with the license inspector in writing. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following: 
A.  Name and home address of the applicant; 
B.  Address of place of business of applicant; 
C.  License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by applicant; 
D.  Name and address of person who owns the sound truck; 
E.  Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck; 
F.  Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck; 
G.  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used; 
H.  A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which the sound truck will be used; 
I.  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck; 
J.  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck; 
K.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
L.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck. State the following: 
1.  The wattage to be used, 
2.  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced, and 
3.  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck. 
(Prior code § 122-2) 
12.44.025 - License fee. 
    There shall be paid to the chief license inspector, at the time of filing the application for a sound truck permit, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the expenses incident to processing the application, the fee to be turned over to the city treasurer of the city for general revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 45, 8-24-2010) 
12.44.030 - Amendment of registration statement. 
    All persons using or causing to be used sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to Section 12.44.020 within forty-eight (48) hours after any change in the information therein furnished. 
(Prior code § 122-3) 
12.44.040 - Possession, display by operator required. 
    The license inspector shall return to each applicant under Section 12.44.020 of this chapter, one copy of the registration statement duly certified by the license inspector as a correct copy of the application. The certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck, at all times while the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation, and the copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Prior code § 122-4) 
12.44.050 - Regulations governing use and operation. 
    Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
B.  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays, when no operation shall be authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. 
C.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. When stopped by traffic, the said sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. 
D.  Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses. 
E.  No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be operated on the following streets between the points designated, viz: 
1.  Broad Street and South Broad Street, from Washington Avenue to the railroad arch. 
2.  North Broad Street, from railroad arch to Elizabeth Hillside city line. 
3.  Elizabeth Avenue, from Seventh Street to Broad Street. 
4.  East Jersey Street and West Jersey Street, from Madison Avenue to Cherry Street. 
5.  East Grand Street, from Madison Avenue to Broad Street. 
6.  Dickinson Street, from West Scott Place to Broad Street. 
7.  Caldwell Place, from Broad Street to South Union Street. 
8.  West Grand Street, from Broad Street to Cherry Street; and from West End Avenue to Roselle city line. 
9.  Morris Avenue, from Central Railroad to Elizabeth River. 
10.  First Street, from Elizabeth Avenue to Trumbull Street. 
11.  Elmora Avenue, from Westfield Avenue to Linden Avenue. 
12.  Trumbull Street, from First Street to Third Street. 
13.  Bayway, from Central Railroad to South Front Street. 
14.  South Front Street, from Linden city line to Goethals Bridge. 
15.  Magnolia Avenue, from Henry Street to Division Street. 
16.  Division Street, from North Avenue to Trumbull Street. 
17.  Newark Avenue, from North Broad Street to Newark city line. 
18.  Rahway Avenue, from Broad Street to Cherry Street. 
19.  All state and county highways not above mentioned. 
F.  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
G.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound truck and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
H.  No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated within excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(Prior code § 122-5) 
12.44.060 - Commercial advertising prohibited. 
    No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any sound truck for commercial sound-advertising purposes in the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation. 
(Prior code § 122-6) 
Chapter 12.48 - PARKS 
Sections: 

12.48.010 - Lawns and grounds-Protected. 
    It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of lawn or other cultivated ground in any city park within the city when forbidden so to do by an official sign or other official notification. 
(Prior code § 102-14) 
12.48.020 - Littering prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or leave any paper or waste material whatsoever in or upon any part of the surface of any city park within the city or in or upon any park property or appurtenance therein except in the receptacles provided in such park for that purpose. 
(Prior code § 102-15) 
12.48.030 - Playing of games restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person above the age of fourteen (14) years to play at any game in a city park in the city except at such times and in such places and under such regulations as may be designated in writing by the department of public works. 
(Prior code § 102-16) 
12.48.040 - Structures and vehicles-Restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place or erect any booth, stand or other structure, or to place any wagon or other vehicle, except such as may be propelled by hand and adapted for the carrying of children, invalids or dolls, on or in any city park of the city without the written permission of the department of public works. 
(Prior code § 102-17) 
12.48.050 - Sales, circulars and advertising-Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within any city park within the city any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, or to display or distribute any advertising device, circular or card in any such park. 
(Prior code § 102-18) 
12.48.060 - Statuary, structures and appurtenances-Protected. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deface, damage or in any wise injure any statuary or pedestal or other structure or park appurtenance whatsoever in a city park in the city. 
(Prior code § 102-19) 
12.48.070 - Wildlife protected. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hunt, molest, injure, capture or in any way interfere with the freedom of any bird, being free and undomesticated, in any city park in the city; or to hunt, molest, injure, capture or in any way interfere with the freedom of any squirrel, fish or other animal, being the property of the city, in any such park. 
(Prior code § 102-20) 
12.48.080 - Disorderly conduct and gambling-Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to utter any profane, threatening or abusive language or loud outcry, or perform any obscene or indecent act, commit any nuisance, solicit any contribution or subscription, or to play any game of chance in any city park within the city, or to bring into such park any instrument of chance or gambling whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 102-21) 
Chapter 12.52 - ADOPT A PARK, LOT AND STREET PROGRAM 
Sections: 

12.52.010 - Purpose. 
    In order to improve the aesthetic appearance of parks, vacant lots and streets located in the city of Elizabeth and in order to provide assistance in maintaining the parks, lots and streets, the city of Elizabeth establishes an "Adopt a Park, Lot and Street Program," in which volunteer groups, individuals, businesses or organizations may adopt a park, vacant lot or street owned by the city of Elizabeth for the purpose of cleaning up leaves, litter, trash and maintaining the general beautification of the park, vacant lot or street. 
(Ord. 3521 § 1, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 1, 1999) 
12.52.020 - Participation. 
    Any person, company, organization or group may petition the city council to participate in the adopt a park, lot and street program. Any individual or group which is comprised of individuals under the age of eighteen (18) must be under the supervision of a person over the age of twenty-one (21). 
(Ord. 3521 § 2, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 2, 1999) 
12.52.030 - Application. 
    Any volunteer group, individual, company or organization shall complete an application on a form prescribed by the director of the department of public works providing the following information: 
A.  The name and the location of the park, lot or street it desires to adopt; 
B.  The names and addresses of all participants; 
C.  A plan and schedule of the work to be performed. 
    Prior to the commencement of any maintenance or beautification activities at the park, lot or street, the applicant must participate in an initial safety orientation meeting with an authorized representative of the city of Elizabeth Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. 3521 § 3, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 3, 1999) 
12.52.040 - Program coordinator. 
    The director of the department of public works shall be the program coordinator. The application shall be filed with the director of the department of public works for review and comment as to the feasibility and compatibility of the applicant participating in the program prior to a formal request being made to the city council of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3521 § 4, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 4, 1999) 
12.52.050 - Authorization to adopt. 
    City council, after receipt and review of a recommendation and report from the director of the department of public works, may adopt the park, lot or street. The city of Elizabeth, at its own expense will provide, install and maintain a permanent sign designating the program with the applicant's name set forth thereon. The applicant shall not use or display any business logo or commercial advertising at the site. 
(Ord. 3521 § 5, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 5, 1999) 
12.52.060 - Tools, equipment and supplies. 
    The city shall not supply any tools, equipment or supplies for this program. Any and all tools, equipment or supplies shall be furnished by the volunteers. 
(Ord. 3521 § 6, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 6, 1999) 
12.52.070 - Approval and renewal. 
    City council approval shall be for a period of not less than six months, nor more than twenty-four (24) months. After the initial period of approval, the participant may petition the director of the department of public works to review its actions and then report its findings to the city council for renewal. After the city council has received a recommendation and report from the director of public works, the governing body may adopt a resolution renewing its approval for a period of not less than six months, nor more than twenty-four (24) months. 
(Ord. 3521 § 7, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 7, 1999) 
12.52.080 - Duties of participants. 
    No volunteer group, individual, company or organization who performs any work or services under this program shall be deemed, to be employees of the city of Elizabeth and the city shall be held harmless by the volunteer group, individual, company, organization or anyone directly or indirectly connected with the volunteer group, individual, company or organization from the negligent or careless acts of the volunteer group, individual, company or organization in the performance of any functions under the program. All participants in the program shall be required to sign a release and shall waive any and all claims for negligence on the part of the city of Elizabeth, its officials and employees, which arise out of their participation in the program. 
(Ord. 3521 § 8, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 8, 1999) 
12.52.090 - Termination. 
    The city council, upon request of the director of the department of public works, shall have the right, in its sole discretion, at its convenience and at any time, to terminate any program designation by providing written notice to the applicant. 
(Ord. 3521 § 9, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 9, 1999) 
12.52.100 - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of the department of public works may adopt such other reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the intent of this program. 
(Ord. 3521 § 10, 2003: Ord. 3145 § 10, 1999) 
Chapter 12.56 - FESTIVALS 
Sections: 

12.56.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Festival" means a series of related events or performances conducted on city property, sidewalks, streets and other public rights-of-way, including but not limited to festive activities, cultural events, exhibitions, competitions, collections of shows, live entertainment and other amusement enterprises and/or the dispensation of food which are open to the public at large. 
    "License" means the permission in writing of the supervisor of licenses of the city, issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law, to carry on a festival. 
    "Person" means every natural person, copartnership, association or corporation, whether profit or nonprofit. 
    "Sponsor" means the person or entity who executes the application for a license to conduct a festival or is the operator of the festival. 
    "Supervisor of licenses" means the city officer in charge of receiving applications for and the issuance of licenses. 
    "Vendor" means a person who operates, during the life of the license, a booth or a stand or otherwise occupies space in which he conducts games of skill or chance or dispenses food and beverage or the like. 
(Ord. No. 4876 , § 3, 6-27-2017; prior code § 72B-1) 
12.56.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is the regulation through licensing and inspections of festivals and affairs of like nature to be conducted in the city on public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and/or other city property, for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the public in general. 
(Prior code § 72B-2) 
12.56.030 - Licenses. 
A.  No license for a festival or other activity of a similar nature shall be considered or issued unless and until the sponsor desiring to conduct the affair shall have made and signed a written application to the supervisor of licenses for an operator's license in the form provided by the city and paid the proper fee therefor when required, not less than two weeks prior to the first day of operation of the proposed festival. 
B.  The issuance of the festival operator's license shall be further conditioned upon the following: 
1.  The sponsor requesting and obtaining from the mayor of the city permission to close the street or streets necessary to conduct the festival, in accordance with the terms of Section 10.20.010 et seq. of this code, incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth. 
2.  The sponsor requesting and obtaining from the city council of the city permission to use property owned by the city as well as sidewalks and other rights-of-way. 
3.  The sponsor and/or vendors executing an indemnification agreement on behalf of the city substantially as follows: 
    "The sponsor and/or vendor hereby represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they do jointly and severally indemnify and hold harmless the City of Elizabeth against liability for any and all claims for damages to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the license or the conduct of the public at and during the life of the festival." 
4.  The approval by the fire department, upon a satisfactory examination of the premises with respect to compliance with regulations as hereinafter set forth in the fire prevention section of this chapter. 
5.  The sponsor shall deposit with the supervisor of licenses at the time of the filing of the application, in cash or by certified check made payable to the city, the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to guarantee that upon the termination of the festival the general area where the affair has been conducted will be left in good condition, cleaned up and cleared of all paper, waste material and debris within twenty-four (24) hours from the termination of the festival. If the sponsor fails to meet this requirement, the city, in its discretion, shall clean and restore the area to prefestival condition, deducting the moneys spent thereon from the deposit aforementioned. 
6.  The sponsor is required to hire a private scavenger to pick-up and dispose of the garbage generated at the festival. 
(Prior code § 72B-3) 
12.56.040 - Fees. 
A.  License Fee for Festival Operator's License: A fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be charged for the festival operator's license. 
B.  Vendor License Fees: 
1.  Non-Food Vendor: There shall be a fee for a non-food vendor's license in the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first two (2) days of operation and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each day thereafter. This fee shall be payable in advance to the supervisor of licenses of the city. 
2.  Food and Beverage Vendors: Food and beverage vendors shall not be required to pay this license fee to the supervisor of licenses. Instead, vendors intending to operate food and beverage stands shall be required to obtain a license from the department of health and human services, division of health, and pay a fee in the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first two (2) days of operation and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each day thereafter. This fee shall be payable in advance to the department of health and human services, division of health. 
(Ord. No. 4250, § 1, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 4149, § 46, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3491 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3393 § 1, 2002; prior code § 72B-4) 
12.56.050 - Exemption from fees. 
A.  Operator's License. The following sponsors of festivals shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection 12.56.040 A. and subsection 12.56.030 5. of this chapter. 
1.  Bona fide religious groups or organizations whose activities are exclusively devoted to religious purposes. 
2.  The parking authority of the City of Elizabeth. 
3.  The housing authority of the City of Elizabeth. 
4.  The Historic Midtown Special Improvement District, the Elizabeth Avenue Special Improvement District. 
5.  The Elizabeth Development Company. 
6.  Co-sponsors with the City of Elizabeth, approved by resolution of the city council. 
7.  Elizabeth Destination Marketing Organization. 
(Ord. No. 4902 , § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 4876 , §§ 1, 2, 6-27-2017; prior code § 72B-5) 
12.56.060 - Health and sanitary requirements. 
A.  All health and sanitary requirements, regulations and licensing shall be adhered to by the sponsors and/or vendors of the festival, as provided for in Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code and the health and sanitary code of the city, both of which are incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth. 
B.  In addition thereto, the operator of a festival shall provide a sufficient number of temporary or permanent toilet facilities for the use of vendors and the use of the public. 
(Prior code § 72B-6) 
12.56.070 - Fire prevention requirements. 
A.  The sponsor and/or vendors, with the consent of the fire department, shall be authorized to install, hook and connect to fire hydrants specially marked by the fire department a master hose or other water carrying device, to supply water to the booths and stands operating at the festival, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The fire department in its sole discretion, shall determine which fire hydrants will be used as hereinabove stated. 
2.  The sponsor and/or vendors shall maintain all fire hydrants within the perimeter of the festival free and clear of any obstruction, with the closest object located next to a fire hydrant at no less than two feet in any direction from its geometrical center. 
3.  The sponsor and/or vendors shall meet and observe at all times the requirements of the water utility department of the city. 
B.  The sponsor and/or vendors, while operating a booth or stand in which there is heating or cooking apparatus for the preparation of food, shall keep at all times, in a visible, easily accessible location within the booth or stand, a fully charged fire extinguisher of the kind classified as ABC. 
C.  All doors or gates on entrances to and exits from the premises where the festival shall be conducted shall be kept open and unobstructed during the hours of operation of the festival in order to facilitate the rapid ingress or egress of all persons attending, in case of an emergency. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the sponsor, before the license shall issue, to provide the supervisor of licenses and the fire department with detailed sketches, drawn to scale, depicting the following: 
1.  Location of all fire hydrants within the perimeter of the festival. 
2.  The physical layout of booths, stands, amusement rides and the lanes of traffic that shall hereinafter be set forth, showing the dimensions of the booths and stands and the location and size of the area which the amusement rides will occupy. 
E.  After the sponsor has assigned the individual booths and stands to the vendors, and the areas used for amusement rides to the operators, it shall be the duty of the sponsor by the end of the first day of the festival to provide the supervisor of licenses with a list in which the names, addresses and locations of the vendors and the operators of amusement rides shall be set forth. 
F.  It shall be the obligation and duty of the sponsor to maintain, during the duration of the festival, an unimpeded and unobstructed lane for emergency traffic, at least ten (10) feet in width, for the rapid ingress and egress of vehicles required for emergencies or other governmental purposes. 
(Prior code § 72B-7) 
12.56.080 - Electrical requirements. 
    All electrical requirements, regulations and licensing shall be adhered to by the sponsors and/or vendors of the festival, as provided for in the electrical and construction codes of the city, both of which are hereby incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth. 
(Prior code § 72B-8) 
12.56.090 - Alcoholic beverages-Gaming. 
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed and no games of skill or chance shall be conducted during the operation of the festival unless and before the sponsor or the vendors obtain a proper and legal license to dispense alcoholic beverages and/or conduct games of skill or chance from the state of New Jersey, the city or any other regulatory agency. 
B.  The sponsor and vendors receiving such licenses to dispense alcoholic beverages and/or conduct games of skill or chance shall be conclusively presumed to be cognizant of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Law of New Jersey, of state rules and regulations in regard thereto, of Chapter 5.08, alcoholic beverages of this code, incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, and of all applicable federal, state and municipal laws, rules and regulations regarding the operation of games of skill or chance. 
(Prior code § 72B-9) 
12.56.100 - Duration and hours of operation. 
A.  The duration of a license for a festival shall be not more than ten (10) consecutive days, after which period it shall lapse. 
B.  The hours in which it shall be lawful to operate or permit the operation of a festival in the city shall be between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., Mondays to Fridays, and 12:00 noon and 11:00 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays, and on Mondays which are legal holidays. 
(Prior code § 72B-10) 
12.56.110 - Availability of financial records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the sponsor to furnish the city, not later than ninety (90) days from the last day of the operation of the festival, with a detailed financial statement submitted by the chief financial officer of the sponsor, certified so as to its accuracy by a licensed accountant in a form and manner satisfactory to the city's finance director. This financial record, with a profit and loss statement in the form of an affidavit attached, shall include but not be limited to fees and sources therefrom, rental derived, donations received by the sponsor and other pertinent data. 
B.  Failure to provide the financial statement in the manner set forth shall preclude the sponsor from applying for and receiving a festival license for future operations until this requirement has been met. 
(Prior code § 72B-11) 
12.56.120 - License revocation. 
A.  The operator's license or any vendor's license may be revoked by the supervisor of licenses at any time during the life of such license for any violation by the operator or individual vendor of any provision of this chapter or any violation of this code or any other applicable state or federal law, in addition to the penalties set forth in the general penalties section of this chapter. 
B.  Anything to the contrary in this section notwithstanding, in cases of revocation of food and beverage vendors' licenses, such revocation shall be at the discretion of the city's director of health, welfare and housing or his or her designee. 
(Prior code § 72B-12) 
12.56.130 - Insurance requirements. 
A.  Before any license shall be granted, the sponsor shall provide and deposit with the city clerk of the city a public liability insurance policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), single limit, naming the sponsor and the city as coinsured. 
B.  In addition thereto, the sponsor shall hold the city harmless from any and all claims or judgments recovered against it or the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, in excess of the one-million-dollar single-limit liability insurance policy. 
(Prior code § 72B-13) 
Chapter 12.60 - TREES 
Sections: 

12.60.010 - Injury and unauthorized cutting-Prohibited-Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person without the written permit of the department of public works, to cut, break, climb or injure any tree or portion of tree planted or growing in any public highway within the city, or cause, authorize or procure any person to cut, break, climb or injure any such tree or portion thereof; or to cut, break, climb or injure any tree or plant or any portion of any tree or plant planted or growing in any city park or parking strip within the city, or cause or authorize or procure any person to cut, break, climb or injure any such tree or plant or any portion of such tree or plant; or to injure, misuse or remove, or cause, authorize or procure any person to injure, misuse or remove, any device set for the protection of any tree or plant in any public highway or city park of the city. Any person, desiring for any lawful purpose to cut, prune or trim any tree in any public highway of the city may apply to the department of public works; and if in the judgment of the department of public works the desired cutting, pruning or trimming shall appear necessary, and the proposed method and workmanship thereof such as the department of public works approves, the department of public works may thereupon issue a written permit for such work. Any work done under such written permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof. 
(Prior code § 102-1) 
12.60.020 - Killing, unauthorized removal prohibited-Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to kill or remove, or cause, authorize or procure the death or removal of, any tree planted or growing in any public highway, or any tree or plant planted or growing in any city park, within the city. Any person desiring for any lawful purpose to take down or remove any tree in any public highway of the city may apply to the department of public works; and if in the judgment of the department the desired taking down or removal shall appear necessary, the department of public works may thereupon issue a written permit therefor. Any work done under such written permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof. 
(Prior code § 102-2) 
12.60.030 - Injury by gas and deleterious substances-Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning or using or having control or charge of gas or other substance deleterious to tree life to allow such gas or other substances to come into contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree in any public highway or of any tree or plant in any city park in the city in such manner as may injure such tree or plant. 
(Prior code § 102-3) 
12.60.040 - Killing by gas and deleterious substances-Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning or using or having control or charge of gas or other substance deleterious to tree life to allow such gas or other substance to come in contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree in any public highway or any tree or plant in any city park in the city in such manner as shall kill or destroy such tree or plant. 
(Prior code § 102-4) 
12.60.050 - Control of deleterious substances-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or procure any brine water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip on or into the soil about the base of a tree in any public highway or city park in the city, or onto a sidewalk, road or pavement therein at a point whence such substance may, by lying on or by flowing, dripping or seeping into such soil, or in any other manner whatever, injure such tree; or to cause or procure such lying, leaking, flowing, dripping, seeping or injuring. 
(Prior code § 102-5) 
12.60.060 - Protection of tree roots-Minimum opening-Permit. 
    It is unlawful for any person except with the written permit of the department of public works, to place or maintain upon the ground in any public highway or city park within the city any stone, cement or other material or substance, in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree in any such highway or park. Unless otherwise provided for in such written permit as above provided for, there must be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public highways and city parks of the city at least six square feet of open ground for a tree of three inches in diameter, and for every two inches of increase of such diameter there must be an increase of at least one square foot of open ground. 
(Prior code § 102-6) 
12.60.070 - Interference with authorized personnel prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere or cause or authorize or procure any interference with the department of public works or any of its employees, agents or servants while they are engaged in or about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any tree in any public highway or city park within the city, or in the removing of any device attached to a tree, or in such removing of stone, cement, sidewalk or other material or substance as may be necessary for the protection and care of any such case in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 12.60.060 hereof as to the area of open ground to be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public highway and city parks of the city. 
(Prior code § 102-7) 
12.60.080 - Injury by electrical contact prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or procure a wire or other conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree in a public highway or with any tree or plant in a city park in the city in such manner as may injure or abrade such tree or plant. 
(Prior code § 102-8) 
12.60.090 - Killing by electrical contact prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause or authorize or procure a wire or other conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree in a public highway or any tree or plant in a city park in the city in such a manner as shall destroy or kill such tree or plant. 
(Prior code § 102-9) 
12.60.100 - Attachment of rope, wire and signs-Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to attach or keep attached to any tree in any public highway or city park in the city, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree, any rope, wire, sign or any other device whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 102-10) 
12.60.110 - Control of horses and other animals-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to tie any horse or other animal to any tree in any public highway or city park within the city or, having charge of such horse or other animal, to allow or cause or procure it to injure any such tree, or for any person in charge of such horse or other animal to cause or allow it to stand so that it can injure such tree. 
(Prior code § 102-11) 
12.60.120 - Permit to plant required-Planting by city, fee. 
    It is unlawful for any person to plant or set out any shade tree or cause or authorize or procure any person to plant or set out any shade tree in or on any part of any public highway or city park within the city without first obtaining from the department of public works a written permit so to do or without complying in all respects with the conditions set forth in such written permit, except that the department of public works of the city may, upon written request of a property owner of the department of public works, plant or set out trees by the department of public works upon payment at the time of the written request to the department of public works of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each tree requested, which payment is for the planting, rearing, trimming and preservation of the tree. 
(Prior code § 10-12) 
12.60.130 - Protection of trees at construction sites required. 
    During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or structure within the city, it is unlawful for the person or persons in charge of such erection, repair, alteration or removal to leave any street tree in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree arising out of or by reason of the erection, repair, alteration or removal. 
(Prior code § 102-13) 
Chapter 12.64 - MUNICIPAL WATERFRONT 
Sections: 

12.64.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Commercial boats" means those boats owned by individuals and/or corporations and used for commercial purposes including, but not limited to, fishing, hauling cargo and the transportation of passengers for a fee. 
    "Municipal marina" means the marina area adjacent to the municipal pier and/or any other marina owned, developed or constructed by the city. 
    "Municipal pier" means the municipal pier adjacent to the municipal marina and/or any other pier owned, developed or constructed by the city. 
    "Municipal waterfront" means that area of land and water along the waterfront from the boundary lines of any bordering state or local municipality. 
    "Pleasure boats" means those boats owned by individuals and/or corporations and used solely for personal recreational purposes. 
(Prior code § 96-1) 
12.64.020 - Implementation of chapter. 
    The director of public works and/or his or her designee shall be responsible for the implementation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 96-2) 
12.64.030 - Permit required. 
    No pleasure boat or commercial boat shall operate from the city waterfront without a permit issued by the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 96-3) 
12.64.040 - Hours of operation. 
    The waterfront facilities shall operate from 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. unless the director of public works shall determine, upon review of any request for additional hours, that permission for additional hours of operation should be granted and then only upon such terms and conditions as the director imposes. 
(Prior code § 96-4) 
12.64.050 - Insurance. 
    All persons and/or corporations using the waterfront facilities shall maintain the required insurance coverage. The policies of insurance as required by this chapter shall be approved by the director of public works and shall name the city as an additional insured and shall contain an appropriate clause holding the city and/or its employees harmless from liability concerning the use of the facilities. 
    Pleasure boats as defined in this chapter shall maintain a minimum of liability insurance coverage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Commercial boats shall maintain a minimum of liability insurance coverage in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(Prior code § 96-5) 
12.64.060 - Annual fee for commercial fishing boats. 
    Commercial fishing boats shall pay the city an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the use of the pier. No commercial fishing boat may dock at the pier to load or unload passengers without obtaining a permit and paying in full the aforesaid fee. No signs or advertisements may be placed anywhere along the waterfront without the permission of the director of public works. Signs in the marina and pier area shall be of a size and shape as approved by the director of public works and in conformance with the existing signs and signposts. 
(Prior code § 96-6) 
12.64.070 - Commercial boats engaged in regularly scheduled transportation. 
    Commercial boats engaged in regularly scheduled transportation of passengers to and from the waterfront must obtain a permit from the director of public works. Such transportation services shall, where applicable, be the subject of open, public, competitive bidding and the terms and conditions of the final contract shall determine the fees and revenues to be collected by the city. The operation of the services shall comply with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, and the operator shall furnish to the director of public works all necessary licenses and permits. 
(Prior code § 96-7) 
12.64.080 - Boats in distress. 
    Any boats in distress or in need of mechanical, medical or other aid and assistance shall be permitted to tie up at the pier to the extent possible. Where the aforesaid boat shall remain overnight, the owners and/or operators shall be charged the sum of eighty cents per foot per day as long as the boat remains at the dock. The city reserves the right to remove, at the owners' expense, any boat, the presence of which would create a hazard to the individuals and/or property in the area. When any boat is left overnight, the owner/operator shall execute and hold harmless an indemnification agreement on behalf of the city. 
(Prior code § 96-8) 
12.64.090 - Exemption from payment of permit fees. 
    Boats which are part of a charitable, corporate, fraternal, political or club type outing leaving from or arriving at the pier shall be required to obtain a permit from the director of public works and shall be required to furnish sufficient proof of insurance in an amount not less than the amount required for commercial boats. All boats, with the exception of commercial fishing boats paying the annual fee as provided in Section 12.64.060 of this chapter, shall pay to the city, the sum of one dollar per passenger for the permitted use of the city waterfront facilities. Where the permittee use of the waterfront facilities is solely for a charitable nonprofit purpose and not for any profit-making enterprise or fund-raising effort, the permittee shall sign an affidavit at the time of his or her application attesting to that fact and shall then be exempt from the payment of fees set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 96-9) 
12.64.100 - Placement of sign. 
    The director of public works shall place in a prominent position, visible from both the land and the water, a sign reading: 
"USE OF MUNICIPAL WATERFRONT FACILITIES UPON PERMIT ONLY." 
(Prior code § 96-10) 
12.64.110 - Administration of facilities. 
    From time to time the director of public works shall and is authorized to make rules and regulations for the proper administration of the waterfront facilities. 
(Prior code § 96-11) 
Chapter 12.68 - WATERFRONT DEBRIS 
Sections: 

12.68.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Waterfront Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 150-1) 
12.68.020 - Word usage and definitions. 
A.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the singular shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
B.  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Debris" means any loose material not attached to the land or to any structure and which is capable of becoming drift. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public works as appointed by the mayor, and who may appoint, with the approval of the mayor, an authorized agent to act in his behalf. 
    "Drift" means any floatable material which may cause damage to vessels or craft. 
    "Final order" means either the order of the director after the time to request a review thereof has lapsed or the order of the director issued as a result of the review requested in Section 16.68.070. 
    "Navigable waters" means the waterways which are capable of carrying interstate commerce, and the tributaries thereto, within the geographical limits of the city. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Premises" means the land, building, wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakdown, bulkhead, jetty or other structure, and shall include all or any as may be necessary. 
    "Waterfront, shore or bank" means that portion of the land which borders navigable waters and which lies shoreward of the established harbor lines or low water mark within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 150-2) 
12.68.030 - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this chapter is the elimination of sources of drift and debris which constitute possible obstacles or hazards to existing navigation on the navigable waters of this city by the removal and disposal of debris and deteriorated structures on the shores of such waters and liable to be washed into such waters. 
(Prior code § 150-3) 
12.68.040 - Order for abatement of public nuisance. 
    Whenever the director has reasonable grounds to believe that debris placed or deposited on the banks of any navigable water is liable to be washed into such navigable water by any cause whatsoever and thereby be or become a source of drift likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct navigation; or that the condition of any wharf, pier, dolphin, booth, weir, breakdown, bulkhead, jetty or other structure on or bordering on the shores of any navigable water is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be or become a source of drift or debris liable to be washed into such navigable waters by any cause whatsoever and thereby likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct navigation, the director may declare the same to be a public nuisance and thereupon order that the same be removed, abated, altered or repaired, as such order may specify. 
(Prior code § 150-4) 
12.68.050 - Order to be in writing and to specify remedy. 
    The order of the director issued pursuant to Section 12.68.080 of this chapter shall be in writing, directed to the occupant, and last known owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint and shall specify whether the condition complained of shall be removed, abated, altered or repaired. 
(Prior code § 150-5) 
12.68.060 - Service of order. 
    The order of the director issued pursuant to Section 12.68.040 shall be served upon the occupant, and the last known owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint either by personally delivering a copy of such order to such occupant and last known owner of record or by registered mail addressed to such persons at their last known addresses. 
(Prior code § 150-6) 
12.68.070 - Review of order. 
    Within fifteen (15) days after service of the order of the director issued pursuant to Section 12.68.040 or, under emergency within such shorter time as the director may prescribe, the person to whom such order is directed, or any person aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the director to review the same. The director or his or her agent, after such review, at which all interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard, may affirm, modify or reverse the order of the director as the facts may warrant. Unless the same is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be arbitrary, capricious or not supported by substantial evidence, the order of the director, after review thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 150-7) 
12.68.080 - Action upon failure to comply with order. 
    In the event that the persons to whom the order of the director is directed shall fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such order within thirty (30) days after such order has become final, the director shall, without further notice to any person, take or cause to be taken the necessary action to remove, abate, alter or repair the nuisance as specified in the order of the director. The costs and expenses incident thereto shall be a personal charge against the occupant, and last owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises affected and all appurtenances thereto. 
(Prior code § 150-8) 
12.68.090 - Unauthorized abandonment of vessels prohibited. 
    No person shall abandon any flat-bottomed boat, barge, scow, raft or other vessel upon any public land or waterway or to or upon any private property within the city without the prior written permission of the director of public works, who is designated by the city council to perform this function. 
(Prior code § 150-9) 
12.68.100 - Bond required for anchorage over ten days. 
    The owner of any occupied or unoccupied barge which is to be docked in or on the banks of any river or navigable waterway within the city for more than ten (10) consecutive days shall post a surety bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) with the city clerk and in favor of the city, the bond being issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 150-10) 
12.68.110 - Forfeiture of bond. 
    In the event that a barge bonded in accordance with the preceding section sinks or otherwise becomes unable to navigate under its own power, the bond so posted shall be forfeited to the city to aid in the removal of such barge from any river, riverbank or navigable waterway within the city. 
(Prior code § 150-11) 
12.68.120 - Cancellation of bond upon removal of vessel. 
    The surety on a bond issued pursuant to the above shall have the right to immediately cancel such bond upon the removal of the barge from the rivers and riverbanks of the city. 
(Prior code § 150-12) 
12.68.130 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall not apply to barges, ships or boats owned or operated by common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, nor shall it apply to pleasure craft used on a seasonal basis. 
(Prior code § 150-13) 
12.68.140 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates this chapter by abandoning any flat-bottomed boat, barge, scow or raft without permission shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by P.L. 1969, c. 264 (N.J.S.A. 12:7C-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented. 
(Prior code § 150-14) 
Chapter 12.72 - WHARVES AND DOCKS 
Sections: 

12.72.010 - Schedule of fees for use. 
A.  All sailing vessels landing at or using any wharves or docks within the city shall pay wharfage and dockage thereon at the rate of one and one-half cents per ton if not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) tons; if exceeding two hundred fifty (250) tons, one and one-half cents for the first two hundred fifty (250) tons, and one cent for each additional ton, customhouse measurements per day for each and every day or part of a day between sunrise of one day and sunrise of the following day; and all vessels lying outside of vessels next to the wharves and docks shall pay one-half of the rates above specified. 
B.  All steamboats or barges landing or receiving passengers or light freight at any wharf or dock shall pay for each landing the sum of fifty cents if of less than fifty (50) tons, customhouse measurement; if of more than fifty (50) tons and less than one hundred (100) tons, one dollar for each landing; and if of more than one hundred (100) tons, one dollar for each landing and one cent per ton for each ton, customhouse measurement. 
C.  All steamboats or barges landing at or using any wharf or dock for any other purpose than to discharge passengers or light freight shall pay wharfage and dockage at the same rate above specified for sailing vessels. 
(Prior code § 151-1) 
12.72.020 - Determination of tonnage. 
    Whenever required, the captain or person in charge of any such vessel shall submit for examination its license or register, for the purpose of ascertaining the tonnage of the vessel, to the wharfinger, clerk or agent of the owner or lessee of the dock; and in case of a refusal to do so, the tonnage of such vessel may be estimated by the wharfinger, clerk or agent by comparing the same with vessels of like size, which estimate shall be conclusive as to the amount of the tonnage so far as any provisions contained in this chapter are concerned. 
(Prior code § 151-2) 
12.72.030 - Removal of goods required-Fee for storage. 
    The person owning any goods and chattels delivered from any vessel or boat, as aforesaid, shall cause the same to be removed from the public docks within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of delivering, and in the event or failure to so remove the same, shall be required to pay at and after the rate of ten cents per ton on the goods and chattels for each and every day that the same shall be allowed to remain on the public docks, and such charges must be paid before the removal of such goods and chattels. 
(Prior code § 151-3) 
Chapter 12.76 - CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF SOLAR ENERGY STATIONS 

12.76.010 - Definitions. 
    "Bus stop" means any autobus pick-up/drop-off area designated and established according to Chapter 10.60, et seq. of the Code of the city. 
    "Crosswalks" means any cut sidewalk or curbline or specific area designed and constructed to facilitate easier access for the public to cross a right-of-way, including corner and midblock crossings. 
    "Fire hydrant" means an upright pipe with a spout, nozzle or other outlet, located in the right-of-way, for drawing water from a main outlet or pipeline and used in emergency situations to fight fires. 
    "Handicapped ramps" means any cut sidewalk or curbline specifically designed and constructed to facilitate easier access for handicapped persons in the public rights-of-way. 
    "Right-of-way" means any and all areas dedicated for public use, including, but not limited to, a street, roadway, curbline or sidewalk designated and used for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
    "SIDs" shall be areas designated by the city as special improvement districts. For the purpose of this definition, SIDs shall refer specifically to C2, C3, and C4 zones located in special improvement districts. 
    "Sign/sign post" means any identification marker and/or post for mounting such identification marker, including, but not limited to, any warning, advertisement, traffic sign stop sign, directional placard and street identification located in the public right-of-way. 
    "Solar access" means space open to the sun and clear of overhangs or shade including the orientation of streets and lots to the sun so as to permit the use of active and/or passive solar energy systems on individual properties. 
    "Solar energy equipment" shall be solar collectors, controls, energy storage devices, heat pumps, heat exchangers, and other materials, hardware or equipment necessary to the process by which solar radiation is collected, converted into another form of energy, stored, protected from unnecessary dissipation and distributed. Solar systems include solar thermal, photovoltaic and concentrated solar. 
    "Solar energy station" shall include but not be limited to any free-standing, solar powered, station that may be used to charge or power a cell phone or other electric device. 
    "Traffic signal" means any municipally installed and owned electric device used for regulating traffic, including, but not limited to, a traffic light, signal or electric box used for powering and/or monitoring such device. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.020 - Location requirements and permitted uses in zoning districts. 
A.  No solar energy stations shall be installed or operated in the city except in compliance with this article. 
B.  No solar energy station shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another solar energy station, on the same side of the right-of-way, unless authorized by the city. 
C.  To the extent practicable, and in accordance with the law of the city, the accommodation of solar energy stations and equipment and the protection of access to sunlight for such equipment shall be encouraged in the application of the various review and approval provisions of the Code of the city. 
D.  Solar energy stations shall be located in a manner to reasonably minimize blockage for surrounding properties and shading of property and shall match the characteristics of the surrounding area in which it is proposed to be located. 
E.  No solar energy station that contains advertising, either digital or print, shall be permitted in any residential district, or be placed facing any residential district. 
F.  Solar energy stations and equipment shall be permitted only if they are determined by the city not to present any unreasonable safety risks, including, but not limited to, weight load, wind resistance and ingress/egress in the event of fire or other emergency 
G.  Solar energy stations shall be located upon a sidewalk and within the public rights-of-way, so as not to obstruct the egress or ingress or line of sight of pedestrians and vehicles, and the following regulations shall govern the placement of solar energy stations: 
1.  On the same side of the right-of-way, no solar energy station shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the following: 
i.  A street corner (measured from the apex of the corner); 
ii.  Fire hydrant; 
iii.  Handicapped ramp located on a street corner; 
iv.  Crosswalk located on a street corner; 
v.  Midblock handicapped ramp; and 
vi.  Midblock crosswalk. 
2.  No solar energy station shall be located less than twelve (12) inches away from the rear face of any curb and shall not obstruct the sidewalk. This provision shall apply to all elevated portions of the structure, including, but not limited to, valance and solar panel. 
3.  The owner of the solar energy station may be required to temporarily remove and/or relocate the station, at the owner's sole cost, during road or streetscape construction. 
4.  The city shall not be liable by the owner for any reason, including, but not limited to, snow removal, removal by the city, graffiti and/or vandalism. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 2, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.030 - Permit application, application fee, issuance, fines, and insurance. 
A.  The bureau of construction shall supply to any solar energy station applicant the proper application, which shall adhere to the following conditions: 
1.  City official solar energy station application (original), plus six (6) photocopies. 
2.  Any other information as the construction code official shall require showing full compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, including any building or electrical approvals necessary pursuant to BOCA, IBC and/or the Uniform Construction Code. 
3.  Every applicant shall pay to the city a non-refundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) that shall accompany the submission of the proposal to construct a solar energy station within the city. 
4.  The applicant for any solar energy station must supply one set of photographs of the current location, two (2) store fronts on the left side and two (2) store fronts on the right side of the proposed solar energy station location along with an architectural drawing of the solar energy station. 
5.  Any person erecting a non-conforming/illegal solar energy station shall receive a summons and has forty-eight (48) hours to remove said solar energy station after notification. The city also reserves the right to remove the station at the owner's cost. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from removing the solar energy station at will. 
6.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the bureau of construction with satisfactory proof that he/she is insured against injury to persons and damage to property caused by any act or omission of the applicant, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of the work to be performed under the permit. 
7.  Applicant must provide an umbrella policy insuring the operations set forth herein in the amount of, at least, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Said policy shall list the City of Elizabeth as an additional insured. Applicant must include the policy in the application submitted herein. 
B.  Permittee shall pay to the city, on an annual basis, an amount equal to ten (10) percent of each station's net revenues (hereinafter known as the "right-of-way fee"), which shall be payable within thirty (30) days of the one year anniversary of permit issuance or an annual permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater. Payment shall be made in a manner, and on such form, as may be prescribed by the city's chief financial officer. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 3, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.040 - City council final approval. 
    Upon satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter, the construction official shall recommend final approval to the city council, who shall have final approval to issue this permit. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 4, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.050 - Structural regulations. 
A.  All solar energy stations and structures of the solar energy station shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured to the ground and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from causing any danger or damage to persons or property. 
B.  All illuminated solar energy station shall comply with the electrical code of the city, in particular, the requirements of Chapter 15.04 of this Code. No solar energy station shall be illuminated between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
C.  No solar energy station or structure of the solar energy station shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct access to any fire escape, window, door, exit or standpipe, or obstruct passage by either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way. 
D.  Solar energy stations and structures of the solar energy station shall be constructed and erected in such a manner as to allow for the effects of high winds and other natural forces, and the bureau of construction may require copies of the stress sheets and calculations showing that the solar energy station is adequately designed for dead-load and wind pressure in any direction. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 5, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.060 - Maintenance and appearance-Aesthetic considerations and graffiti. 
    All solar energy stations and structures of the solar energy station shall be maintained in a clean and neat-appearing condition, and such maintenance, where applicable, shall include regular cleaning; regular painting and removal of any peeled, chipped or blistered paint; the renewal or replacement, in whole or in part, of any solar energy station or structure of the solar energy station which has been caused to crack, break, peel or otherwise disintegrate or fall apart. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 6, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.070 - Structural requirements. 
A.  Solar energy stations are permitted only when they meet the following provisions: 
1.  Lettering no larger than six (6) inches in size. 
2.  The business name and logo are permitted on the valance section of the solar energy systems, and may not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the valance. 
3.  Maximum height of the solar energy system shall be ten (10) feet measured from the ground. 
4.  Maximum width and depth of the solar energy system shall be three (3) feet, including solar panel. 
B.  To prevent solar energy stations from being easily overturned, all solar energy stations must be affixed to the sidewalk. Upon removal of any solar energy station, it shall be the duty of the permittee to restore the area to pre-installation conditions. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 7, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.080 - Advertising. 
    No solar energy station shall contain any advertisement containing any name, word, identification, description, display or illustration of an indecent or immoral nature; nor contain any libelous, defamatory or sacrilegious language; nor urge, advocate or glorify any unlawful activity or conduct. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 8, 9-24-2013) 
12.76.090 - Removal. 
A.  In the event that a solar energy station does not meet the maintenance/graffiti standards set forth in this chapter, the bureau of construction shall immediately notify the owner. The owner shall have seven (7) to fourteen (14) days to remedy the defect. If the owner fails to remedy the defect, the department of public works reserves the right to remove the solar energy station upon request of the building inspector. 
B.  In the event that a solar energy station is found to be unsafe or unsecure, the bureau of construction shall immediately notify the owner. The owner shall have forty-eight (48) hours to remedy the defect. If the owner fails to remedy the defect, the department of public works reserves the right to remove the solar energy station upon request of the building inspector. 
C.  Nothing herein stated shall prevent the city from removing the solar energy station at will. 
(Ord. No. 4426, § 9, 9-24-2013) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Rules and regulations established. 
    For the purpose of enabling the city to continue to provide and supply water for the public and private uses of the city and its inhabitants, the following rules and regulations for governing water service, installation of mains, fire hydrants and service connections are prescribed by the mayor and city council of the city, in the manner provided in this chapter: 
A.  Rule 1. General Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Cost" includes labor, material, transportation expense, supervision, engineering and other necessary overhead expenses. 
    "Customer" means the party contracting for service to a property as classified in this subsection: 
1.  A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied as one business or residence. 
2.  A combination of buildings owned by one party in one common enclosure occupied by one family or business. 
3.  The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall making it capable of divided ownership. 
4.  A building owned by one party of more than one apartment and using in common one hall and one entrance. 
5.  A building owned by one party having a number of apartments or offices and using in common one hall and one or more means of entrance. 
    "Department" means the city water utility. 
    Extension. An extension shall be construed to mean the extension of mains along the street or avenue and shall not include the meter or any part of the house service connections. 
    Lien. By virtue of the statute in such cases made and provided, charges for water service are declared to be lien against the property served. 
    "Owner" means an applicant, customer or person holding record title to the property served. 
    "Service connections" means the tapping of water mains and the laying of pipes from the main to the building served. 
B.  Rule 2. Lien. All water charges are a lien upon the property for which water service has been rendered. 
C.  Rule 3. Water Services. The following character of water service shall be rendered at rates prescribed by this chapter: 
1.  Domestic, Commercial and Industrial Service. This service shall be and includes all water delivered for domestic, commercial or industrial purposes supplied through meters under constant pressure and at the will of the customer. 
2.  Automatic Sprinkler Service. This service shall be only for water consumed for the extinguishing of fires through automatic sprinkler equipments. No charge shall be made for water used through an automatic sprinkler connection for the initial filling of a pressure tank or refilling a pressure tank after a fire, but all water lost through leakage from the fire pipe lines on the premises, or used to replace leakage or evaporation from the pressure tank, shall be charged for at the regular domestic rate, such charge to be in addition to the regular fire service charge. 
3.  Miscellaneous Service. This service shall be for water supplied through unmetered temporary service connections for the construction of sewers, storm drains, street paving, curing concrete, laying cement gutters, curbs and sidewalks, puddling the surface of streets in advance of paving and puddling fills and trenches, etc. The department reserves the right to render such miscellaneous service through a meter and charge for the water consumed by meter measurements instead of a flat rate schedule. An applicant for temporary use of water from a fire hydrant must first secure a permit from the water utility for the use of the fire hydrant and comply with any regulations they may have governing the use of the same. 
D.  Rule 4. Assent to Rules. 
1.  The ordinances, rules and regulations and water rates adopted by the mayor and city council of the city shall be considered a part of the contract with every person, company or corporation supplied with water through the water system of the city and every such person, company or corporation, by taking water, shall be considered to express his or their assent thereto and be bound thereby. 
2.  All permits for the use of water shall be granted upon the express condition that the quantity of water to be used by the customer may, at any time, be restricted or regulated or discontinued if, in the judgment of the city, such restriction, regulation or discontinuance is necessary for the public good and upon the further condition that if from any cause the supply of water should fail, be restricted, regulated or discontinued, the city shall not be held responsible for any damages which shall be claimed of the city for any such causes. 
E.  Rule 5. Pressure Conditions. All applications for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distributing system at the location of the proposed service connection and to hold the department harmless for any damage arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions of service. 
F.  Rule 6. Cross Connections. No cross-connection bypass, valve, pipe line or other similar device which permits or may permit any flow of water into the city's system from any other water supply unapproved by the Department of Health of the state of New Jersey or any source of water supply not fully treated in accordance with the terms of the provisions of the permit issued for or the rules and regulations governing the supplying of such water for public potable purposes by the Department of Health of the state of New Jersey shall be permitted. 
G.  Rule 7. Cutting and Refitting, Etc. of Service Connections and Water Mains. Persons, corporations or contractors making improvements, etc. requiring excavations in streets wherein water mains and service connections are laid, requiring the water mains and service connections to be cut and refitted, lowered or raised, etc., shall make written request to the department to make such changes and shall furnish a satisfactory guaranty to the department ensuring the payment of all cost incurred by the department in making the changes necessary or required to be made. 
H.  Rule 8. Property on Customer's Premises. The department may refuse to connect with any customer's piping system when it is not in accordance with the plumbing rules of the city or the rules of the department. The department shall have the right to access the customer's premises and to all property furnished by the department at reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters or inspecting appliances used in connection with the supply of service or for the removal of its property at the time service is to be terminated. The customer shall obtain or cause to be obtained all necessary permits needed by the department in giving it access to the appliances referred to. The customers shall not permit access to the meter and other appliances of the department except by authorized employees of the department. In case of defective service, customers shall not interfere with the apparatus belonging to the department, but shall immediately notify the proper parties to have the defect remedied. 
I.  Rule 9. Water Used Without Regulation Application Being Made. A person, firm or corporation taking possession of a premises and using water through an active service connection without having made application to the department for water service shall be held liable for the water delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter was found inoperative, the quantity of water consumed will be estimated. If proper application for water service is not made upon notification to do so by the department, and if accumulated bills for service are not paid immediately, the service may be discontinued by the department without further notice. 
J.  Rule 10. Turning on and off Water Supply. 
1.  No charge will be made for turning on and shutting off the water supply when requested by the customer, for the closing of an account or the beginning of a new one. 
2.  When service has been discontinued on account of nonpayment of water bills, or on account of failure to make a required cash guaranty deposit, or for any other infraction of the rules shall require a charge as specified in Rule 47. 
3.  Should the occupant of the premises turn on the water or suffer or cause it to be turned on after it has been shut off at the curb by the department, it will be shut off again, the curb stop will be sealed, the meter taken out and a charge consisting of the actual cost to the department for such service will be made for the expense of shutting off the curb stop, removing and replacing the meter and turning on again. 
K.  Rule 11. Emergency Shutoffs. The department, upon request, night or day, without charge, will shut off the supply for emergency purposes at the curb stop. The customer's plumber or agent shall turn on the supply when repairs are made. 
L.  Rule 12. Damages through Leaking Pipes and Fixtures. When turning on the water supply as requested and the house or property is vacant, the department will endeavor to ascertain if water is running on the inside of the building. If such is found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the curb stop. The department's jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the curb stop, and the department will, in no case, be liable for damages occasioned by water running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the department's curb stop. 
M.  Rule 13. Maintenance of Water Pressure and Shutting Down for Emergency Repairs. The department shall not accept any responsibility for the maintenance of pressure, and it reserves the right to discontinue service while making emergency repairs, etc. Customers dependent upon a continuous supply should provide emergency storage. When the supply of water is to be temporarily cut off, notice will be given when practicable to all customers affected by the shutting off. All persons having boilers within their premises not supplied by a tank or cistern are cautioned against collapse. In such case, the department will not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered. 
N.  Rule 14. Tampering with Department's Property. No one except an employee or representative of the department shall at any time or in any manner operate the curb cock or valves (except to repair or change private plumbing), main cocks, gates or valves of the system or interfere with meters or their connections, street mains or other parts of the system. 
O.  Rule 15. Discontinuance of Service. 
1.  Service under an application may be discontinued for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the application. 
b.  Willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise. 
c.  Failure to maintain, in good order, connections, service lines or fixtures owned by the applicant. 
d.  Molesting any service pipe, meter curb stopcock or seal or any other appliance of the department. 
e.  In case of vacancy of the premises. 
f.  Nonpayment for water service or any other charges accruing under the application. 
g.  Refusal of reasonable access to property for purposes of inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters. 
2.  Service will be renewed under a proper application when the conditions under which such service was discontinued are corrected and upon the payment of all proper charges due from the applicant provided in the schedule of rates and charges of the department. 
P.  Rule 16. Complaints. Complaints with regard to the character of the service furnished or the reading of meters or of the bills rendered must be made at the department's office, either verbally or in writing. 
Q.  Rule 17. Fire Service. No person, except the superintendent or other authorized person, shall take water from any public fire hydrant, hose plug, street washer or fountain pipe, except for fire purposes or for the use of the fire department in case of fire, and no public fire hydrant shall be used for sprinkling streets, flushing sewers or gutters or for any other than fire purposes, except with the approval of the department. 
1.  Use of Hydrants. 
a.  An applicant for temporary use of water from a fire hydrant must first secure a permit from the superintendent of water for use of the fire hydrant. 
b.  The permit shall require a charge as specified in Rule 47. 
c.  The holder of the permit must comply with the provisions of the superintendent's regulations governing the use of a fire hydrant. Failure to so comply will cause the permit to become null and void. 
2.  Fire Hydrants-Use and Operation General Provisions. 
a.  Hydrants are to be used only by an authorized employee of the water utility or of the fire department. 
b.  The superintendent of water may, at his discretion, issue a permit for the use of a hydrant for a miscellaneous work. The location and the approximate length of time of the hydrant to be used must be known. A valve must be installed on the outlet side of the meter between the hose and the meter. The top operating nut must be used only at the beginning and end of the day's work. 
c.  The person to whom a permit for hydrant use is issued shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all liability or damage of whatever nature by reason of the opening or use of such hydrants or the use of water therefrom by any person, agent, servants or employees. 
d.  The use of the large nozzle is restricted to the fire department only. Nozzle caps shall be replaced after the use of the hydrant. Care shall be taken that the cap chains are not broken or the caps lost. 
e.  The use of a defective hydrant is prohibited. If a hydrant is defective, the division of water utility should be notified immediately and given the location thereof. 
f.  Access to hydrants shall not be obstructed. 
g.  Hydrants shall be protected by the user from freezing or other damage. If damage to a hydrant results from the use thereof, repairs shall be made at the expense of the user. To prevent freezing, hydrants used at any time during the period from the first day of November to the first day of April shall in every instance be pumped out immediately after use. No hydrant shall be used when the temperature is less than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit, except in case of emergency and under special permission from the division of water utility. 
h.  The permittee agrees to pay all established fees in connection with the use of hydrants and to pay for all water used at the established rates. 
i.  The division of water utility will supply a proper meter for registering the amount of water used by a hydrant permittee. 
j.  The division of water utility may cancel any such permit issued, if any of the conditions mentioned herein are violated or for such other reasons as may be considered adequate. 
k.  The hydrant permit must be retained at the point where water is being used. 
l.  Note. When using the hydrant for street cleaning, the area first must be cleaned and swept. 
2.  Violations-Abatement. Upon notice from the superintendent of water or authorized representative of noncompliance with or violation of any of the provisions of the rules and regulations of the superintendent or the provisions of this title, the person causing or maintaining such noncompliance or violation shall, within the time given in such notice, remove or abate such noncompliance or violation. 
3.  Penalty. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the superintendent of water referred to in the section "Fire Hydrants-Use and Optional General Provisions" shall, except as otherwise provided in this title, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
Water Main Extensions 
R.  Rule 18. Extension Requested By Owners. 
1.  Where applications for extensions are made by individuals, partnerships or corporations interested in the development and sale of land or otherwise, the department may require a deposit from the applicant covering the entire cost of installing the necessary main lines to serve the tract or parcel. 
2.  Such deposits are not to carry interest. 
3.  Such deposits are to be returned to the depositor when new houses abutting on such main lines are completed, the prospective customer's equipment such as piping, etc., is installed and the house occupied; and after such completion and occupation there shall be returned to the depositor the amount equal to the estimated revenue derived from five years' service; provided, however, that the sum to be returned should not exceed the sum originally deposited, and provided further that no part of the deposit remaining over ten (10) years is to be returned. 
S.  Rule 19. Street Must be Down to Grade. Streets in new subdivisions must be down to grade before the water mains, service and fire hydrants are installed. If curbs are not constructed, the location and grade of the same must be well established. If, after mains and services are installed, they have to be moved or lowered because of incorrect information as to grade of curbs, property lines, etc., all expense incurred by making the changes must be borne by the tract or property owner. 
T.  Rule 20. Nondedicated Streets. No water mains shall be laid in streets not formally dedicated to public use, except by special action of the city council. 
U.  Rule 21. Installation of Fire Hydrants. The superintendent of water sewers shall designate the size and location of all fire hydrants to be installed. The cost for installing fire hydrants shall be included in the water main extension cost. 
V.  Rule 22. Changing Location of Fire Hydrants. The location of a fire hydrant may be changed upon request. The cost of making this change shall be borne by the individual requesting the same. 
W.  Rule 23. Repairs to Damaged Fire Hydrants. Repairs to damaged fire hydrants will be made by the water utility. The cost of making the repairs shall be borne by the party or parties causing such damage. 
X.  Rule 24. Applications. Applications for service connections must be made on printed forms furnished by the department, which applications shall specify the size of the service connection desired, the property to be served, the legal owner thereof and the purpose for which the meter is to be used. The information supplied by the applicant in such application shall be considered as authoritative and final. If any errors in such information shall cause the service connection to be installed of a wrong size or at a wrong location, the cost of all changes required shall be borne by the applicant. All use of water other than by the applicant, or for any purpose or upon any premises not stated or described in the application must be prevented by him or her. The applicant will be liable for the amount of water used in conformity with the schedule or rates of the department. 
Y.  Rule 25. Size and Location. The department reserves the right to determine the size of the service connection and its location with respect to the boundaries of the premises to be served. The laying of the customer's pipe to the curb should not be done until the service connection is installed. Service pipe shall be in a separate trench not nearer than eighteen (18) inches to other trenches, shall run at right angles to the curbline and shall, in all places, be at least three and one-half feet below the finished grade. 
Z.  Rule 26. Curb Cock. Every service connection installed by the department shall be equipped with a curb cock near the curbline; such curb cock is intended for the exclusive use of the department in controlling the water supply through the service connection pipe. If the curb cock is damaged by the customer's use to an extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall be at the customer's expense. 
AA.  Rule 27. Installation Charges, Domestic, Commercial and Industrial Connection. 
1.  The tapping of the main shall be done and the corporation cock and couplings, the service lines from main to curb, curb stopcock and coupling and curb box shall be furnished and placed by the department or its agent at the expense of the department. The remainder of the service connection shall be placed by the owner in conformity to specifications prescribed by the department. 
2.  The municipal charge, if any, for permission to open the street shall be paid by the applicant. 
3.  Whenever a tap is made through which regular service is not immediately desired, the applicant shall bear the entire expense of tapping the main, laying and maintaining the service pipes, couplings and connections but shall be entitled to a refund for such part as the department is hereinbefore required to assume, whenever regular service is begun. 
BB.  Rule 28. Installation Charges, Automatic Sprinkler Equipment. Service connections for the supply to automatic sprinkler equipment installed for the prevention and extinguishment of fire shall be installed at the expense of the customer. The applicant must deposit an amount equal to the estimated cost of such service connection. If the actual cost for making the connection is less than the amount deposited, the difference will be refunded, and, if more, the difference will be billed. 
CC.  Rule 29. Maintenance. The service connections extending from the water main to the curb cock shall be maintained by the department; all pipes, fixtures, chambers and meter pits extending or lying beyond the curb cock shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the property. 
DD.  Rule 30. Renewal in Advance of Paying. Service connections are renewed, in streets to be permanently paved, at the department's expense. 
EE.  Rule 31. Domestic, Commercial and Industrial Service Connections. 
1.  Each customer must be provided with a separate service connection; two or more houses under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land must be supplied through separate service connections. 
2.  Not more than one service connection shall be installed for a customer, except under special conditions. 
3.  A service connection shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner or to supply property of the same owner across a street or alley. 
FF.  Rule 32. Fire Service Connection. When a fire service connection is installed, the valve governing the same will be closed and sealed and remain so until a written order is received from the owner of the premises to have the water turned on. After the water is turned on, the department shall not be held liable for damages of any kind whatsoever that may occur to the premises served by reason of the installation, maintenance, use, fluctuation of pressure or interruption of supply. 
GG.  Rule 33. Temporary Service Connection. A temporary service connection will be installed at the expense of the customer upon receipt of a deposit covering the estimated cost of such connection. If the cost for making the connection is less than the amount deposited, the difference will be refunded, and, if more, the difference will be billed. 
HH.  Rule 34. Ownership. The department shall, without charge, furnish and install each customer supplied with water with a suitable meter and such appliances as are customarily furnished in order to connect the customer's equipment, except when a remote reading meter is installed at the customer's request. When a remote reading meter is installed there will be an installation charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) to be paid by the customer. 
II.  Rule 35. Maintenance. Meters will be maintained by the department so far as ordinary wear and tear are concerned, but damages due to freezing, hot water or external causes shall be paid for by the customer. The charge for the reinstallation or changing of a meter when removed because of damage in any way, due to negligence of the customer, shall be the actual costs of materials and labor involved. 
JJ.  Rule 36. Location. 
1.  Meters shall be conveniently located at the point approved of by the department so as to control the entire supply, and a proper place and protection for the meter shall be provided by the applicant. 
2.  All meters hereafter placed in buildings shall be located in the cellar or first floor, as near as possible to the point of entrance of the service in a clean, dry and safe place not subject to great variation in temperature, so located as to be easily accessible for installation or disconnection and for reading and of a type suitable for the purpose and location. 
3.  A stopcock or gate valve shall be placed on the service line on the street side of and near the meter, and a stopcock and waste cock or valve on the other side of the meter. A suitable check valve shall be placed between the stopcock and waste cock or valve and the meter if required by the department. 
4.  When no suitable location for a meter can be obtained in a building or when the building is distant from the street line or curbline, the customer must provide a watertight pit chamber or vault for the meter fifty (50) feet or more from the curbline. Meter pit covers shall conform with specifications obtained in the office of the superintendent. 
KK.  Rule 37. Test Requests. 
1.  The department shall, without charge, make a test of the accuracy of a meter upon request of a customer, provided that such customer does not make a request for a test more frequently than once a year. A report giving the results of such tests shall be made to the customer and a complete record of such tests shall be kept. 
2.  In case of a disputed account involving a question as to the accuracy of a meter, such meter will be tested upon the request of the applicant. In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an error in the registration in excess of three percent, the bills will be corrected accordingly. 
3.  Where water is furnished by a meter, the quantity recorded by it shall be taken to be the amount passing through the meter, except where the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In such cases the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the meter when in order, or by such fair and reasonable method as shall be based upon the best information obtainable. 
LL.  Rule 38. Changing Meters. The department shall make no charge for replacing a meter where such replacement is requested by a customer unless the meter first referred to has been in use less than one year, in which case a charge shall be made to cover the actual expense of making the change. 
MM.  Rule 39. Setting. The connections at the meter must be so arranged that the department will not be required to do any pipe fitting but will merely have to connect the meter by means of unions already in place. The union connections are to be put in place at the expense of the owner and will remain as a part of the permanent piping of the building. 
NN.  Rule 40. Application for Water. Where a service connection has been previously installed and water is desired, a proper application must be signed by the owner of the premises on a form provided by the department. All agreements covering water supply shall continue in force from year to year, unless notice in writing is given by either party to terminate the contract. Water charges begin when the meter is installed and continue until written notice has been given of a change of ownership. When such change or transfer takes place, the new owner must sign a new application. Water may be turned off from any premises temporarily without, in any way, affecting the existing agreement for service. 
OO.  Rule 41. Meter Reading Periods. Under ordinary conditions, continuous service meters will be read quarterly on approximately the same day of the month each quarter. Meters installed for miscellaneous temporary service may be read at the discretion of the department. 
PP.  Rule 42. Presentation of Bills. Unless the applicant for water service specifies otherwise, the bills will be mailed or delivered to the premises where water service is furnished. If the applicant so desires, the department will mail or deliver the bills to the business or home address of the applicant or agent. Bills will be delivered only when and as far as practical. When not delivered, the customer is required to obtain them at the office of the department without notice. Failure to receive bills or notice is no excuse for nonpayment of water bills. 
QQ.  Rule 43. Bills for Continuous Service. All meter bills for continuous service will be rendered quarterly. The amount charged shall be due on the date of the rendering of the bill. If bills are not paid within thirty (30) days from date of issue, interest will be charged at the legal statutory rate set for property taxes by the governing body. If a bill remains unpaid for a period of three months after date of issue, service will be summarily discontinued during the following month. 
RR.  Rule 44. Bills for Miscellaneous Temporary Service. Application for a supply of water for construction or other temporary purposes must be made at the office of the department and permit obtained before making any use thereof. All such water shall be estimated and paid for thereof. All such water shall be estimated and paid for in advance, unless metered. In the latter case, a suitable deposit will be required to guarantee the payment of the bill. The charge for estimated and actual metered service shall be at the rates specified in Rule 47. 
SS.  Rule 45. Penalty for Violation of Rules and Regulations. If any person shall knowingly violate any of the rules and regulations made by the department, such persons so offending shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in addition to any other charges that may be accrued. 
TT.  Rule 46. Amendments. These rules and regulations shall not be suspended and can only be amended by submitting, in writing, the amendments proposed at a regular meeting of the city council one month previous to the regular meeting. 
UU.  Rule 47. Rates. 
    The following rates are adopted: 
1.  The water use charge shall be ninety ($0.90) cents per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water. 
2.  Facility charges. The base charge for metered service shall be as follows: 
Meter Diameter In Inches Charge Per Quarter 5/8$ 9.49 3/4 12.65 1 20.70 1 1/2 43.70 2 75.90 3 167.90 4 296.70 6 664.70 8 1,179.90 10 1,842.30  
    Facility charge is determined by: 
2.3 x (1 + 8 x (diameter in inches) 2 ) 
    When service is provided for seasonal or temporary use, the facility charge shall not be prorated to a period of less than a quarter. 
3.  Construction and special use service. 
a.  For metered use the charges shall be as specified in subsections 1 and 2 of this subsection. 
b.  For unmetered service excluding use for filling tanks, storage facilities, testing lines, and other uses which can be estimated, the charges shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per day payable in advance. 
c.  For unmetered service such as the filling tanks, storage facilities, testing lines, and other uses which can be estimated, the charges shall be as specified in subsections 1 and 2 of this subsection. 
4.  Miscellaneous Service-Charges not Involving the Use of Water. The resumption of service after discontinuance due to nonpayment of bills or violation of the rules or removing and replacing meters within a period of one year at the request of the customer shall be charged as follows: 
a.  Ten dollars ($10.00) for meters up to one inch in diameter. 
b.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) per inch in diameter or fraction thereof for meters larger than one inch. 
    The above amount, plus all outstanding bills, penalties and interest must be paid in full by the customer before service will be renewed. All bills must be paid by three p.m. or water service will not be turned on until the next regular working day. If a customer requests service to be restored outside of the regular working hours, an additional charge consisting of the actual cost to the department of such service will be made. 
5.  Private Fire Protection. 
a.  The base charge for sprinkler connections with hose or hydrant connection shall be the same as the facility charge specified in subsection 2 of this section, since the same facilities are provided. 
b.  The base charge for sprinkler connections without hose or hydrant shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the facility charge, since use is restricted. 
6.  Special Provisions. Private fire service lines shall be equipped with special meters or detector checks and are to be used exclusively for fire protection purposes. No water shall be used through these fire protection connections, except for testing purposes or in case of fire. No additional charges will be made for water used in testing or for fire. 
7.  Wholesale Water Adjustment Charges. When the weighted average of wholesale charge for the city increases above the base level of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per million (1,000,000) gallons, the increase per one hundred (100) cubic feet as seen at the end user's meter shall be used to adjust the flow charge of all users by one hundred two (102) percent of that amount. 
8.  The finance department reserves the right to bill certain commercial accounts monthly. Charges will be adjusted for this interval where appropriate. 
9.  The rates and charges in this section established shall be collected from and after April 1, 1982. 
10.  Exemption from Standby Water Fees. A facility that is a residential healthcare facility pursuant to the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136, or a rooming or boarding house pursuant to the Rooming and Boarding House Act of 1979, P.L. 1979, c. 496, is exempt from the payment of the private fire protection rates listed under subsection 5 of this section for sprinkler connections required to be installed in one of the above facilities pursuant to state law. Subsection 6 of this section, special provisions, will apply to those facilities which qualify for exemption from standby water fees, except that charges will be made for water used in testing and may be made for water used in fires. 
11.  The actual cost of water main connections, including installation, will be charged to the facility qualifying for exemption from standby water fees. 
VV.  Rule 48. Utility Opening Permits. 
1.  Whenever any person makes an application for a permit which will require the city to apply for a utility opening permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:7-44.1 and N.J.A.C. 16:41-3.1, that person shall pay to the city a fee equal to the fee imposed on the city by the New Jersey Department of Transportation for obtaining a utility opening permit. 
2.  Further, should the applicant request that the city prepare any required plans, drawings or specifications necessary for the application for utility opening permit, a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) or the actual cost to the department of such service, whichever is greater shall be imposed for the preparation of these drawings. 
3.  The applicant shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents, against all suits and costs of every name and description and from any and all damages and injuries arising out of the work performed or service or equipment provided. 
4.  The applicant shall comply with all the conditions set forth by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as stated in Section 41-3.2(b) et seq. of Title 16 of the New Jersey Administrative Code. 
WW.  Rule 49. Fees. There shall be a fee of one dollar ($1.00) as a service charge for the reproduction of a replacement or duplicate water and sewer utility bill. (Prior code § 149-1) 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER CONSERVATION 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Legislative purpose-Powers of mayor and council. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, and to aid in the prevention of injury to life and of damage and destruction to property because of a water shortage during the present emergency, by prescribing a course of conduct for the population and inhabitants of the city, and by centralizing the control of all civilian activities having to do with the usage of water and the shortage thereof, and for that purpose to give to the mayor and the city council of the city control of such abuses of the use of water as may be necessary to cope with the shortage and with this emergency, and to invest the mayor and city council with all other powers convenient or necessary to effectuate the saving of water. 
(Prior code § 148-1) 
13.08.020 - Services of personnel. 
    Because of this shortage and the imminent danger to health and welfare of the people, the mayor and the city council are authorized to enlist all available resources of the city government and the personal services of any head of any department of the city necessary to protect the city and its citizens against this threatened shortage, which will affect the health and welfare of the people. 
(Prior code § 148-2) 
13.08.030 - Cooperation of citizens. 
    The mayor and the city council are authorized to request any citizen or resident of this city, or any firm, partnership or corporation, to cooperate and to enable the mayor and the city council to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 148-3) 
13.08.040 - Waste of water prohibited. 
    The mayor and the city council are empowered to call upon the police and fire departments of the city, together with all other departments, to investigate and check sources of wastage of water by any user in the city, and upon the discovery by any department or any lawfully authorized person of the wastage of the water, said unlawful user shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. 
(Prior code § 148-4) 
13.08.050 - Prohibited acts. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, or anyone, who commits any act during this water shortage emergency, which act shall: 
A.  Jeopardize the health, welfare and safety of the people; 
B.  Commit any unlawful act during the emergency that contributes to the loss of water; 
C.  Hampers, impedes or in any way interferes with any person who is performing any function or duty authorized under the ordinance codified herein; 
D.  Refuses to obey the lawful orders of any policeman or fireman or other person who is duly authorized to perform any act or function during the threat of the water shortage; or 
E.  Refuses to cooperate with any policeman or fireman or other person duly authorized to perform any act or function in connection with the conservation of water and the imminence of danger as the result of loss of water. 
(Prior code § 148-5) 
13.08.060 - Additional persons subject to penalty. 
    Any person who shall knowingly aid or abet another in the violation of any provision of this chapter shall also be subject to Section 1.12.010. 
(Prior code § 148-6) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER EMERGENCIES 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Declaration of water emergency. 
    Whenever the mayor of the city shall be satisfied and finds that a water emergency exists in the city, he or she may adopt an executive order declaring that a water emergency exists in the city. Such executive order shall identify that portion of the city affected by the water emergency, which may include the entire municipality and shall specify which of the water use regulations contained in Section 13.12.020 of this chapter is being imposed as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. Such executive order shall be effective immediately upon publication according to law and shall continue in effect for ninety (90) days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in Section 13.12.030 of this chapter. For the purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist if, for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the city has adopted water use restrictions, has notified the city, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other state, county or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions and such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any state, county or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so. 
B.  The mayor is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency exists in the city. 
(Prior code § 149A-1) 
13.12.020 - Water use restrictions. 
    Upon the mayor adopting an executive order declaring that a water emergency exists in the city in accordance with Section 13.12.010 of this chapter, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation measures and, any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona fide health emergency exists and to exempt businesses, as specified herein during the water emergency: 
A.  The complete ban and prohibitions of outside water usage, including the watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of cars; 
B.  Outside water usage on alternative days allowing outside water usage by persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days with outside water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of any month during the water emergency; or 
C.  Any other water use restriction specified by the mayor in his or her executive order required by Section 13.12.010 of this chapter which is reasonable under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall be limited in application to that portion of the municipality, which may include the entire municipality, identified as being affected by the water emergency in the executive order of the mayor in accordance with Section 13.12.010 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 149A-2) 
13.12.030 - Duration of water use restrictions. 
    The executive order of the mayor required by Section 13.12.010 of this chapter shall, in addition to complying with Section 13.12.010, provide a period of time during which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the executive order, the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable. If the mayor shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the executive order, he or she shall adopt an executive order declaring the water emergency ended and the water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time period specified in the executive order, the mayor shall be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, he may adopt an executive order in accordance with the requirements of this chapter continuing the water use restrictions. 
(Prior code § 149A-3) 
13.12.040 - Enforcement of water use restrictions. 
    The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be enforced during a water emergency by the local authorized official. Whenever a local authorized official shall find a violation of the water use restrictions, such authorized official shall give the violator a written warning and explain the penalties for a second and third offense as provided by Section 13.12.050 of this chapter. The local authorized official shall keep such records as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The local authorized official is empowered to write summonses for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 149A-4) 
13.12.050 - Penalties. 
    After a first offense in accordance with Section 13.12.040 of this chapter, any person or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with this section. For a second offense, the fine imposed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for ten (10) days or both. For a third and subsequent offense, the fine imposed shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for thirty (30) days or both. 
(Prior code § 149A-5) 
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Sewer Use 

13.16.010 - Definitions and word usage. 
A.  Unless the contents specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Building" means any structure contained within exterior walls and from which sewage originates. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of the drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, and means and includes a house sewer or a private sewer. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or to an existing extension from a public sewer when available. 
    "BOD (denotes 'biochemical oxygen demand')" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means the measure of the organic matter present in the sewage as determined by the dichromatic reflux method and expressed in milligrams per liter (parts per million). 
    "Chlorine demand" means the amount of chlorine expressed in milligrams per liter, or parts per million by weight, which will complete the normal reactions with all chemicals and materials in the sewage leaving an excess of one-tenth milligram per liter [one-tenth part per million by weight] after thirty (30) minutes' contact time at room temperature of approximately seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth, in the county of Union and state of New Jersey. 
    "Combined sewage" means the mixture of rainfall runoff and sewage. 
    "Combined sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage to which storm and surface waters are intentionally admitted. 
    "Compatible pollutant" means BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the joint meeting's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment facilities where said facilities have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
    "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any system of condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other, but which shall be free from odor and oil. It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or suspended solids each in excess of ten (10) parts per million by weight. 
    "Director of finance" means the director of the department of finance of the city. 
    "Director of public works" means the director of the department of public works of the city. 
    "Domestic wastes" means liquid wastes from the non-commercial preparation, cooking and handling of food and consisting of human excrement or similar matter from the sanitary conveyances of dwellings. 
    "Engineer" means the city engineer of the city or authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Floatable oil" means oil, fat or grease in a physical state which will separate by gravity from wastewater through treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of "floatable oil" if it is properly pretreated in such a manner that the discharged wastewater does not interfere with the wastewater facilities. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    "Grease" or "fats" means any material which is extractable from an acidified sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent. 
    "Heavy metals" means the electronegative metals with a density greater than five grams per cubic centimeter, including but not limited to lead, chromium, mercury, nickel and zinc, plus the nonmetallic element arsenic. 
    "Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in this section. 
    "Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    "Joint meeting" means the municipalities of the city of East Orange, the township of Hillside, the town of Irvington, the township of Maplewood, the township of Millburn, the city of Newark, the borough of Roselle Park, the village of South Orange, the city of Summit, the township of Union and the town of West Orange, organized in joint meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:63-68 et seq. under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as supplemented, in the matter of an outlet sewer and treatment plant for said municipalities, and, when the context requires, shall mean the executive director or authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Joint sewer" includes the joint outlet or trunk sewer constructed by the several member municipalities forming the joint meeting under a contract dated March 15, 1901; the Supplementary Joint Trunk Sewer and Sewage Disposal Plant constructed under a contract between the member municipalities dated June 1, 1926, and contract dated March 9, 1931; or shall mean any trunk sewer theretofore or thereafter constructed and maintained by the joint meeting. 
    "Major industry" means an industrial user of municipal or joint meeting wastewater facilities that has a flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per work-day; has in its waste toxic substances injurious to the treatment process or sewer system; is found by the USEPA, NJDEP, joint meeting or municipality to have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on municipal or joint meeting wastewater facilities or upon the quality of effluent from these wastewater facilities; or has a detrimental effect upon human health or welfare. 
    "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    "NJDEP" refers to the state of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or successor agency. 
    "Nonstationary source" means any mobile vehicle, piece of equipment or appurtenance thereof that is utilized in the discharge of waste or wastewater to any sewer or natural outlet. The term includes, but is not limited to, tank trucks and dump trucks as well as associated equipment and appurtenances. Fixed, permanent or semipermanent equipment is excluded from the category of nonstationary source and is regulated elsewhere in this chapter. 
    "Normal sewage" shall be regarded as normal for the city if analyses show, by weight, a daily average of not more than one hundred eighty (180) parts per million of suspended solids, not more than two hundred ten (210) parts per million of BOD and not more than twenty-five (25) parts per million of chlorine demand each. One part per million equals 8.34 pounds per million gallons. 
    "NPDES (national pollution discharge elimination system)" means the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters and contiguous waters and the ocean. 
    "Other wastes" includes garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals and all other discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste. 
    "Part" as used in relation to the term "sewer system," includes all lateral sewers, or all combined sewers, or all branch sewers, or all interceptor sewers, or all trunk sewers, and any sewage treatment and disposal works, each part with necessary appurtenances, including sewage pumping stations. 
    "Person, enterprise, establishment or owner" means any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, society, corporation (public or private) or group, including heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, using the sewage works or sewerage system. 
    "Petroleum hydrocarbons" means that portion of the total extractable grease or fats which is not retained on an activated alumina absorption column after elutriating with hexane. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Plumbing code" means the plumbing code of the city, as amended. 
    "Plumbing inspector" means the plumbing inspector of the city. 
    "Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive substances, thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste or other residue discharged into the joint meeting or city sewer system or waters of the state. 
    "Pretreatmeant" means a treatment given to waste by other than residential users prior to its direct or indirect discharge to municipal or joint meeting wastewater facilities to remove illegal and/or undesirable waste constituents, or to reduce the strength of waste prior to discharge to publicly owned wastewater facilities. 
    "Private sewer" means a building, sewer and connection or other sewer not controlled by a municipality or other public authority. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the garbage that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    "Sanitary sewage" means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm and surface waters and industrial wastes. 
    "Sewage" means the water-carried human or animal wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present. The admixture with sewage, as above defined, of industrial waste or other wastes, as defined in this section, also shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning of this chapter. 
    "Sewage or treatment works" means any device or system, whether public or private, used in the conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal or industrial wastes of a liquid nature including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, cooling towers and ponds, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof, elements essential to produce a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities, and any other works including sites for the treatment process or for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. Additionally, "treatment works" means any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of pollutants, including stormwater runoff or industrial waste in combined or separate stormwater and sanitary sewer systems. The term "treatment works" shall not be construed to include any facilities subject to the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. 
    "Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    "Slug" means any discharge of water excluding rainfall runoff sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
    "Storm sewer or storm drain" means a pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. It may, however, carry cooling water or other unpolluted waters. 
    "Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or immediately following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    "Suspended solids" means those solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtration. 
    "Unpolluted water" means water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, and waters whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards. 
    "USEPA" refers to the United States Environmental Protection Agency or successor agency. 
    "User" means any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the wastewater treatment facilities of the joint meeting. 
    "User classification" means a classification of user defined in the 1972 Edition (or subsequent editions) of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the Office of Management and Budget. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
B.  Word Usage. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
C.  Terms not otherwise defined in this chapter shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation; the Federal Guidelines for Liquid Pretreatment, EPA-43019-76-0179, Vol. 1, 1977, or the latest revisions thereof; P.L. 95-217; N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1; or N.J.A.C. 58:11-49, 1972. 
(Prior code § 118-1) 
13.16.020 - Use of public sewer required. 
A.  It is unlawful to place, deposit or permit deposit in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the subsequent provisions of this chapter and the public health law. 
C.  So far as is practicable, industrial waste shall be discharged into the city's sewer system with or without pretreatment, provided that the consent of the engineer is first obtained and the rules, regulations and standards hereinafter prescribed are complied with, in the judgment of the engineer. 
D.  Written approval by the engineer is required for all new discharges of industrial wastes after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. These shall include all wastes in which the quantity, temperature or chemical characteristics are altered in operation procedures and equipment changes. 
E.  The discharge of industrial cooling water to the city's sewer system is not permitted except by specific written approval by the engineer. 
F.  It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage within any area where public sewer service is available within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line. 
G.  The owner of all houses, buildings or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other similar purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilets and facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice from the plumbing inspector to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line. In no event shall the city be required to furnish a public sewer to a point within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line. 
H.  No portion of this chapter shall be construed to interfere with or modify the requirements of design, inspection and approval which are imposed by the appropriate health officials and the state and city health departments. 
(Prior code § 118-2) 
13.16.030 - Building sewers and connections-Permit. 
A.  No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into or use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written sewer permit in accordance with the regulations as established by the city, including the plumbing code of the city, as amended. 
B.  A sewer permit shall not be issued without first furnishing the engineer with plans and specifications or other information considered pertinent for compliance with this chapter. 
C.  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property being served. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly be occasioned by installation of the building sewer. 
D.  A separate independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. Under such conditions, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
E.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the plumbing inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
F.  The building sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable portions of the city's plumbing code, as amended. 
G.  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sideways, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city or other appropriate governmental agencies. All necessary permits for the opening of streets shall be obtained from the director of public works in advance of the issuance of any sewer permit. 
H.  Building sewers shall be serviced and repaired by the owner of the property being served. Evidence of willful damage to building sewers shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 118-3) 
13.16.040 - Connection with joint sewer-Permit. 
A.  Connections of building sewers shall, wherever possible, be made to city sewers and not to joint meeting main lines or trunk sewers. No direct connection or alteration or repair of any such connection with the joint sewer shall be made without having first obtained a written permit from the joint meeting and from the city. 
B.  Each permit to connect with the joint sewer, if and when issued, will require that the applicant for such permit agrees that it or he will carefully make the connection with the joint sewer in the manner prescribed by the joint meeting; that it or he or she will defend, indemnify and save harmless the joint meeting and the city from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his or her work or any imperfect or inadequate work done by virtue of such permit; that it or he or she will faithfully comply with the ordinances of the city; and that he or she will replace and restore the sidewalk, pavement or street surface over any opening he or she may have made, the work to be subject to the inspection and approval of the joint meeting and the city. 
C.  Connections with the joint sewer shall be made only by a plumber licensed and/or recognized by the city or by some other person duly authorized by the joint meeting and the city. Connections shall be made with suitable materials approved by the joint meeting. All work included in the construction of connections with the joint sewer or relating thereto shall be done to the satisfaction of the joint meeting and the city, and the person or persons doing such work shall accept as final all decisions of the joint meeting and the city as to the fitness of all materials furnished or work done and shall immediately replace all work rejected. 
D.  Connections shall be such as to provide flexibility and watertight joints. A manhole shall be provided if required. Connections shall include a cast-iron hub, set and sealed in the main sewer. No connections shall be covered until inspected by the joint fleeting and the city. No top connections will be permitted. 
(Prior code § 118-4) 
13.16.050 - Regulations for use of public sewers-Prohibited discharges. 
A.  Ground water acceptance regulation use of public sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water (except as set forth below), roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
1.  Direct or indirect discharges of ground water to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities shall only be permitted under the following circumstance: 
a.  The proposed discharger or applicant has filed an application for and has been issued a non-domestic wastewater discharge permit (permit) by the joint meeting. 
2.  For long-term, continuous discharges, the municipality where the site remediation project of the applicant is located or, at the election of the municipality, the proposed discharger or applicant ("municipality/applicant") will be required to identify and eliminate two gallons of infiltration/inflow to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities for each gallon of ground water to be delivered into the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities on a daily average over the life of the remediation project discharge (2 to 1 offset). 
a.  The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the municipality/applicant shall be identified by the municipality and agreed to by the joint meeting, through the use of the Phase III Sewer System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen and Sawyer, dated August 1983, and as supplemented, which was previously distributed by joint meeting to each member municipality in the joint meeting service area, or such other report as may be available in the case of non-member municipalities. 
b.  The remedial work to be performed by the municipality/applicant shall be completed within a time period that shall not exceed one-half of the time frame of the remediation project discharge estimated by the proposed discharger or applicant and approved by the municipality and the joint meeting. In the event that extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that will affect the ability of the municipality/applicant to meet the time period previously agreed upon by the parties for completion of the infiltration inflow remedial work, the municipality/applicant may seek an extension of the time period through the filing of a written request not less than sixty (60) days before a previously defined and agreed upon milestone, fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances and specifying the additional time necessary to complete the remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests for extensions will be considered by the joint meeting on a case-by-case basis, and an extension of time shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
c.  An applicant may not discharge ground water to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities until it has obtained a permit and an agreement is reached between the joint meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the 2 to 1 offset policy set forth in this regulation. 
d.  At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the municipality/applicant and the joint meeting, the municipality/applicant shall be required to demonstrate, in written progress reports, to the satisfaction of the joint meeting that the municipality/applicant is making definable progress in performing the remedial work so as to be able to complete the work within the time frame established in accordance with subsection (A)(2)(b) above. 
e.  The engineer of the municipality where the remedial work has been performed will be required to submit to joint meeting a certification stating that the remedial work has been completed and such certification must be submitted within one week of the date of the completion of the work. 
f.  After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is identified by the municipality and agreed to by the joint meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the municipality/applicant will be required to submit proof to the joint meeting that a performance bond in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the value of the remedial work and naming the joint meeting as a co-obligee has been issued to ensure that such work is completely performed. 
3.  a.  For short-term, batch discharges, the municipality/applicant will be required to identify and eliminate two gallons of infiltration/inflow into the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities for each gallon of ground water to be delivered to the joint meeting treatment works on a daily average over the life of the remediation project discharge (2 to 1 offset); or 
b.  The material to be discharged from the site of the remediation project may be delivered in tanker vehicles to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities in the city for direct discharge at a rate of three cents per gallon, for example one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per five thousand (5,000) gallon trailer, to compensate joint meeting for the costs to sample, monitor and process the discharge. The use of this option will be at the reasonable discretion of the joint meeting in order to avoid the arrival of a number of trailers that will adversely impact the performance of treatment operations by the joint meeting. 
4.  In the event the 2 to 1 offset option is selected with respect to short-term, batch discharges, then the following procedures shall apply: 
a.  The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the municipality/applicant shall be identified by the municipality and agreed to by the joint meeting, through the use of the Phase III Sewer System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen and Sawyer, dated August, 1983, and as supplemented, which was previously distributed by joint meeting to each member municipality in the joint meeting service area, or such other report as may be available in the case of non-member municipalities. 
b.  The remedial work to be performed by the municipality/applicant shall be completed within a time period that shall not exceed one-half of the time frame of the remediation project discharge estimated by the proposed discharger or applicant and approved by the municipality and the joint meeting. In the event that extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that will affect the ability of the municipality/applicant to meet the time period previously agreed upon by the parties for completion of the infiltration/inflow remedial work, the municipality/applicant may seek an extension of the time period through the filing of a written request not less than sixty (60) days before a previously defined and agreed upon milestone, fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances and specifying the additional time necessary to complete the remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests for extensions will be considered by the joint meeting on a case-by-case basis, and an extension of time shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
c.  An applicant may not discharge ground water to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities until it has obtained a permit and an agreement is reached between the joint meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the 2 to 1 offset policy set forth in this regulation should this option be selected with respect to a short-term, batch discharge. 
d.  At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the municipality/applicant and the joint meeting, the municipality/applicant shall be required to demonstrate, in written progress reports, to the satisfaction of the joint meeting, that the municipality/applicant is making definable progress in performing the remedial work so as to be able to complete the work within the time frame established in accordance with subsection (A)(4)(b) of this section. 
e.  The engineer of the municipality where the remedial work has been performed will be required to submit to the joint meeting a certification stating that the remedial work has been completed and such certification must be submitted within one week of the date of the completion of the work. 
f.  After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is identified by the municipality and agreed to by the joint meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the municipality/applicant will be required to submit proof to the joint meeting that a performance bond in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the value of the remedial work and naming the joint meeting as a co-obligee has been issued to ensure that such work is completely performed. 
5.  The ground water to be discharged to the joint meeting wastewater treatment facilities pursuant to a permit will be, at all times, subject to analyses by the joint meeting, at the sole cost of the applicant, to ensure that the proposed discharge shall meet the quality limits as set forth in these sewer use rules and regulations. At any time during the period of the discharge of ground water to the joint meeting, a failure by the applicant to meet such quality limits shall be the basis for a revocation of the permit and a discontinuation of the discharge, and/or such enforcement measures as are authorized by law to be taken by the joint meeting. 
6.  The proposed discharger or applicant shall be obligated to institute pretreatment measures prior to the direct or indirect discharge of ground water to the joint meeting in the event the ground water fails to meet the parameters for acceptance of the discharge set forth in the sewer use rules and regulations. 
7.  Credits for future discharges of ground water through the removal of infiltration/inflow pursuant to the above provisions may be accumulated or "banked"; however, such credits may only be transferred in accordance with ownership of the site identified as the source of ground water at the time of the performance of the remediation work. 
B.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such storm sewers or combined sewers specifically designated or to a natural outlet approved by the engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged upon approval by the engineer to a public or private storm sewer or a natural outlet. 
C.  Approval of Engineer for Discharge of Industrial Wastes. 
1.  So far as is practicable, industrial wastes may be discharged into the city's sewer system with or without pretreatment, provided that the consent of the engineer is first obtained and the rules, regulations and standards hereinafter prescribed are complied with, in the judgment of the engineer. 
2.  Written approval by the engineer is required for all new discharges of industrial wastes added to the city's sewer system after the effective date of this chapter. These shall include all wastes in which the quantity, temperature or chemical characteristics are altered in operation procedures and equipment changes. 
D.  Observation, Sampling and Measurement of Wastes. 
1.  No industry shall discharge any flow directly into a sanitary, combined or storm sewer. All such discharge shall be through a manhole or other approved flow-sampling structure to be located between the sidewalk and curb or other location agreed upon in writing between such industry and the engineer and the joint meeting and to be built by the owner. Each manhole or approved sampling structure shall be kept safe and accessible at all times. 
2.  When required by the city, joint meeting, NJDEP and/or USEPA, an industry shall install and maintain additional facilities at its own expense, including, for example, meters, sealed automatic monitoring systems or other appurtenances, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Construction, installation and maintenance of such additional facilities shall be the responsibility of the industry, which shall keep these facilities safe and accessible to the city and joint meeting at all times. Design and construction of such additional facilities shall be subject to the requirements of the governmental authority requiring them. 
E.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes: 
1.  Any wastes with a temperature in excess of one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit [sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade] and wastes that may create a hazard to people, create a hazard or cause damage to the wastewater facilities, endanger or interfere with the treatment process, create a hazard to the receiving waters or result in a violation of the effluent limitations or other conditions contained in any NPDES permit or wastes that may impair or cause to impair the hydraulic capacity of the sewerage system such as ashes, sand, metal, precipitates, etc. 
2.  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the treatment works facilities or the operation of the facilities. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the treatment works be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (L.E.L) of the meter. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, naphtha, benzene, toluene, zylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. 
3.  Any water or wastes containing mineral oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of one hundred (100) parts per million [eight hundred thirty-four (834) pounds per million gallons] or any floating oil, without written approval of the engineer. 
4.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
5.  Any water or wastes that contains more than two parts per million by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen. 
6.  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rubber, rags, feathers, tar, fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste bulk solids, diseased human organs or tissue fluids, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, whole blood, spent grains, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil and similar substances or any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
7.  Any water or wastes that contains phenols in such quantity that the aggregate of contributions throughout the area of service creates treatment difficulties or produces a plant effluent which may be unsatisfactory. 
8.  Any water or wastes, acids or alkaline in reaction and having corrosive properties, capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized, at all times, within a permissible range of pH between six point zero and nine point zero. 
9.  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in toxic amounts as defined by USEPA regulations or in sufficient quantity to damage the sewage works, injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters or the wet-weather overflows of the effluent of the sewage treatment plant, or which result in a violation of effluent limitations or other conditions contained in any NPDES permit. 
10.  Concentrations of heavy metals. 
a.  Heavy metals in excess of the following concentrations: 
Metal Concentration (parts per million) Iron as FE 5 Chromium as Cr 1 Nickel as Ni 1 Copper as Cu 1 Cadmium as Cd 0.1 Zinc as Zn 2.5 Chromium (hexavalent) 0.09 Lead (Pb) 1 Mercury as Hg 0.5 Fluoride as F 25 Silver as Ag 0.05 Aldrin Prohibited Dieldrin Prohibited DDE Prohibited DDT Prohibited PCB Prohibited Endrin 0.0015 Toxaphene 0.0015 Benzidine 0.010  
b.  At no time shall the hourly concentration exceed three times the average concentration and with contributions from individual establishments subject to control in volume and concentration by the engineer. 
11.  Cyanide (CN), or any of its compounds amenable to chlorination in excess of eight-hundredths part per million by weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers with a peak day concentration not exceeding two-tenths part per million. Total cyanide (CN) shall not exceed five-tenths milligram per liter at anytime. 
12.  Any water or wastes containing the discharge of strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
13.  Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual provision, attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
14.  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or by interaction with any waste, is capable of creating a public nuisance, hazard or menace to life or property or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
15.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that may exceed limits established by the city or joint meeting in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations, without special permit. 
16.  Any waters or wastes that for a duration of fifteen (15) minutes have a concentration greater than five times that of normal sewage as measured by suspended solids and BOD. 
17.  Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other wastes which are highly colored, or wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of solids or composition, as for example: total suspended solids of inert nature, such as fuller's earth; and/or total dissolved solids, such as sodium chloride, calcium chloride or sodium sulphate; or unusual in BOD. 
18.  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases or develop color of undesirable intensity, or form suspended solids in objectionable concentration; or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
19.  Any wastes discharged at a flow rate that is excessive over a relatively short period of time, which cause or may cause an upset of the treatment process and a substantial loss of treatment efficiency or which may exceed the hydraulic capacity of the sanitary sewer system. 
20.  Any garbage other than properly shredded garbage which has been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the treatment works with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
21.  Any oil and grease from industrial facilities in concentrations or amounts violating federal pretreatment standards. This includes petroleum-based hydrocarbons as determined by silica gel absorption or other acceptable means. 
22.  Any wastewater from industrial facilities containing floatable fats, wax, grease or oils. 
23.  Any substance which may cause the joint meeting's sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the joint meeting is processing a reuse or reclamation program. In no case shall the substance discharged to the joint meeting cause the joint meeting to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the New Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization and Disposal of Municipal and Industrial Sludges and Septage, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use for disposal developed pursuant to the Sludge Waste Disposal Act and the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or the New Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization and Disposal of Municipal and Industrial Sludges and Septage. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection E, any discharge into the public sewer of wastes whose concentration of suspended solids, BOD or grease causes at the municipal sewage works a monthly increase in the average daily analysis of any of these constituents in excess of two percent of the annual daily average for the previous year is prohibited unless specifically approved by the city and the joint meeting. 
G.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the plumbing inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type and capacity as approved by the plumbing inspector and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction and as approved by the plumbing inspector, watertight and equipped with removable covers which, when mounted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
H.  All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuous, efficient operation at all times. 
I.  Certain Prohibited Wastes-Pretreatment Facilities. 
1.  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having the following characteristics: 
a.  A BOD of more than two hundred forty (240) parts per million. 
b.  A suspended solids content greater than three hundred (300) parts per million. 
c.  A quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection E except as defined in subsection (I)(1)(a) and (b) above. 
d.  An average flow greater than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day shall be prohibited unless reviewed and approved by the engineer. 
2.  Where necessary, in the opinion of the engineer, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such pretreatment as may be necessary to: 
a.  Reduce the BOD to two hundred forty (240) parts per million and the suspended solids to three hundred (300) parts per million. 
b.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits which are provided for in subsection E of this section. 
c.  Control the quantities and rates of such discharge of waters and wastes. 
3.  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information related to the proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the engineer. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
4.  When pretreatment standards are adopted by NJDEP or USEPA or any given class of industries, then any industry within that class shall conform to the NJDEP or USEPA timetable for adherence to pretreatment requirements as well as all other applicable requirements promulgated by the NJDEP or USEPA in accordance with the provisions of law. Additionally, such industries shall comply with such more stringent standards necessitated by local conditions as determined from time to time by the city and the joint meeting. 
J.  Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense, and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the engineer. They shall be the type and capacity approved by the engineer and must produce an effluent conforming to the provisions of this chapter. The owner shall maintain operating records and shall submit to the engineer a monthly summary report of the character of the influent and effluent as may be prescribed by the engineer to show satisfactory performance of the treatment facilities. 
K.  Any approval of the engineer of a type, kind or capacity of an installation shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of revamping, enlarging or otherwise modifying an installation if it is found inadequate to accomplish the intended purpose. 
L.  All measures, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in accordance with standard methods for the examination of water and sewage and shall be determined at a control manhole or other approved sampling structure provided for in this section upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole or other approved sampling structure. In the event that no manhole or other approved sampling structure has been required, the control manhole or other approved sampling structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
M.  No statement contained in the ordinance codified herein shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to extra payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
N.  Without having first obtained the signed, written permission of the city and the joint meeting, no person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be discharged any quantity of waste or wastewater to any public sewer or natural outlet from a nonstationary source, including for example, but not limited to, the discharge of industrial waste from any tank truck. Each and every individual operator and/or owner of a nonstationary source that discharges in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties prescribed. 
(Prior code § 118-5) 
13.16.060 - Protection of sewer works from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the public sewage works. Any person violating these provisions shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of disorderly conduct. 
(Prior code § 118-6) 
13.16.070 - Right of entry by inspectors. 
    The engineer and other duly authorized officers and employees of the city, the joint meeting, the NJDEP and the USEPA bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted immediately upon all private and public property for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter during any reasonable hour of the day or at any time during an emergency. 
(Prior code § 118-7) 
13.16.080 - Information from users of sewage works. 
A.  All persons discharging sewage or wastes to the sewage works shall be required to provide information to the city, joint meeting, NJDEP or USEPA, as needed, to determine compliance with the ordinance codified herein. This information may include: 
1.  Wastewater discharge rate and volume over a specified time period. 
2.  Chemical analysis of wastewater. 
3.  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
4.  Quantity and disposition of specified liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control. 
5.  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
6.  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
7.  Details of systems designed to prevent and/or control the loss of spilled materials to the sanitary sewer (i.e., spill prevention plan). 
8.  Any other information required by the city or joint meeting. 
B.  When persons responding to such a requirement furnish proprietary information of a confidential nature, they shall so stipulate, and their proprietary information shall be treated as such and not disclosed as general knowledge. 
(Prior code § 118-8) 
13.16.090 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and any person guilty of such violation may be liable to fine which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in amount, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day in which any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue may be deemed a separate violation. 
(Prior code § 118-9) 
13.16.100 - Industrial wastewater monitoring and reports. 
A.  All industrial users who discharge wastewaters to the treatment works shall maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts of concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the ordinance codified herein and any applicable state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. Such records shall be made available when requested by the city and the joint meeting. All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the NJDEP and the United States Environmental Protection Agency upon demand. A summary of such data indicating the industrial user's compliance with this chapter shall be prepared quarterly and submitted to the city and the joint meeting. 
B.  The owner and operator of any premises or facilities discharging wastes into the system shall install at his or her own cost and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate accurate observation and sampling of wastes. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all times. Each major industrial discharger shall maintain separate monitoring equipment. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the city requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Plans and specifications for all such work shall be submitted to the city and joint meeting for approval prior to construction. 
(Prior code § 118-12.1) 
13.16.110 - Reporting of accidental discharges. 
    If for any reason a facility does not comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this chapter, the facility responsible for such discharge shall take immediate corrective action to prevent continued harm to the treatment works and shall immediately notify the city and joint meeting so that additional corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment works. In addition, a written report addressed to the city director of public works detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, quantity and characteristics of the discharge and action taken to prevent future discharges shall be filed by the responsible person within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. 
(Prior code § 118-12.2) 
Article II - Sewer Use Charges 

13.16.120 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "BOD (denotes 'biochemical oxygen demand')" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "City" means the City of Elizabeth, in the County of Union and the State of New Jersey. 
    "Class (1) user" means a residential, commercial, governmental, or institutional users served by a ?-inch or 3/4-inch water meter. 
    "Class (2) user" means a residential, commercial, governmental, or institutional users served by a water meter with a size of 1" or greater. 
    "Class (3) user" means any industrial user, regardless of meter size. 
    "Commercial user" means all retail stores, restaurants, office buildings, laundries and other private business, manufacturing and service establishments that are not classified as industrial users. 
    "Director of finance" means the director of the department of finance of the city or authorized representative. 
    "Director of public works" means the director of the department of public works of the city or authorized representative. 
    "Governmental user" shall include any building, site or facility used for legislative, judicial, administrative, educational, and regulatory activities of federal, state and county governments. (Buildings, sites or facilities owned by the City of Elizabeth and used for municipal purposes are excluded from this classification and shall be exempt from sewer user charges). 
    "Industrial user" means any industry required to obtain an industrial user permit pursuant to the rules and regulations of the joint meeting. 
    "Industrial waste" means any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural resources. 
    "Institutional user" means social, charitable, religious, and educational facilities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal institutions and similar users. 
    "Joint meeting" means the municipalities of the City of East Orange, the Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood, the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park, the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and the Town of West Orange, organized in joint meeting pursuant to statute under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint trunk and outlet sewer and treatment plant for the sewage wastewater emanating from said municipalities. 
    "Other wastes" includes garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals and all other discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste. 
    "Part" as used in relation to the term "sewer system," includes all lateral sewers, or all branch sewers, or all interceptor sewers, or all trunk sewers, and any sewage treatment and disposal works, each part with necessary appurtenances, including sewage pumping stations. 
    "Permit" or "industrial user permit" means a permit issued by the joint meeting including, a letter of agreement entered into between the joint meeting and a user of its treatment works, setting effluent limitations and other conditions on the user of the joint meeting's treatment works. 
    "Residential user" means any contributor to the city's sewerage system whose lot, parcel or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only. 
    "Sewage" means the water-carried human or animal wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present. The admixture with sewage, as above defined, of industrial waste or other wastes, as defined in this section, also shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning of this chapter. 
    "Sewer system" means all sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are used or useful in whole or in part in connection with the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and which are owned, operated, maintained or used by the city, individually or with other municipalities, including sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment and disposal works. 
    "TSS (denotes 'total suspended solids' or 'suspended solids')" means those solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtration. 
    "User" means an individual, firm, company, partnership, association, society, corporation (public or private) or group who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the wastewater system of the city and/or joint meeting. 
    "User charge" means a charge levied upon users of the sewerage system for the use and service of that system. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 1, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4466, § 1, 6-24-2014; prior code § 118-13) 
13.16.130 - Computation of charges. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq., the city establishes and imposes user charges in the city for the use of the sewer system or any part or parts thereof and establishes and imposes such computed user charges as shall be hereinafter provided. 
B.  The user charge shall consist of a fixed facility charge and a volumetric charge. In addition, industrial users shall pay separate BOD and TSS charges. 
C.  All users (with the exception of industrial users) shall be billed quarterly in arrears. Industrial users shall be billed monthly in arrears for facility and volumetric charges and quarterly in arrears for BOD and TSS charges. 
D.  Facility Charges. 
1.  The facility charge shall be based on the size of the water meter serving the user. A separate facility charge will be charged for each meter. 
2.  The facility charge for each metered service shall be as follows: 
Meter Size In Inches Charge Per Quarter ? $  3.82 3/4 10.19 1 26.37 11/2 72.62 2 137.37 3 322.36 4 581.36 6 1,321.33 8 2,357.31 10 3,689.87  
E.  Volumetric charges. 
1.  There shall be three (3) separate volumetric rates as follows: Class (1) users with a water meter size of less than 1"; Class (2) users with a water meter size of 1" or greater; and Class (3) comprising all industrial users regardless of water meter size. 
2.  Volumetric rates for users in Class (1) and Class (2) shall be based on allocated shares of flow-related costs and allocated shares of BOD and TSS-related costs. 
3.  The volumetric rate for Class (3) Industrial Users shall be based only on an allocated share of flow-related costs and not upon any allocated shares of BOD and TSS-related costs, which shall be billed separately. 
4.  The volumetric charge for Class (1) and Class (2) users shall be based upon the amount of water supplied by the city water utility or by such other system supplying water to the user as shown by the water meter readings for the most recent quarterly period prior to billing; provided, however, that whenever water consumption is metered but the charge for the measuring period is based upon an estimated consumption due to the fact that a meter reading was not made for the measuring period, the sewer charges shall likewise be based upon the estimated consumption. 
a.  The volumetric rate for Class (1) users shall be four dollars and forty cents ($4.40) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water. 
b.  The volumetric charge for Class (2) users shall be six dollars and forty cents ($6.40) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water. 
c.  Multi-family residential users served by a 1" meter or larger may submit a request to the director of public works that the city charge them under the ?"-3/4" classification. Such requests shall be on application forms prescribed by the city and accompanied by sketches, narrative and certifications listed on the application or subsequently requested by the city. The city shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises in question to clarify and verify information submitted by the applicant. A determination of such request shall be based on information furnished to the city and/or collected by the city. Where a user in the 1" and larger classification is strictly residential in nature and metered separately from other classifications, the city may reclassify the user. The city reserves the right to return the user to the 1" and above classification if determined by the city that the characteristics of the user's discharge are not consistent with those of the ?"-3/4" classification. 
5.  The volumetric charge for Class (3) industrial users shall be based upon the amount of water supplied by the city water utility or by such other system supplying water to the user as shown by the water meter readings for the most recent quarterly period prior to billing; provided, however, that whenever water consumption is metered but the charge for the measuring period is based upon an estimated consumption due to the fact that a meter reading was not made for the measuring period, the sewer charges shall likewise be based upon the estimated consumption. The volumetric rate for Class (3) industrial users shall be three dollars and fifty-seven cents ($3.57) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water. 
6.  In the case of consumers of water who discharge into the sewer system an amount of sewage substantially less than or substantially greater than the amount of water supplied to such consumer, the amounts of the sewage discharged into the sewer system shall be determined by meters, gauges or other suitable measuring devices furnished or approved by the city and installed by such consumer at the consumer's expense and at no cost or expense to the city, and the user charge thereon shall be computed at the rates stipulated herein for sewage discharged into the sewer system. 
7.  The department of public works may require the owner of any real property subject to user charges of the city to install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device which is acceptable to the department of public works and installed at the consumer's expense and at no cost or expense to the city, provided, however, that any determination of the department of public works is subject to review and modification by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
8.  Any owner of real property subject to user charges discharging into the city sewer system who claims to be unable to install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device after being so ordered by the director of public works may submit to the department of public works a written application requesting that the department of public works grant to the owner a specified extension of time within which to install such meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device. In the event the department of public works shall grant such specified extension of time, such owner shall install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device on or before the date fixed and prescribed therefore by the department of public works and shall pay user charges on or before the times fixed and prescribed there-for by the department of public works. Prior to such installation, the department of public works shall estimate the amount of sewage discharged by such owner into the sewer system. Such estimate by the department of public works shall be submitted to the city council for its approval or modification, and the decision of the city council with respect thereto shall be binding and final unless modified by a court of competent jurisdiction following any review thereof permitted by law. Such owner shall thereupon, prior to the aforementioned installation of a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device, pay user charges computed at the rate defined in this section for the estimated sewage discharged into the sewer system, and the decision of the department of public works with respect to the amount thereof shall be binding and final unless modified by a court of competent jurisdiction following any review thereof permitted by law. Such user charges computed at the rate defined in this section for the estimated sewage discharged into the sewer system shall be due and payable at such time as the director of finance shall fix and prescribe therefore. 
9.  Any owner of real property in the city subject to user charges who fails to submit to the department of public works a written application requesting that the department of public works grant to such owner a specified extension of time within which to install a meter, gauge or other suitable measuring device and any owner of real property in the city subject to user charges whose written application is denied by the department of public works shall pay sewer user charges equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimate computed by the department of public works in the manner set forth in subsection E.8. of this section. 
10.  In all cases in which users of the sewerage system are not supplied with water from the city water utility, the charge for the use of sewerage system shall be based upon the actual discharge as measured by a meter to be installed by the consumer; provided, however, that when in the judgment of the director of public works such charges may be reasonably accurately estimated, the initial charges may be based upon his or her estimate of actual discharge volume. 
11.  In any other case where the charges for sewer services cannot be reasonably measured based on water consumption during the measuring period, the initial and any subsequent charges shall be based upon an estimate, which may be revised from period to period. 
F.  BOD and TSS Charges. 
1.  In addition to facility and volumetric charges, industrial users shall be subject to a separate charge for BOD and TSS. 
2.  Charges for TSS and BOD shall be based on total suspended solids and five-day BOD loadings computed by the joint meeting and reported quarterly to the city. 
3.  Each industrial user shall perform sampling and analysis in accordance with its industrial user permit and the rules and regulations of the joint meeting. 
4.  An industrial user may sample and analyze its discharge for suspended solids and five-day BOD at a greater frequency than specified in its industrial user permit provided that the results of all such testing are included in the periodic monitoring reports submitted to the joint meeting. All such additional sampling and analyses shall be the sole responsibility of and at the expense of the industrial user. 
5.  Samples and measurements taken by industrial users as required by the joint meeting industrial user permit and such additional sampling and analyses taken at the option of the industrial user shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored discharge. 
6.  The rates for BOD and TSS charges for industrial users shall be one hundred twenty (120) percent of the rates charged by the joint meeting to the city as those rates may be changed from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 2, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4593 , § 2, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 4466, § 2, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 4085, §§ 1-4, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 4019, §§ 1-4, 2-10-2009; Ord. 3833 §§ 1-4, 2006; prior code § 118-14) 
13.16.140 - Payment of charges-Interest charge for late payment. 
A.  Sewer user charges shall be due and payable upon submission and may be paid to the department of finance within a period of thirty (30) days after they are due and payable without any charge for interest. 
B.  Interest will be charged at the legal statutory rate as defined by N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1, et seq., on any sewer user bill which is not paid within thirty (30) days from date of issue. 
C.  The rates and charges herein established shall be effective with the billing commencing July 1, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 3, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4466, § 3, 6-24-2014; Ord. 3122 § 1, 1999; prior code § 118-15) 
13.16.150 - Charges to constitute lien. 
    Sewer user charges shall constitute a lien upon the real property served by the sewer system to the extent set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-12. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 4, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4466, § 4, 6-24-2014; prior code § 118-16) 
13.16.160 - Collection of delinquent charges. 
    The city may enforce the collection of delinquent sewer user charges pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 5, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4466, § 5, 6-24-2014; prior code § 118-17) 
13.16.170 - Application for refund. 
    If any owner of real property on which a sewer user charge has been imposed deems himself or herself aggrieved because such real property is not served by the sewer system or an error has been made in computing such sewer user charge, he or she may file an application for a refund of all or part of such sewer user charge. Such application shall be verified by him or her and shall set forth the amount of refund sought and the grounds therefore. Such application shall be presented to the director of the department of finance and he or she shall forward such application to the city council with his or her recommendations in relation thereto. The director of the department of finance may refund all or part of such sewer user charge upon proper resolution by city council. 
(Ord. No. 5025 , § 6, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 4466, § 6, 6-24-2014; prior code § 118-18) 
Chapter 13.20 - STORMWATER REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated in this section unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Containerized" means the placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater. 
    "Domestic sewage" means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations. 
    "Feed" means to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game. 
    "Illicit connection" means any physical or nonphysical connection that discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the city of Elizabeth, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    "Immediate" means that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay. 
    "Industrial waste" means nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a), (b), or (c)). 
    "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the city of Elizabeth or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
    "NJPDES permit" means a permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A. 
    "Noncontact cooling water" means water used to reduce temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors. 
    "Owner/keeper" means any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such pet. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    "Pet" means a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship. 
    "Pet solid waste" means waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement. 
    "Process wastewater" means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water. 
    "Proper disposal" means placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designated to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal. 
    "Stormwater" means water, resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines. 
    "Wildlife" means all animals that are neither human nor domesticated. 
    "Yard waste" means leaves and grass clippings. 
(Ord. 3758 § 2, 2005) 
13.20.020 - Prohibited conduct. 
A.  The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the city of Elizabeth is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the city of Elizabeth any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater). 
C.  No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the city of Elizabeth, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers). 
    Any person found to be in violation of this provision shall be ordered to cease the feeding immediately. 
D.  Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this provision. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or such party shall be deemed in violation of this provision. 
(Ord. 3758 § 3, 2005) 
13.20.030 - Exceptions to prohibition. 
A.  Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources; 
B.  Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground waters); 
C.  Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling water); 
D.  Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff); 
E.  Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges and diverted stream flows; 
F.  Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool discharges; 
G.  Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water; 
H.  Flows from firefighting activities; 
I.  Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: 
1.  Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their intended purposes, and 
2.  Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in this section, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery. 
(Ord. 3758 § 4, 2005) 
13.20.040 - Requirement for disposal of pet solid waste. 
    All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person. 
(Ord. 3758 § 5, 2005) 
13.20.050 - Exemptions from disposal of pet solid waste. 
    Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for that purpose. 
(Ord. 3758 § 6, 2005) 
13.20.060 - Other provisions. 
A.  Litter Control. See Chapter 8.32 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
B.  Requirements for the Proper Handling of Yard Waste. See Chapter 8.32 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3758 § 7, 2005) 
13.20.070 - Penalties. 
    Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to general penalty provisions found in this code. 
(Ord. 3758 § 8, 2005) 
13.20.080 - Enforcement. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the Elizabeth Police Department and/or the department of health and human services and/or the department of public works of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. 3758 § 9, 2005) 
Chapter 13.24 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Scope and purpose. 
A.  Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge. 
B.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls for "major development," as defined in Section 13.24.020. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the following major developments that require preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review: 
a.  Nonresidential major developments; and 
b.  Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted by the residential site improvement standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21. 
2.  This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by the city of Elizabeth. 
D.  Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements. Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control. 
(Ord. 3844 § 1, 2006) 
13.24.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2. 
    "CAFRA centers, cores or nodes" means those areas within boundaries accepted by the department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B. 
    "CAFRA planning map" means the geographic depiction of the boundaries for coastal planning areas, CAFRA centers, CAFRA cores and CAFRA nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3. 
    "Compaction" means the increase in soil bulk density. 
    "Core" means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public transportation. 
    "County review agency" means an agency designated by the county board of chosen freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency is the Hudson County division of planning. 
    "Department" means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 
    "Design engineer" means a person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation of drawings and specifications. 
    "Designated center" means a State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet. 
    "Development" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. 
    "Drainage area" means a geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody. 
    "Empowerment neighborhood" means a neighborhood designated by the urban coordinating council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69. 
    "Environmentally critical areas" means an area or feature which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous, open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the department's landscape project as approved by the department's endangered and nongame species program. 
    "Erosion" means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    "Impervious surface" means a surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. 
    "Infiltration" is the process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation. 
    "Major development" means any "development" that provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation. 
    "Municipality" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Node" means an area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact form. 
    "Nutrient" means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, the city of Elizabeth, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. 
    "Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants. 
    "Recharge" means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired. 
    "Sediment" means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    "Site" means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred. 
    "Soil" means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin. 
    "State Development and Redevelopment Plan Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1)" means an area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts. 
    "State Plan Policy Map" is defined as the geographic application of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these goals and policies. 
    "Stormwater" means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
    "Stormwater management basin" means an excavation or embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands). 
    "Stormwater management measure" means any structural or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances. 
    "Stormwater runoff" means water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation. 
    "Tidal flood hazard area" means a flood hazard area, which may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean. 
    "Urban coordinating council empowerment neighborhood" means a neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority. 
    "Urban enterprise zones" means a zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq. 
    "Urban redevelopment area" is defined as previously developed portions of areas: 
1.  Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the metropolitan planning area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes; 
2.  Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes; 
3.  Designated as urban enterprise zones; and 
4.  Designated as urban coordinating council empowerment neighborhoods. 
    "Waters of the state" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the state of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction. 
    "Wetlands" or "wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
(Ord. 3844 § 2, 2006) 
13.24.030 - General standards. 
A.  Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures. 
1.  Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in Section 13.24.040. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design. 
2.  The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major development to the extent that alternative design and performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with department rules provided that any alternative standards provide at least as much protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5. 
(Ord. 3844 § 3, 2006) 
13.24.040 - Stormwater management requirements for major development. 
A.  The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in accordance with Section 13.24.100. 
B.  Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the department landscape project or natural heritage database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150. 
C.  The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of subsections F and G of this section: 
1.  The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion; 
2.  The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and 
3.  The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that the access is made of permeable material. 
D.  A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of subsections F and G of this section may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that cannot be accomplished by any other means; 
2.  The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of subsections F and G of this section to the maximum extent practicable; 
3.  The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of subsections F and G of this section, existing structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and 
4.  The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not falling under subsection (D)(3) of this section within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of subsections F and G of this section that were not achievable on-site. 
E.  Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies. 
1.  To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections F and G of this section shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at this subsection into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in subsection (E)(2) of this section into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention. 
2.  Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site design shall: 
a.  Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss; 
b.  Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces; 
c.  Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation; 
d.  Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from pre-construction to post construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest within a watershed; 
e.  Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading; 
f.  Minimize soil compaction; 
g.  Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides; 
h.  Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; 
i.  Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash and debris in drainage systems, including features that satisfy subsection (E)(3) of this section; 
ii.  Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris from drainage systems; 
iii.  Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or commercial developments; and 
iv.  When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules. 
3.  Site design features identified under subsection (E)(2)(i)(ii) of this section shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection (E)(3)(c) of this section. 
a.  Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate: 
i.  The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or 
ii.  A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension. 
    Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors. 
b.  Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
c.  This standard does not apply: 
i.  Where the city engineer determines that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards; 
ii.  Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified in subsection (G)(1) of this section are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following: 
(A)  A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or 
(B)  A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches. 
iii.  Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified in subsection (G)(1) of this section; or 
iv.  Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property. 
4.  Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to meet the performance standards in subsections F and G of this section shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity. 
5.  Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section 13.24.070, or found on the department's website at www.njstormwater.org. 
F.  Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Standards. This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development. 
1.  The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules. 
2.  The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater recharge are as follows: 
a.  The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at Section 13.24.050, either: 
i.  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the site and its stormwater management measures maintain one hundred (100) percent of the average annual pre-construction groundwater recharge volume for the site; or 
ii.  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from pre-construction to post-construction for the two-year storm is infiltrated. 
b.  This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to projects subject to subsection (F)(2)(c) of this section. 
c.  The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged: 
i.  Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and commercial developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent with department approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and 
ii.  Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material." "Source material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater. 
d.  The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater recharge area. 
3.  In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at Section 13.24.050, complete one of the following: 
a.  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100) year storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm events; 
b.  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100) year storm events and that the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full development under existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area; 
c.  Design stormwater management measures so that the post-construction peak runoff rates for the two, ten (10) and one hundred (100) year storm events are fifty (50), seventy-five (75) and eighty (80) percent, respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed development or project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or 
d.  In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in accordance with subsections (F)(3)(a) through (F)(3)(c) of this section shall only be applied if: 
i.  Required by the city engineer to reduce stormwater impacts to existing drainage facilities including segments of the combined sewer system, and 
ii.  The increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the point of discharge. 
G.  Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards. 
1.  Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by eighty (80) percent of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management measures shall only be required for water quality control if an additional one-fourth acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to combined sewers or any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures. 
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution 
Time 

(Minutes) Cumulative 

Rainfall 

(Inches) Time 

(Minutes) Cumulative 

Rainfall 

(Inches) 0 0.0000 65 0.8917 5 0.0083 70 0.9917 10 0.0166 75 1.0500 15 0.0250 80 1.0840 20 0.0500 85 1.1170 25 0.0750 90 1.1500 30 0.1000 95 1.1750 35 0.1330 100 1.2000 40 0.1660 105 1.2250 45 0.2000 110 1.2334 50 0.2583 115 1.2417 55 0.3583 120 1.2500 60 0.6250  
2.  For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section 13.24.070, or found on the department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 13.24.070. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the department for approval at the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418. 
3.  If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required eighty (80) percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction: 
R = A + B - (AXB)/100 
    Where: 
    R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs, and 
    A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP 
    B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP 
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs 
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate Bioretention Systems 90 Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90 Extended Detention Basin 40-60 Infiltration Structure 80 Manufactured Treatment Device See Section 13.24.060(C) Sand Filter 80 Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80 Wet Pond 50-90  
4.  If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty (80) percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted average. 
5.  Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the performance standards in subsections F and G of this section. 
6.  Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address identified in Section 13.24.070. 
(Ord. 3844 § 4, 2006) 
13.24.050 - Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge. 
A.  Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following: 
1.  The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods: 
a.  The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS runoff equation and dimensionless unit hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4-Hydrology and Technical Release 55-Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or 
b.  The rational method for peak flow and the modified rational method for hydrograph computations. 
2.  For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section and the rational and modified rational methods at subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section. A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation). 
3.  In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates and volumes. 
4.  In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55-Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be employed. 
5.  If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater management measures. 
B.  Groundwater recharge, where required, may be calculated in accordance with the following: 
1.  The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587. 
(Ord. 3844 § 5, 2006) 
13.24.060 - Standards for structural stormwater management measures. 
A.  Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows: 
1.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into account the existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone). 
2.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater than one-third the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the requirements of Section 13.24.080(D). 
3.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the residential site improvement standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. 
4.  At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in diameter. 
5.  Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at Section 13.24.080. 
B.  Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality design and performance standards established by Section 13.24.040 of this chapter. 
C.  Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of Section 13.24.040 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the department. 
(Ord. 3844 § 6, 2006) 
13.24.070 - Sources for technical guidance. 
A.  Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the documents listed at subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038. 
1.  Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds. 
2.  The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended. 
B.  Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be obtained from the following: 
1.  The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540; 
2.  The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and 
3.  The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540. 
(Ord. 3844 § 7, 2006) 
13.24.080 - Safety standards for stormwater management basins. 
A.  This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to all existing and new stormwater management basins. 
B.  Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions. 
1.  A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the following: 
a.  The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six-inch spacing between the bars. 
b.  The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure. 
c.  The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed two and one-half feet per second under the full range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of opening through the rack. 
d.  The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) lbs./ft. sq. 
2.  An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable for emergencies and maintenance. 
b.  The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
c.  The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) lbs./ft. sq. 
3.  For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include escape provisions as follows: 
a.  If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in subsection C of this section a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this requirement. 
b.  Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two and one-half feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and one-half feet above the permanent water surface. See subsection D of this section for an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin. 
c.  In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
C.  Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards. 
1.  A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency (city of Elizabeth, Union County, or the NJDEP) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety. 
D.  Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin. 
  

(Ord. 3860 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 3844 § 8, 2006) 
13.24.090 - Requirements for a site development stormwater plan. 
A.  Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan. 
1.  Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the checklist for the site development stormwater plan at subsection C of this section as part of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval. 
2.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter. 
3.  The applicant shall establish a funding mechanism for maintenance of proposed stormwater control facilities. 
4.  The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials listed in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with subsection C of this section. 
B.  Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained by the planning and/or zoning board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required: 
1.  Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch is equal to two hundred (200) feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown. 
2.  Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
3.  Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be provided. 
4.  Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 13.24.030 through 13.24.060 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management and source controls whenever possible. 
5.  Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map, shall be included: 
a.  Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of stormwater. 
b.  Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway. 
6.  Calculations. 
a.  Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in Section 13.24.040 of this chapter. 
b.  When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure. 
7.  Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of Section 13.24.100. 
8.  Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(6) of this section when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review process. 
(Ord. 3860 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 3844 § 9, 2006) 
13.24.100 - Maintenance and repair. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Projects subject to review as in Section 13.24.010(C) of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of subsections B and C of this section. 
B.  General Maintenance. 
1.  The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a major development and the developer shall establish a mechanism for funding in compliance with this chapter. 
2.  The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation. 
3.  Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or project. 
4.  If the person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection (B)(2) of this section is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection (B)(7) of this section shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken. 
5.  Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings. 
6.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection (B)(2) of this section shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders. 
7.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection (B)(2) of this section shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed. 
8.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection (B)(2) of this section shall retain and make available, upon request by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by subsections (B)(6) and (B)(7) of this section. 
9.  The requirements of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section do not apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency. 
10.  In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal engineer or his or her designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. 
(Ord. 3844 § 10, 2006) 
13.24.110 - Penalties. 
    Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or confinement in the Union County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or community service for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. If convicted and fined for the same offense within one year of the date of a previous violation of said ordinance, the owner shall be subject to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine shall not exceed one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00), and shall be calculated separately, and in addition to, the fine imposed for violating the chapter. 
(Ord. 3844 § 11, 2006) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Enforcing agency designated-Subcode officials. 
A.  There is established in the city a state uniform construction code enforcing agency to be known as the "department of construction, division of building inspections," consisting of a construction official, fire protection subcode official, building subcode official, electrical subcode official, plumbing subcode official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, state of New Jersey, shall in this section adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. 
    The construction official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency and he or she shall have the primary administrative responsibility for the issuance of all construction permits within the city as defined under the act and all certificates of occupancy. 
B.  Building Subcode. There shall be a subcode building official and such additional building inspectors as may from time to time be appointed to make necessary inspections within the city. These inspectors and the subcode official shall have the authority to make all building subcode inspections and provide such reports and recommendations as the construction official shall request when considering an application for a construction permit. 
C.  Electrical Subcode. There shall be a subcode electrical official and such additional electrical inspectors as may from time to time be appointed to make necessary electrical inspections within the city. These inspectors and the subcode electrical official shall have authority to make all electrical inspections and provide such written reports and recommendations as the construction official shall request when considering an application for an electrical permit. These inspectors and the subcode electrical official shall also have the authority to authorize service connections and disconnections with the local power company when required by law to do so or to protect the public health or safety and other duties as set forth in Chapter 28, Electrical Code, of the code of the city. 
D.  Plumbing Subcode. There shall be a subcode plumbing official and such additional plumbing inspectors as may from time to time be appointed to make necessary plumbing inspections within the city. These inspectors and the subcode plumbing official shall have authority to make all plumbing inspections and provide such written reports and recommendations as the construction official may require in reviewing applications for plumbing permits. 
E.  Fire Protection Subcode. There shall be a fire protection subcode official and such additional fire protection inspectors as may from time to time be appointed to make necessary fire protection inspections within the city. These inspectors and the fire protection subcode official, although employees of the city fire department, shall report to the construction official for purposes of the Uniform Construction Code Act. These inspectors shall have the authority to make all fire protection inspections within the city and provide such written reports and recommendations to the construction official as he or she may from time to time require when considering an application for a construction permit. 
(Prior code § 26-1) 
15.04.020 - Qualifications of subcode officials-Location of office. 
A.  Each official position created in Section 15.04.010 hereof shall be filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position. 
B.  The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. 
(Prior code § 26-2) 
15.04.030 - Construction board of appeals. 
A.  There is established a construction board of appeals to hear appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such board shall consist of five members. At least one board member shall be a registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building construction experience, and at least one board member shall be as qualified as a plumbing subcode official and one as qualified as an electrical subcode official. No more than two board members shall be selected from the same business or profession. Each board member shall have had at least three years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect or in the alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher education; or, as a further alternative, ten (10) years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector. 
B.  The mayor, with consent of city council, shall appoint the board members and any alternative members. For the members first appointed, the city council shall designate the appointees, terms so that one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years and two for terms of four years. At the expiration of such terms, and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
C.  The mayor, with the consent of city council, shall appoint such number of alternates, as may be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years or may, in the alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis. 
D.  No regular or alternate board member may be a member of the enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to review by the board. 
(Prior code § 26-3) 
15.04.040 - Construction permit fee schedule. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed and shall be paid before the permit is issued. 
2.  The fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the structure. The volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. 
3.  The fee for renovation shall be based on the estimated cost of the work. For the purpose of determining the estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to the construction official such cost data as may be available produced by the architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating firm, or a bona fide contractor's bid. 
4.  The fee for addition shall be computed on the same basis as for new construction for the added portion. 
5.  The fee for a combination of renovation and additions shall be the sum of the fees computed separately as renovation and as additions. 
6.  The fee for plan review shall be twenty (20) percent of the amount to be charged for the construction permit and shall be paid at the time of submission of an application for a permit. The amount paid for plan review shall be credited towards the fee for the construction permit. 
7.  The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid before a certificate is issued. The fee shall be in addition to the construction permit fee. 
8.  The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based on the number of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility, and who are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers and clerical shall not be considered maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing an annual permit fee. 
9.  The fee for those subcode inspections performed by a private inspection agency shall be the percentage of the state fees under N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 Departmental Fees established in the authorized agencies contract. 
B.  Building Fees. 
Work/Project Scope of Work/Activities Fees ($) New Construction New Building Addition 
New Addition 0.02/Cu. Ft. (75.00 Min. Fee) 
0.02/Cu. Ft. (75.00 Min. Fee) Rehabilitation & Alteration First $50,000.00 
Second $50,000.00 
Over $100,000.00 20.00/1000.00 (75.00 Min. Fee) 
18.00/1000.00 
16.00/1000.00 Demolition Garage (up to 3-cars) & Shed 
One & Two Family 
Three Family & up 
Commercial under 5,000.00 Sq. Ft. & 
Commercial over 5,000.00 Sq. Ft. 50.00 
100.00 
125.00 
225.00 
275.00 Certificate of Occupancy & 
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy New One & Two Family 
New Three Family & Up 
New Commercial 
Rehabilitation, Alteration & Renovation to Residential 
Rehabilitation, Alteration & Renovation to Commercial 
Renewal of T.C.O. 5% of Permit Fee (75.00 Min. Fee) 
15% of Permit Fee (150.00 Min. Fee) 
15% of Permit Fee (200.00 Min. Fee) 
60.00 
65.00 
30.00 Roofing One and Two Family 
All Other Use 75.00 
20.00/1000.00 (100.00 Min. Fee) Siding One and Two Family 
All Other Use 75.00 
20.00/1000.00 (100.00 Min. Fee) Tank Removal/Abandonment and Installation Tank up to 550 Gallons 
551 - 1000 Gallons 
1001 - 2000 Gallons 
2000 - 5000 Gallons 
Above 5000 Gallons 85.00 
150.00 
200.00 
250.00 
300.00 Pool Above Ground Pool 
In-Ground Pool 75.00 
175.00 Fence To 300 Ln. Ft. 
Over 300 Ln. Ft. 75.00 
150.00 Asbestos and Lead Abatement 190.00 Certificate of Clearance for Asbestos and Lead Abatement 35.00 All Signs 2.50/Sq. Ft. (75.00 Min. Fee)  
C.  Plumbing Fees. 
Devices & Fixtures Fee ($) Water Closet 15.00 Bidet/Urinal 15.00 Bathtub/Shower 15.00 Lavatory/Sink 15.00 Floor Drain 15.00 Dishwasher 15.00 Drinking Fountain 15.00 Washing Machine 15.00 Hose BIBB 15.00 Water Heater 15.00 Fuel Oil Pipe 15.00 Gas Pipe 15.00 L.P. Gas Tank 15.00 Steam Boiler 70.00 Hot Water Boiler 70.00 Sewer Pump 70.00 Interceptor/Separator 70.00 Residential Back Flow Preventer 70.00 Commercial Back Flow Preventer 70.00 Grease Trap 70.00 Water Cooled A/C 70.00 Sewer Connection 75.00 Water Service Connection 75.00 Stack 15.00 Minimum Fee 65.00  
D.  Electrical Fees. 
Devices & Fixtures Increments and Rating Fees ($) Outlets, Wall Switches, Fluorescent Fixtures, Receptacles, Motors & Devices of 1-HP or 1-KW or Less 1 to 25 
Increments of 20 45.00 
10.00 Motors & Electrical Devices To - 10 H.P. 
To - 50 H.P. 
To - 100 H.P. 
Above - 100 H.P. 20.00 
65.00 
150.00 
550.00 Transformers & Generators To - 10 KW 
To - 45 KW 
To - 112.5 KW 
Above - 112.5 KW 20.00 
65.00 
150.00 
550.00 Photovoltaic System To - 10 KW 
To - 45 KW 
Above - 45 KW 20.00 
65.00 
125.00 Services Panel To - 100 AMP 
To - 225 AMP 
To - 300 AMP 
To - 400 AMP 
To - 500 AMP 
To - 600 AMP 
To - 1000 AMP 
Above - 1000 AMP 65.00 
65.00 
150.00 
150.00 
150.00 
150.00 
150.00 
575.00 Minimum Fee 65.00  
E.  Fire Permit Fees. 
Devices & Fixtures Increments and System Fees ($) Wet and/or Dry Sprinkler Head 1 to 20 
To - 100 
To - 200 
To - 400 
To - 1000 
Over - 1000 85.00 
130.00 
245.00 
625.00 
900.00 
1140.00 Alarm Devices (Smoke and/or Fire Devices) 1 - 12 
To - 37 
To - 62 
To - 87 
To - 112 
To - 137 
Over - 137 50.00 
55.00 
70.00 
85.00 
100.00 
120.00 
140.00 Pre-Engineered CO 2 Suppression 
FM 200 Suppression 
Foam Suppression 
Dry Chemical 
Wet Chemical 105.00 
105.00 
105.00 
105.00 
105.00 Miscellaneous Stand Pipe 
Kitchen Hood 240.00 
80.00 Heat Producing Devices Smoke Control 
Fire Pump/GPM Type 
Oil/Gas Fire Appliance 
Fire Place Vent/Metal Chimney 90.00 
160.00 
55.00 
68.00 Minimum Fee 65.00  
F.  Certificate of Occupancy Fees. 
1.Certificate of occupancy $35.00 2.Certificate of occupancy granted to change in use groups $120.00 3.Certificate of continued occupancy $120.00  
G.  Annual Permit Fees. 
1.One to 25 workers (including foremen) $500.00 2.Each additional worker over 25 $175.00  
    Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training registration fee of one hundred forty dollars ($140.00) per subcode and a list of at least one, but not more than three individuals to be trained per subcode shall be submitted by the applicant to the department of community affairs training section along with a copy of the construction permit. 
H.  Asbestos Removal. 
1.  Fee shall be the fee established in N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.9. 
I.  Lead Abatement. 
1.  Fee ..... $140.00 
J.  Training and Administration Fees. 
1. DCA Training fees: N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19  a.Volume of new construction times $0.0016  b.Cost of renovation work, including all disciples $0.80 per $1,000.00 2. Administrative Fee, N.J.A.C. 5:23-(subcode enforced by private agencies only)  a.Administrative surcharge 15 percent of permit fee 3. Variation, Re-submission, N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10  a.Class 1 plans $350.00  b.Class 2 and 3 $65.00  c.Class 1 plans resubmission $125.00  d.Class 2 and 3 plans resubmission $35.00 4. Construction Board of Appeals  a.Fee will be $50.00  
K.  Any nonprofit charitable organization which solely provides permanent care for terminally ill individuals in the city shall be exempt from the payment of any construction permit fees effective June 30, 1996. 
L.  Any nonprofit organization which has been determined by the city to qualify as a community housing development corporation (CHODO) as defined by the National Affordable Housing (Cranston-Gonzales) Act of 1990 shall be exempt from the payment of any construction permit fees for construction in an area of the city which has been declared blighted, or an area in need of rehabilitation. 
M.  Miscellaneous Permit Fees. 
Fees ($) After Hours Inspection 400.00 Dumpster in Public Right-of-Way 100.00 (3 increment days without construction permit) 
100.00 (5 increment days with Construction Permit) Renewal of Certificate of Occupancy For Day Care 450.00 Scaffold in Public Right-of-Way 
(Subject to prior approval from Dept. of Engineering) 100.00  
(Ord. No. 4540 , § 1(Sch. A), 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 4516 , § 1(Sch. A), 11-25-2014; prior code § 26-4) 
15.04.045 - Demolition permit-Conditions. 
A.  Definition. For purposes of this section, "construction official" means the construction official, or his or her representative, as designated and defined in this chapter of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
B.  Demolition Permit. In accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1, et seq. and Section 15.04.040 of the code of the city of Elizabeth, no person shall demolish any structure in the city of Elizabeth without first having obtained a demolition permit from the construction official of the city of Elizabeth. 
    Upon receipt of the demolition permit and commencement of demolition, the demolition must be completed within one month of the date of issuance of the demolition permit, unless extended for cause upon the prior written permission of the construction official. During new construction, if contractor work is incomplete, the owner, on a continuous basis, must maintain the property in a clean and debris free condition. 
    If permission is extended beyond one month by the construction official, the individual or entity permit holder must return to the property on a bi-weekly basis in order to ensure that the property is maintained in clean condition satisfactory to the construction official. 
C.  Conditions. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit by the bureau of construction, the applicant individual or entity must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the construction official that all of the following conditions (known as the "Demolition Checklist") have been met: 
    Conditions 1 through 10 are incorporated by reference herein from the Uniform Construction Code. In the event that the Uniform Construction Code are amended at a later date, the inclusion of any amended provisions in this checklist shall be done without amending this section. 
1.  Certification from an accredited environmental agency attesting to the status of any asbestos disturbance; 
2.  Proof of buried oil tank removal or closure; 
3.  Proof of disconnection of all water fixtures from the water company; 
4.  Proof of disconnection of all electric connections from the electric utility company; 
5.  Proof of disconnection of all gas connections from the gas company; 
6.  Sewer line must be capped off and a plumbing permit must be obtained as required by Section 15.04.040 of this chapter; 
7.  Certificate of pest control treatment and if necessary, a certificate of abatement, accepted by the construction official and forwarded for review and approval to the department of health and human services no later than ten (10) days prior to demolition. A compliance certificate will be issued by the department of health and human services for a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
8.  All abutting and adjoining property owners must be notified at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of demolition by regular and certified mail. Proof of notification is required; 
9.  If intended for use, a cutting torch permit is required from the Elizabeth Fire Department, bureau of fire prevention; 
10.  Footings, foundations and slabs must be removed and inspected by the construction official before clean fill is installed; 
11.  Site must be left with grade the same as grounding grade; 
12.  A temporary fence (silt fence or bails of straw) must be erected/installed around the circumference of the entire property; 
13.  A dumpster must be placed on site during the entire demolition process and removed within twenty-four (24) hours after completion of the demolition. In the event that a dumpster cannot be located on the property and must be located on the public right-of-way, the provisions and permit requirements of Chapter 8.16 of the code of the city of Elizabeth must be observed; 
14.  Sidewalks must be kept in safe condition at all times, in the discretion of the bureau of construction and must be free of debris and must not hinder or obstruct the pedestrian traffic; 
15.  A certified letter from an accredited soil testing firm is to be delivered to and inspected by the department of planning and community development, bureau of construction prior to the placement on site of any clean fill or dirt; 
16.  A portable toilet facility must be located on site and maintained in a sanitary condition for the duration of the demolition and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after completion of the demolition. 
D.  Deficiencies. If it is determined that an individual or entity in possession of a demolition permit has failed to satisfy all of the conditions set forth in subsection C of this section, the construction official shall require such condition or conditions to be satisfied within twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Nothing in this section shall prohibit the construction official from immediately revoking the demolition permit for failing to abide by the provisions set forth herein above. 
E.  Scope. This section shall in no way supersede the requirements of other sections of the code of the city of Elizabeth relating to powers, duties or fees, nor shall it limit the powers of the construction official as set forth in the city code, Uniform Construction Code and/or any other code specified by the New Jersey Administrative Code. 
    This section is meant to be read in para materia with other sections of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
F.  Violations. The penalty for an initial violation of this section shall be a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00); one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second offense; two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the third offense. 
    The monetary penalty prescribed herein shall in no way limit the authority to the municipal court judge to penalize a violator in accordance with the other provisions of the general penalty provision, Chapter 1.12 of the code of the city of Elizabeth. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. 3879 §§ 1-7, 2007) 
15.04.050 - Adoption of standards-Repeal of prior provisions.* 
A.  Building. 
1.  There is adopted by reference by the city the building subcode of the state of New Jersey, which is known as the "BOCA Basic Building Code/1975," including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as adopted by the state of New Jersey. 
2.  Three copies of the BOCA Basic Building Code/1975, including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey, shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk, the construction official and the director of the department of construction, one copy in each office respectively. 
B.  Electrical. 
1.  The following provisions of Chapter 28 of the prior code of the city is specifically retained: Sections 28-1 [Section 15.04.070 of this chapter] and 28-8 [Section 15.04.080 of this chapter]; all other provisions of prior Chapter 28 are repealed. 
2.  There is adopted by reference by the city, the electrical subcode of the state of New Jersey, which is known as the "National Electrical Code/1975," including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey. 
3.  Three copies of the National Electrical Code/1975, including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey, shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk, the construction official and the director of the department of construction, one copy in each office respectively. 
C.  Fire Protection. 
1.  Chapter 30 of the prior code of the city [Chapter 15.08 of this title] is retained. 
2.  There is adopted by reference by the city, the fire protection subcode of the state of New Jersey, which comprises those portions of the building and electrical subcodes to the extent delineated in Article 18, Section B, and identified in Article 22, known as "Regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code," as promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the authority of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended). 
3.  Three copies of the Fire Protection Subcode of the state of New Jersey, including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey, shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk, the construction official and the director of the department of construction, one copy in each office respectively. 
D.  Plumbing. 
1.  The following provisions of Chapter 36 of the prior code of the city are specifically retained: Sections 36-1, 36-2, 36-3, 36-4, 36-5, 36-6, 36-14, 36-54 [Section 15.04.090 of this chapter] and 36-55 [Section 12.08.040 of Chapter 12]; all other provisions of Chapter 36 are repealed. 
2.  There is adopted by reference by the city, the plumbing subcode of the state of New Jersey, which is known as the "National Standard Plumbing Code/1975," including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey. 
3.  Four copies of the National Standard Plumbing Code/1975, including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the state of New Jersey, shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk, the construction official, the director of the department of health, welfare and housing, and the director of the department of construction, one copy in each office respectively. 
(Prior code § 26-5) 
* Sections 36-1 through 36-6 of prior code were repealed by Ord. 3518 § 1, 2003. 
15.04.060 - Deposits of moneys in city treasury. 
    All moneys received for permits, certificates or inspections or accruing from any other source under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be paid daily or as required through transmittal sheets into the city treasury. 
(Prior code § 26-6) 
15.04.070 - Electrical inspectors-Appointment and qualifications. 
    The electrical inspector and such other electrical inspectors as shall be provided for by ordinance shall be appointed by the director of department of construction, and the inspector shall hold office subject to civil service examination and until his or her successor shall be duly elected and qualified. He or she shall be a practical electrician with a technical knowledge of electricity who has had not less than five years' experience as an electrical worker in the practical installation of interior wiring, electrical appliances and electrical apparatus; who holds a current (in effect) public utility commission inspector's license; and who is not a stockholder or shareholder in any corporation or firm which is engaged in supplying electricity to the public or individuals, nor interested as a stockholder, partner or otherwise in any corporation or firm selling or furnishing electrical supplies or materials or doing electrical work of any kind whatsoever. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office. 
(Prior code § 28-1) 
15.04.080 - Temporary wiring-Exception. 
    Any person engaged in the manufacture or repair of electrical appliances or apparatus shall not be required to secure a permit for the installation of temporary wiring installed at the place of manufacture or repair for the purpose of testing the electrical appliance or apparatus. 
(Prior code § 28-8) 
15.04.090 - Plumbing-Seats for toilets. 
    All toilets installed in public buildings shall be provided with open front seats. 
(Prior code § 36-54) 
15.04.100 - Construction on Sundays and legal holidays prohibited. 
    Construction means operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work. There shall be no construction on Sundays or legal holidays, within the boundaries of the city of Elizabeth, with the exception of emergency work for public service utilities or by permit issued by proper authority. 
(Ord. 3722 §§ 1, 2, 2005) 
Chapter 15.08 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Sections: 
Article I - Definitions-Bureau of Fire Prevention Board of Appeals 

15.08.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
B.  Wherever the term "legal representative of the municipality" is used, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. 
(Prior code § 30-1) 
15.08.020 - Establishment and duties of the bureau of fire prevention. 
A.  Pursuant to Section Eleven (11) of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (PL. 1983 C. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced locally. The local enforcing agency shall be the Elizabeth fire prevention bureau within the Elizabeth fire department; and shall be operated under the direct supervision and control of the fire official, subject to the direction and supervision of the director and chief of the fire department. 
B.  The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of the city and shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code. 
C.  The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code. 
D.  The fire prevention bureau shall be under the supervision of a fire official who shall be appointed by the fire director pursuant to Title II, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes. 
E.  Such inspectors as may be necessary in the fire prevention bureau shall be assigned by the fire director upon the recommendation of the chief of the department. 
F.  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the fire director through the office of the chief of the fire department; it shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. 
G.  The chief of the fire department shall be furnished with a weekly report on the fees that are collected. This report shall state the number and types of classification of fees, the number and types of fees with the name, address and business. 
H.  There shall be biweekly meetings between the fire official and the chief of the fire department relating to the working of the fire prevention bureau, a review of all plan modifications and any problems that might arise. 
(Ord. 3650 § 1, 2004; prior code § 30-2) 
15.08.030 - Board of appeals. 
    Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right of appeal to the construction board of appeals of the city. 
(Prior code § 30-3) 
Article II - Fees 

15.08.040 - Permit and inspection fees. 
    In addition to the permit and inspection fees required pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the department of community affairs, the permit and inspection fees shall be as follows for non-life hazard uses: 
Reference No. Fee 1. Buildings less than 5,000 sq. ft. $36.00 2. Buildings 5,001 sq. ft. to 50,000 sq. ft. 104.00 3. Buildings 50,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft. 204.00 4. Buildings 100,001 sq. ft. or larger 300.00 5. Welding gases cylinder storage 42.00 6. Storage of over 200 l.s. of calcium carbide, flammable and combustible liquids, storage and handling use 104.00 7. Tank storage up to 275 gallons 42.00 8. Tank storage 276 to 550 gallons 65.00 9. Tank test 17.00 10. Alter, repair or modify piping dispensing units 21.00 11. Tank vehicles 29.00 12. Commercial installation 1,000 gallon water capacity or more LPG and LNG 48.00 13. LPG-LNG transfer from one container to another regardless of amount 48.00 14. Storage of LPG and LNG for sale, rent or use 48.00 15. Use with temporary space heating LPG and LNG 22.00 16. Fuel oil tank up to 55 gallons 22.00 17. Temporary oil fired space heater (each unit) for construction only 24.00 18. Automobile tire re-building plants 29.00 19. Bowling establishments 22.00 20. Motion picture operators license 9.00 21. Cellulose nitrate motion picture film 22.00 22. Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxlin) 22.00 23. Combustible fibers 22.00 24. Compressed gas 22.00 25. Dry cleaning plants 22.00 26. Dust explosion, prevention of 22.00 27. Ammunition 48.00 28. Flammable finishers, application of 22.00 29. Commercial and industrial establishments 42.00 30. Processing plants 104.00 31. Refineries 104.00 32. Chemical plants 104.00 33. Distilleries 104.00 34. Bulk plants 104.00 35. Tank vehicles, per vehicle 9.00 36. Fruit ripening 22.00 37. Hazardous chemicals 104.00 38. Lumber yards and woodworking plants 22.00 39. Magnesium 22.00 40. Matches 22.00 41. Ovens, industrial baking and drying 22.00 42. Public garage 48.00 43. Auto refinishing and body shop 72.00 44. Service station, maintenance    (a) Each additional pump $5.00 to $50.00 maximum 27.00 45. Commercial garage 22.00 46. Private gasoline pump 29.00  
(Ord. No. 4149, § 58, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3650 § 2, 2004: prior code § 30-4) 
Article III - Storage of Explosives, Flammable Liquids and Liquefied Gases 

15.08.050 - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in Section F 2601.2 of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established as follows: 
    Prohibited in all areas except that: 
A.  Amounts constituting one day's supply for current operations may be kept within the city limits and must meet all requirements as set forth by the Department of Labor and Industry of the state of New Jersey. 
B.  The amount specified in subsection A of this section shall be brought into the city only on the date it is to be used, and any amount which for any reason is not used in the day shall be removed to a permanent magazine, outside the city limits, at the close of operations on that day. 
(Prior code § 30-6) 
15.08.060 - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above-ground tanks is to be prohibited. 
A.  The limits referred to in Section F 2803.1 of the New Jersey Fire Prevention Code in which storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside aboveground storage tanks is prohibited are established as follows: Prohibited in all areas exclusive of the districts zoned "M2 or M3" as designated by Chapter 40, Land Development Control schedule 111 K (1) (2) of the city, and as amended December 28, 1982 by Order No. 1546. 
B.  The location referred to in Section F 2802.1 of the New Jersey Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk, processing and industrial plants used for the storage, processing, distillation, refining or blending of flammable and combustible liquids are prohibited, shall be the same as specified in subsection A of this section. 
(Prior code § 30-7) 
15.08.070 - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG) is to be prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in Section F 3002.1 of the Fire Prevention Code in which bulk storage and use of liquefied petroleum gases and liquefied gas is prohibited are established as follows: Prohibited in all areas except in the districts zoned M2 and M3 as designated by Chapter 40 Land Development Control schedule 111k (1)(2) of the city and as amended December 28, 1982 by Order No. 1546. 
(Prior code § 30-8) 
Article IV - Amendments and Supplements 

15.08.080 - Modifications and supplements to the New Jersey Fire Prevention Code.* 
* NOTE: For purposes of this chapter, the paragraphs of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code to be changed are reproduced for information purposes and are designated by being bracketed. The language following which is in quotes is the modification of the New Jersey Fire Prevention Code. 
A.  Modifications. 
    The following sections of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code are modified as provided in this section: 
    [F-305.3 INSIDE STORAGE: Storage in buildings and structures shall be orderly, shall not be within 2 feet [610 mm] of the ceiling, and located so as not to obstruct egress from the building.] 
    "SECTION F-305.3 INSIDE STORAGE 
    Storage in buildings and structures shall be orderly, shall not be within two (2) feet of the ceiling, shall be located so as not to obstruct egress from the building, and shall further conform to NFiPA Standards 231, 231A, 231B, and 231C, except as such standards may be in conflict with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code." 
    [F-400.2 INSTALLATIONS: Before any fire alarm, detection or fire suppression system is installed, enlarged or extended, a permit shall be secured from the building official. Plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the fire official prior to the issuance of the building permit.] 
    "SECTION F 400.2 INSTALLATIONS: Before any fire alarm, detection or fire suppression system is installed, enlarged or extended, a construction permit shall be secured from the Construction Official. Plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the Fire Official and Fire Sub Code Official and Superintendent of Communications prior to the issuance of the building permit." 
    [F-1700.1.1 PERMIT REQUIRED: A tent or air-supported structure covering an area in excess of 120 square feet [11.16m2], including all connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance, and used or intended to be used for gathering together of ten or more persons shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without obtaining a permit from the building official and the fire official. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes shall be exempt from the above requirements. Special permits required by the building code shall be secured from the building official.] 
    "SECTION 1700.1.1 PERMIT REQUIRED: A tent or air-supported structure covering an area in excess of 120 square feet, including all connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance and used or intended to be used for gathering together of ten or more persons shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without obtaining a permit from the Fire Official & Building Official. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purpose shall be exempt from the above requirements. Also a certificate of flame resistance shall be submitted to the Fire Official for all tents over 120 square feet. Any tent used for cooking foods must have at least 1-10 pound ABC dry chemical extinguisher at their location when cooking." 
    [F-2701.2 BOND FOR DISPLAY: The permittee shall furnish a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the fire official for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or the property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, the permittee's agent, employees or subcontractors.] 
    "SECTION F2701.2 BOND FOR DISPLAY 
    Before any permit for a fireworks or pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person, firm or corporation seeking such a permit shall first make application to the City Clerk of the City of Elizabeth and furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for property damage or personal injury arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person, firm, or corporation that such amount is not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and in such form as the City Clerk, the City Attorney and the City Council of the City of Elizabeth determine to be necessary for the protection of the public." 
    [Article 30. LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES.] 
    "Article 30 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS AND LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS." 
B.  Supplements to the New Jersey State Fire Prevention Code. 
1.  Testing. Periodic tests of underground tank storage systems may be required by the fire official to determine that leakage has not occurred. Such periodic testing shall be required of all existing underground Class I flammable liquid storage tanks and associated piping systems as specified herein. 
a.  All underground Class I flammable liquid tanks shall be tested every five years after the last hydrostatic test. If a test has not been performed as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, testing must be completed by the end of 1986. 
b.  Any devices used for testing shall be capable of detecting leaks as small as five one-hundredths gallon in one hour, in the tanks or piping systems after adjustments are made for variables. 
2.  Plumbers' Torches and Lead Pots. Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for sweating pipe joints, thawing frozen pipes, melting lead or other similar operations in any building or structure shall have available in the immediate vicinity where such work is being done one approved fire extinguisher or water hose connected to a water supply. Combustible materials in the close proximity of the flame shall be protected against ignition by shielding, wetting or other approved means. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain in the vicinity of such operations for at least one-half hour after the torch or flame-producing device has been used. 
3.  Ordinary Combustible Materials. Ordinary combustible materials or storage of ordinary combustible materials in motor freight terminals, warehouses or distribution centers, and when stored for use in manufacturing or industrial plants or processes a permit shall be obtained from the fire official. No permit shall be required for storage in conjunction with retail sales. 
4.  Outdoor Barbecuing and other Fires. Charcoal or other fires for cooking (except gas and electric cooking equipment) or other purposes on balconies, fire escape, combustible roofs or inside of any building or structure are hereby prohibited. Except as prohibited, these fires shall be kindled only on a proper receptacle designed for that purpose, and shall be located so that the receptacle is at least ten (10) feet from combustible buildings or structures on the same or adjoining property. Flammable liquids shall not be added once the fire is started. 
5.  Establishment of fire lanes or zones on private property devoted to public use, or to which the public is invited. Fire lanes or fire zones on private property devoted to public use, or to which the public is invited, are hereby established as follows: 
a.  Those portions of such properties which the fire official shall designate, shall be those areas of such properties where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress or egress of persons or the ingress or egress of fire department vehicles or otherwise interfere with the operations of the fire department for the protection of persons or property, such as at, but not limited to, shopping centers, bowling alleys, theaters, hospitals, churches, schools, places of assembly, and similar locations including residential properties. 
b.  When it is necessary for the fire official to establish or designate such lanes or fire zones he shall notify the owner or other person, firm, company or corporation having control of the property in writing by registered or certified mail, or by hand delivering such notice, specifically describing the area designated and the reason for making the designation. The lanes or zones shall be properly marked by the owner, person, firm, company or corporation having control, at their own expenses and within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice. 
6.  Mercantile Occupancies. All mercantile occupancies shall be provided with at least one fire extinguisher, suitable for the class of fire that is likely to occur. Fire extinguishers shall be provided on the basis of one for each twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet or fraction thereof and so located that there shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet travel distance. If there is more than one level used for storage and/or retail sales, there shall be at least one at each level. 
7.  Emergency Lighting. Emergency lighting facilities shall be installed in each assembly occupancy having an occupant load of one hundred (100) or more in educational, industrial, institutional occupancy; and in windowless building which the fire official deems necessary, in order to provide reasonable safety for the occupants. 
8.  Location. No heliport, helistop or stol (short take-off and landings) port shall be located within the city unless specifically approved by the fire chief, police chief, municipal council, fire official, and the construction official and the planning board. 
9.  Fire Watch. The use in any building with a permitted occupancy of one hundred (100) or more persons for the amusement, entertainment, sporting events, shows or religious events, shall have the fire official or his designee, certified fire inspectors and firefighters in attendance at all functions as required by the fire chief and fire official and this code. 
10.  Pyrotechnics. Any time pyrotechnics are used in a structure, the fire official or his designee, certified fire inspectors, and firefighters will be in attendance at all such functions as required by the fire chief and fire official and this code. 
11.  Service Stations. The use of the premises of service stations for the storage of old and discarded tires or flammable scrap parts is prohibited, and the parking and storage of vehicles so as to impede proper ingress or egress to the premises is also prohibited. 
12.  Fire Safety Requirements Construction and Protection Requirements. Handling and storage of large quantities of waste-paper, rags or used rubber tires and other waste materials of a flammable nature shall not be in a building of wood frame or ordinary construction unless the building is sprinklered. 
13.  Loose Paper to be Baled. Large quantities of loose combustible material shall not be permitted to accumulate but shall be baled so that such quantities may be kept at a minimum, and all such material shall be baled by the end of the working day. 
14.  Tank Size and Location with Respect to Property Lines. Aboveground tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet in diameter and shall not exceed sixty-four (64) feet in height. Tanks shall be the required distances from property lines and public ways, regardless of whether the adjoining property may be built upon. Refer to Title 17 of this code. 
15.  Spacing between Aboveground Tanks. When tanks located aboveground are sixty (60) feet or larger in diameter, there shall be not more than two rows of tanks without an intervening roadway having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet and a fire service water main of at least six inches in diameter having fire hydrants spaced not more than three hundred (300) feet apart. Where a roadway is required the flat section at the top of a dike may be used, provided it can support the weight of fire apparatus vehicles and is at least fifteen (15) feet wide at the narrowest point. 
16.  Drainage, Dikes and Walls. In addition to other requirements, the following regulations shall be complied with: 
a.  All tanks containing flammable or combustible liquids having a flash point below two hundred fifty (250) degrees shall be diked or be provided with drainage to a safe area. 
b.  There shall be not more than three tanks within a common dike when such tanks are sixty (60) feet or more in diameter and contain Class I flammable liquid. 
c.  There shall not be more than six tanks within a common dike when such tanks are sixty (60) feet or more in diameter and contain liquids having a flash point at or above one hundred (100) degrees and below two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit. 
d.  When tanks are less than sixty (60) feet in diameter, the number of tanks within a common dike shall be limited to such number as can be effectively protected by hose streams. 
e.  Height of dike walls shall be limited to a maximum of six feet, measured from the interior of the diked area. 
f.  Piping supports within dike areas shall be of materials that have a fire resistance rating of at least two hours. All pipe systems shall be substantially supported and protected against physical damages, and excessive stresses arising from settlement, vibration, expansion or contraction. 
17.  Piping to Underground Flammable Liquid Tanks. All alteration, repair or modifying of piping or dispensing units in relation to underground flammable and combustible liquid tanks shall require a permit from the fire official. 
18.  Water Supply. A water supply and distribution system shall be included as part of all bulk storage plants. The minimum fire flow shall be sufficient to provide protection for the largest tank in the plant or the greatest hazard within the plant and to provide sufficient additional flow to protect and cool exposed tanks or other property. The installation of water lines for plant protection shall comply with the applicable provision of NFiPA Standard 24, the most recent edition of "Outside Protection." 
19.  Tank Protection. Suitable fire suppression systems shall be required to protect all aboveground storage tanks containing liquids having a flash point less than two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit. The suppression system shall be sufficient additional capacity and equipment to control fires. Supply piping and manifolds for foam or other approved suppression systems shall not be located inside of diked areas, except as necessary to deliver the extinguishing agent to the tank being protected. An adequate supply of the appropriate type of foam concentrate for the system shall be stored on the premises. 
20.  Inspection Permit Fee Required. No person shall engage in the business of delivering flammable or combustible liquids from tank vehicles without first having obtained a permit from the fire official, except that deliveries made to bulk plants suitable fire control equipment need not require a permit. 
21.  Prohibited Materials. All chemicals and materials possessing a health hazard greater than "3" or a reactivity hazard greater than "3" as identified in accordance with the most recent edition of the NFiPA Standard 49 "Hazardous Chemical Data" and NFiPA Standard 325 M "Fire Hazard Properties of Flammable Liquids" for the Fire Hazards of materials, are hereby prohibited to be stored in bulk within the city limits of the city. The fire official may permit limited amounts to be stored when they are to be used in conjunction with chemical or industrial processes, when application is made in writing and the fire official is satisfied that the safety precautions to be taken in the storage and handling of such materials will not pose an unreasonable risk of hazard to persons or property. No increase in the amounts which may be allowed shall be permitted except on new written application to the fire official. 
22.  Identification of the Fire Hazard or Materials. All chemicals in storage and in use shall be identified both as to the type of hazard and the degree of hazard in such manner as to reveal at a glance to firefighters and other interested persons proper precautions and actions to be taken to safeguard life and property. Identification shall be made for health, flammability, and reactivity hazards of the materials, and the degree of each of these hazards. This identification shall be made in accordance with methods outlined in the most recent edition of the NFiPA Standard 704, "Identification System for the Fire Hazards of Materials." 
23.  Proper Designation of Hazard. All hazard symbols used shall be proper for the material which is being identified. In the event of doubt as to how the symbol should be displayed, the fire official shall be consulted. It shall remain the responsibility of the person, company, firm or corporation to supply all the information necessary to arrive at a proper designation for each hazard that may be involved. It shall be the duty of the person, company or firm or corporation to check as often as necessary to insure that all identification is proper, and accurately describes the true nature of the materials, and is kept up to date. 
24.  Exceptions and Records. All requests for variance from the strict compliance with NFiPA Standard 704 shall be made in writing to the fire official stating the reason for the request and suggesting an alternative type of container and identification symbol assigned to it shall be kept on the premises and shall be available to the fire department on request. 
25.  Additional Inspection Permits Required. Annual inspection permits shall be required for all installations in which liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or liquefied natural gas (LNG) is transferred from one container to another regardless of the size of the installation, and for the storage of cylinders inside a building. Such storage shall be limited to amounts and locations approved by the fire official. This shall apply to cylinders awaiting sale, reuse, empty awaiting exchange or used in connection with temporary heating equipment. 
26.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section and as used in this code, the following words and terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    "Liquefied natural gas" means a fluid in the liquid state composed predominately of methane and which may contain minor quantities of ethane, propane, nitrogen or other components normally found in natural gas. Also known by the abbreviation LNG. 
    "Liquefied natural gas equipment" means all container apparatus, piping (not including utility distribution piping systems) and equipment pertinent to the storage and handling of liquefied natural gas. Gas consuming appliances shall be considered as being liquefied natural gas equipment. 
27.  Oil Burner Equipment-Scope. The installation, operation and maintenance of oil burning equipment, except combustion engines, oil lamps and portable devices such as flow torches, melting pots, weed burners and similar devices shall comply with the requirements of this code and the specific provisions of this section. 
28.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section and as used in this code, the following words and terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    "Conversion range oil burner" means an oil burner designed to burn kerosene, range oil or similar fuel. This burner is intended primarily for installation only in a stove, or range, a portion or all of which originally was designed for the utilization of solid fuel and which is flue-connected. 
    "Fuel oil" means kerosene or any hydrocarbon oil conforming to nationally recognized standards and having a flash point not less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
    "Heating and cooking appliance" means an oil fired appliance not intended for central heating. These appliances include kerosene stoves, oil stoves and conversion range oil burners. 
    "Oil burner" means a device for burning oil in heating appliances such as boilers, furnaces, water heaters, ranges and similar appliances. A burner of this type may be furnished with or without a primary safety control; and it may be a pressure atomizing gun type, a horizontal or vertical rotary type, or mechanical of natural draft vaporizing type. 
    "Oil burning equipment" means an oil burner of any type together with its tank, piping, wiring, controls and related devices and shall include all oil burners, oil-fired units, and heating and cooking appliances but excluding those exempted by Section F 3400.1 of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. 
    "Oil-fired units" means a heating appliance with one or more oil burners and all the necessary safety controls, electrical equipment and related equipment manufactured for assembly as a complete unit. This definition does not include kerosene stoves or oil stoves. 
29.  Inspection Permits Required. Inspection permits shall be obtained from the fire official for the installation of oil-fired equipment except when installed in connection with work requiring a construction permit in which case the Fire Protection Sub-Code of the state Uniform Construction Code shall apply. 
30.  Annual Inspection Permit. An annual inspection permit shall be required for a fuel oil tank when used in connection with an oil burning unit when the amount stored is in excess of twenty-five (25) gallons, if in the opinion of the fire official such installation created a hazard or constitutes a potential hazard. 
31.  Portable Space Heater Inspection Permit. An inspection permit shall be required for the use of a portable space heater used in conjunction with construction work. 
32.  Tank and Burner Inspection Permit. A single inspection permit shall be required for the initial installation of an oil burner and a fuel oil tank used in connection therewith that is in excess of twenty-five (25) gallons. A separate inspection permit shall be required for the replacement of a fuel oil tank connected to an oil burner. 
33.  Fire Safety Requirements-General. The layout, arrangement and construction of building and structures in which oil burning equipment is to be installed or used shall comply with the applicable requirements of the building code for the appropriate occupancy use group classification, and shall be provided with fire protection and fire extinguishing equipment as required by that code. Buildings and structures and their service equipment shall be maintained in proper operating condition as required by this code. 
34.  Use of Approved Equipment. Oil burning equipment shall be of an approved type as required by the building code. 
35.  Installation-Requirements. Oil burning equipment and systems shall be installed in accordance with the Building Subcode of the state Uniform Construction Code, the installation instruction of the manufacturer, and the most recent edition of the NFiPA 31. 
36.  Accessibility. The installation shall be such as to provide reasonable accessibility for cleaning heating surfaces, removing burners, replacing motors, controls, air filters, draft regulators and other working parts for adjusting, cleaning and lubricating parts requiring such attention. 
37.  Electrical Wiring and Equipment. Electrical wiring and equipment used in connection with oil burning equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the current National Electrical Code, NFiPA 70 and in addition, the equipment shall be in a properly identified, direct separate line from the electrical service panel. A remote shut-off switch shall be installed at the top of the cellar stairs or at such other location as may be specified by the fire official. 
38.  Fuel Oil. The grade of fuel oil used in a burner shall be that for which the burner is approved and as specified by the manufacturer. Crankcase oil or any oil containing gasoline shall not be used. 
39.  Storage Tanks. Installation of fuel oil storage tanks shall comply with the requirements of this code, the Building Code and the NFiPA 31. 
40.  Use of Approved Equipment. No person shall use, keep for use, or store and maintain for use in any structure or portion of a structure a portable liquid-fuel-burning space heater. For the purpose of this article a portable liquid-fuel-burning space heater is defined as any heater, stove or appliance designed for heating space in structures, using or designed for using kerosene, liquid fuel or other flammable liquid, which is neither flue nor chimney connected, and which is not permanently affixed to any part of a structure and which is capable of being moved or upset. Within their assigned duties, any fire prevention member and/or company officer shall confiscate any portable liquid fuel burning space heater found in nay structure. 
41.  Conversion Burners. A conversion range oil burner shall be equipped with a thermal (heat actuated) valve in the oil supply line located in the burner compartment of the stove. 
42.  Small Appliances. Small heating and cooking appliances, including space heaters, shall be installed as specified in the most recent edition of the NFiPA Standard 31 and in addition shall be vented to a chimney or approved vent and shall be securely anchored to prevent movement and protected from physical damage. No small heating and cooking appliance shall be connected to a supply tank that exceeds a capacity of three gallons. 
43.  Article 35-Gas Piping and Appliance-General-Scope. This article shall apply to liquefied petroleum gas and natural gas piping and appliances used for heating, cooking or industrial purposes. 
44.  Inspection Permit Required. An inspection permit shall be required for the initial installation of gas-fired central heating units in all buildings. Gas-fired space heaters shall also require a permit except those designed to heat a single room of a dwelling unit. 
45.  Odorization Required. All gas supplied to customers shall possess a distinctive gas odor of sufficient strength to act as a warning of its presence, except gas for industrial process use if the odor used would contaminate or otherwise render the gas unfit for the process. Any gas not naturally possessing odor shall have an odorant added to it to meet this requirement. 
46.  Precaution in lieu of Odorization. When the addition of an odorant would render the gas unsuitable for use in industrial processes, the odorant may be omitted, provided there is installed gas detection equipment that continually monitors the atmosphere where the gas is used or stored to detect its presence and sound an alarm. 
47.  Installation Requirements-Gas Cocks Required. Every gas appliance shall have an approved gas cock installed near the appliance to shut off the gas supply while the appliance is being serviced or temporarily released. 
48.  Automatic Gas Shut-Off Valves. An automatic gas shut-off valve shall be installed in the gas supply to cooking appliances when such appliances are protected by approved fire suppression systems. The valve shall be arranged to automatically shut the gas supply off whenever the suppression system is activated by any means. It shall be so arranged that it cannot be opened until the suppression system has been restored. 
49.  Flexible Connectors. Only approved flexible connectors shall be used to connect a gas consuming appliance to the supply piping. The flexible connector shall be as short as practical with suitable clamps or threaded coupling to prevent accidental separation of the connectors. Flexible connections shall be installed only on the appliance side of gas cock. 
50.  Gas Appliance Piping and Venting. Gas appliances, piping and venting systems shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code, Plumbing Code, and the most recent edition of the NFiPA Standard 54 National Fuel Gas Code. Where requirements differ, the requirement that offers the greatest of safety shall apply. 
(Prior code § 30-9) 
Chapter 15.12 - HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - General Provisions 

15.12.010 - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Housing Code of the City of Elizabeth." 
(Prior code § 32-1) 
15.12.020 - Legislative finding of fact. 
    It is found and declared that there exist in the city, structures used for human habitation which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, and further, that such conditions, together with inadequate provision for light and air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of its citizens. It is further found and declared that the existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics will, if not remedied, create slum and blighted areas requiring large-scale clearance, and further, that in the absence of corrective measures, such areas will experience a deterioration of social values, a curtailment of investment and tax revenue and an impairment of economic values. It is further found and declared that the establishment and maintenance of minimum housing standards are essential to the prevention of blight and decay and the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals and welfare. It is further found and declared that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof. 
(Prior code § 32-2) 
15.12.030 - Purpose of chapter-Construal. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the people of the city, by establishing minimum standards governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises; establishing minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential to make dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, agents and occupants of dwellings and dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units; authorizing and establishing procedures for the inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units, and the condemnation and vacation of these dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units unfit for human habitation and fixing penalties for the violations of the provisions of this chapter. This chapter is declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this chapter be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated above. 
(Prior code § 32-3) 
15.12.040 - Application of chapter. 
    Every portion of a building or premises, used or intended to be used for any dwelling purpose, except temporary housing, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building, or for the premises, for the construction or repair of the building; or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, its equipment or facilities. 
(Prior code § 32-4) 
15.12.050 - More restrictive provisions to govern. 
    If any provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of any other ordinance, the chapter with the higher requirements shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 32-5) 
15.12.060 - Compliance required. 
    All departments, officials and employees of the city, who have the duty to issue permits or licenses in regard to the construction, installation, repair, use or occupancy of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses or rooming units, equipment or facilities, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-6) 
15.12.070 - Existing remedies saved. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city, or its officers or agencies, relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary. 
(Prior code § 32-7) 
Article II - Definitions and Responsibility 

15.12.080 - Defined words and terms-Compliance. 
A.  Definitions. 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises. 
    "Approved" means approved by the head of the code enforcement agency under the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or approved by an authority designated by law or by this chapter. 
    "Basement" means the portion of the building that is partly underground which has more than one-half its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building. 
    "Bathroom" means an enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also include toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
    "Building" means a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals or property and appurtenances belonging thereto. The word "building" shall be construed, when used herein, as though followed by the words, "or part or parts thereof," unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. 
    "Cellar" means the lowermost portion of the building partly or totally underground have one-half or more of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, below the average finished grade of the adjoining ground. 
    "Code enforcement agency" means the department of health, welfare and housing. 
    "Dormitories" means rooms where sleeping accommodations or areas for three or more adults are provided. 
    "Dwelling" means a building containing one or more building units occupied exclusively for residential uses. Residential uses shall include a private garage and customary home occupations conducted in the dwelling by the occupants. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms with living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities therein arranged for one family with whom may reside not more than two lodgers or boarders. 
    "Exterior property areas" means an open space on the premises and vacant open space on adjacent premises. 
    "Extermination" means the control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing, or making inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other approved means of pest elimination. 
    "Garbage" means the animal, vegetable and mineral waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    "Garbage collection area" means that portion of the exterior property areas of premises, together with all walkways leading thereto, which are provided by every dwelling with three or more dwelling units for the storage of garbage and rubbish. 
    "Grade" means the natural surface of the ground, or the surface of the ground after completion of any change in contour. 
    "Gross floor area" means the total area of all habitable space. 
    "Habitable space" means the space occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms and basement or cellar recreation rooms. 
    "Infestation" means the presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests. 
    "Kitchen" means the space, sixty (60) square feet in floor area or more, with a minimum width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food, and deemed habitable space. 
    "Kitchenette" means the space, less than sixty (60) square feet in floor area, used for cooking or preparation of food, and not deemed habitable space. 
    "Occupant" means any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    "Operator" means any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple residence or rooming house in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy. 
    "Owner" means the holder or holders of the title in fee simple. 
    "Plumbing system" means pipes, fixtures and other apparatus for supplying water for consumption, or for the conveyance of waste and drainage. 
    "Potable water" means water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking. 
    "Parties in interest" means all individuals, associations and corporations, including "operator" and "occupant" as defined in this chapter, who have interests of record in a building and who are in actual possession thereof. 
    "Premises" means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    "Public sewer" means the sewer operated by a public authority or public utility, and available for public use. 
    "Rooming house" means a building or part thereof which contains one or more rooming units, and in which space is occupied or intended to be occupied by three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    "Rooming unit" means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    "Rubbish" means all combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage. 
    "Sewage" means the waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or machine. 
    "Structure" means the combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming a construction, including buildings. The word "structure" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof." 
    "Supplied facilities" means the facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
    "Temporary housing" is temporary shelter provided for victims of fire, storm or war damage or any other act of God that causes the evacuation of dwelling units and requires the temporary sheltering of the victims of these calamities. 
    "Toilet room or compartment" means an enclosed space containing one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing fixtures. 
    "Ventilation" means the supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or mechanical means. 
    "Ventilation, mechanical" means the ventilation by power-driven devices. 
    "Ventilation, natural" means the ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven devices. 
B.  Responsibility for Compliance. In all complaints involving violation of this code which makes a building unfit for human habitation, the owner and any parties in interest shall be responsible for compliance in this chapter. In all violations of this code other than one which makes a building unfit for human habitation, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, agent and occupants of the building to comply with the provisions in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-12) 
Article IIIl - Exterior Property Areas 

15.12.090 - Hazards prohibited. 
    Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which might create a health, accident or fire hazard. Exterior property areas shall be reasonably free from holes, excavations, sharp protrusions and other objects or conditions which are or might be a cause of personal injury. Walks, steps and driveways which contain holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired or replaced as needed, and garbage collection areas and walks, steps or driveways leading thereto shall be maintained by the owner, or his duly authorized agent, of said dwelling in a safe and sanitary condition, shall be kept well-lighted from dusk to dawn of each day and shall be kept free of ice, snow and litter. Open wells, cisterns or other ground openings shall be securely closed. Trees or tree limbs that constitute a hazard shall be removed. 
(Prior code § 32-14) 
15.12.100 - Rubbish and garbage-Disposal-Containers required. 
    Exterior property areas shall be kept free from organic and inorganic material that might become a health, accident or fire hazard. Exterior property areas, whether or not used for human habitation, shall be kept clean at all times. The owner of every dwelling with three or more dwelling units shall provide a garbage collection area for the storage of garbage and rubbish; every garbage collection area shall be within a reasonable distance from every door and window of the dwelling, shall also be a reasonable distance away from any structure or building on adjacent premises so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard, and shall be provided with metal or other leak proof containers, with tight-fitting covers, for the temporary storage of garbage and rubbish. Disposal of rubbish and other refuse by means of incineration shall be done in accordance with all regulations of the city and of the state of New Jersey. 
(Prior code § 32-15) 
15.12.110 - Stormwater drainage required. 
    Storm water shall be properly drained to prevent recurrent or excessive ponding or the entrance of water into any basement or cellar. All leaders and gutters on all buildings shall be kept in proper operating order. 
(Prior code § 32-16) 
15.12.120 - Weeds prohibited. 
    Exterior property areas and vacant lots shall be free of all weeds, noxious or harmless. A growth higher than six inches above the ground shall be considered to be weeds. 
(Prior code § 32-17) 
15.12.130 - Insect and rodent harborage prohibited. 
    Exterior property areas shall be kept free from sources of insect, vermin and rodent breeding; harborage and infestation shall be eliminated. 
(Prior code § 32-18) 
15.12.140 - Domestic animals and pets-Nuisances prohibited. 
    Domestic animals and pets shall not be kept on any premises in such a manner as to create insanitary conditions or constitute a menace. Insanitary conditions, inappropriate types of pets or animals and excessive numbers of same constitute conditions which may be considered a nuisance under this section. 
(Prior code § 32-19) 
15.12.150 - Maintenance of accessory structures required. 
    Accessory structures shall be kept structurally sound and in good repair or removed from the premises. Effective rodent proofing or extermination must be done, where necessary, in these structures. The exterior of such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay-resistant materials or the application of paint or other preservatives. All such structures shall have such exterior covering as is required by this chapter for dwellings. 
(Prior code § 32-20) 
15.12.160 - Value of surrounding property protected. 
    Exterior property areas shall be so maintained as not to cause a substantial depreciation in property values in the immediate neighborhood. 
(Prior code § 32-21) 
15.12.170 - Brush, weeds, debris-Removal required-Action by city. 
    The owner or party in interest shall remove from his lands all brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within ten (10) days after notice to remove the same. In the event the owner or party in interest shall have refused or neglected to remove same in a manner necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard and within the time provided above, the code enforcement agency shall provide for the removal of same by and under the direction of the department of public works, and the owner or party in interest shall be subject to the imposition of penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-22) 
15.12.180 - Removal of debris-Assessment of costs, liabilities. 
    In all cases where brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris are removed from any lands by or under the direction of the department of public works, the director of public works shall certify the cost thereof to the governing body, which shall examine the certificate, and if found correct shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands; the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes. 
(Prior code § 32-23) 
15.12.181 - Fertilizer application. 
A.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Buffer" means the land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any waterbody. The department believes that 25 feet is the appropriate buffer width to be protective of water quality. However, in situations that warrant additional flexibility, such as where lot sizes are exceptionally small or where the 25 feet buffer constitutes the majority of the available property, the municipality may reduce the buffer to ten feet in width, with the additional requirement that a drop spreader be used for fertilizer application. 
    "Commercial farm" means a farm management unit producing agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500.00 or more annually. 
    "Fertilizer" means a fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for sale. 
    "Impervious surface" means a surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    "Phosphorus fertilizer" means any fertilizer that contains phosphorus, expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient content. 
    "Soils test" means a technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension. 
    "Waterbody" means a surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream, creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary. 
B.  Prohibited Conduct. No person may do any of the following: 
a)  Apply fertilizer when a runoff producing rainfall is occurring or predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer movement off-site exists. 
b)  Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate container for reuse. 
c)  Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody. 
d)  Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time after the end of the recognized growing season of March 1 to November 15 which is Zone 6b as identified by the USDA Plant Hardiness Zones, and the standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, July 1999. 
C.  Phosphorus Fertilizer Application. No person may do the following: 
a)  Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension. 
b)  Exceptions: 
1.  Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for: 
a.  Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules, 
b.  Re-established or repairing a turf area. 
2.  Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots. 
3.  Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens. 
D.  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the construction official and health officer of the city. 
E.  Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the general penalty provision of this Code for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard. 
(Ord. No. 4044, §§ I-V, 5-6-2009) 
Article IV - Exterior of Structure 

15.12.190 - Foundation walls-Maintenance required. 
    The foundation walls of every structure used for human habitation shall be maintained in good repair and structurally sound. Foundation walls shall be considered to be in good repair and structurally sound if found free from damage or defects and capable of bearing imposed loads. 
(Prior code § 32-27) 
15.12.200 - Stairs, porches and railings-Good repair required. 
    The stairs, porches and railings affixed to the exterior of every structure used for human habitation shall be kept in good repair and structurally sound. Railings shall be provided for porches and accessible roofs. 
(Prior code § 32-28) 
15.12.210 - Weathertight, watertight maintenance required. 
    Every structure used for human habitation shall be so maintained that it will be weathertight and watertight. Exterior walls, roofs and all openings around doors, windows, chimneys and all other parts of the structure shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the structure and to prevent undue heat loss. 
(Prior code § 32-29) 
15.12.220 - Protective coating for wood surfaces required. 
    All exterior wood surfaces of a structure used for human habitation that are not of a species inherently resistant to decay shall be treated periodically with a protective coating or other preservative to prevent structural deterioration and to preserve a suitable appearance, thereby lessening fire hazards. This paint or preservative shall be applied to the wood surfaces whenever it is determined they are in need of such. 
(Prior code § 32-30) 
15.12.230 - Windows, doors-Maintenance required. 
    Window glass shall be maintained unbroken and properly installed in all window sash. Window sash and frames shall be properly maintained without rot and shall be kept operable. Doors shall also be properly maintained without rot and broken glass and shall be operable at all times. 
(Prior code § 32-31) 
15.12.240 - Exterior covering required. 
    The exterior of all buildings used for human habitation shall be covered with wood siding, wood shingles, asbestos siding or shingles, aluminum siding, wood clapboard or other material considered suitable by general construction standards. All such outer covering shall be suitably maintained. 
(Prior code § 32-32) 
15.12.250 - Screening-When required. 
    Every window, door and other opening to outdoor space in the exterior of every structure used for human habitation shall be effectively protected against the entrance of insects. From May 1 to October 1 every opening used for ingress and egress from a structure used for human habitation, and every window, shall be provided with approved screening. 
(Prior code § 32-33) 
15.12.260 - Overhanging objects prohibited. 
    Every structure shall be free of loose, overhanging objects. 
(Prior code § 32-34) 
15.12.270 - Safe means of egress from dwelling unit. 
A.  Every dwelling unit shall have safe and unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level, accessible to a street. In addition, there shall be a suitable and separate secondary exit from each dwelling unit by means of a doorway, stairway, protected passageway or openable window. Residential buildings to be occupied by two or more families and/or occupants shall be provided with at least two means of egress for each family and/or occupants. In residential buildings occupied by two or more families and/or occupants, the secondary exit from the second story or from any additional stories shall be by fire escape or horizontal passageway providing a safe path of escape in case of emergency. Such means of egress shall be approved by the fire director and/or superintendent of buildings. 
B.  Maintenance of Exitways-Owner Responsibility. The owner or lessee of an existing building and structure shall be responsible for the safety of all persons in or occupying such premises with respect to the adequacy of means of egress therefrom. 
C.  Obstructions. It is unlawful to obstruct or reduce in any manner the clear width of any doorway, hallway, passage or any other exitway required by the provisions of the basic code. 
D.  Exterior Exitways. Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be kept clear of all flower boxes, pots and other obstruction; and no display sign or other obstruction shall be attached to the building so as to interfere with the free operation and use of such means of egress. They shall be kept free of snow and ice and shall be properly painted before and after erection and scraped and painted as often as necessary to maintain them in safe condition. 
(Prior code § 32-35) 
Article V - Interior of Structure 

15.12.280 - Freedom from dampness required. 
    Cellars, basements and crawl spaces in every structure used for human habitation shall be reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
(Prior code § 32-39) 
15.12.290 - Supporting structural members-Maintenance required. 
    Supporting structural members of every building shall be structurally sound. Supporting structural members shall be considered to be structurally sound if such members are capable of bearing imposed loads safely and if there is no evidence of deterioration. 
(Prior code § 32-40) 
15.12.300 - Chimneys, flues and vents-Maintenance required. 
    Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto of every structure shall be structurally sound, free from defects and adequate to perform the function for which they were designed and are used. 
(Prior code § 32-41) 
15.12.310 - Stairs and railings-Maintenance required. 
    Interior stairs of every building shall be structurally sound and free from defects. Railings shall be provided for stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells. Treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are warped, broken or loose shall be repaired or replaced. Properly balustrated railings, capable of bearing normally imposed loads, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells. 
(Prior code § 32-42) 
15.12.320 - Floors, walls and ceilings-Maintenance required. 
    Floors, walls and ceilings of every structure used for human habitation shall be structurally sound and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Walls and ceilings shall be covered with plaster, drywall, sheetrock, tile or other materials of acceptable construction standards. 
(Prior code § 32-43) 
15.12.330 - Water-resistant bathroom floors required, criterion. 
A.  Bathroom, shower room and toilet room or compartment floors of every structure used for human habitation shall be water-resistant. 
B.  A floor shall be considered water-resistant if it is covered with linoleum, or ceramic, rubber, linoleum or asphalt tile cemented to the floor. 
(Prior code § 32-44) 
15.12.340 - Rubbish and garbage-Disposal, containers required. 
    The interior of every structure used for human habitation shall be maintained free from rubbish and garbage that might become a health, accident or fire hazard. Metal or other leak-proof containers, with tight-fitting covers, shall be provided for the temporary storage of rubbish, garbage and other refuse. 
(Prior code § 32-45) 
15.12.350 - Insect and rodent harborage prohibited. 
    The interior of every structure shall be kept free from insect, rodent and vermin infestation. 
(Prior code § 32-46) 
Article VI - Basic Facilities 

15.12.360 - Potable water supply required. 
    Every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming house shall be supplied with a potable water supply. There shall be adequate water supply and pressure at all installed hot- and cold-water outlets. 
(Prior code § 32-50) 
15.12.370 - Hot water-Connections, temperature required. 
    Every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming house shall have an adequate supply of hot water properly connected to plumbing fixtures requiring hot water. Adequate hot water is water with a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit available at all times. 
(Prior code § 32-51) 
15.12.380 - Plumbing fixtures required. 
    Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have the following plumbing fixtures: kitchen sink, toilet, bathtub or shower and lavatory. The toilet, bathtub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a separate, private room located within the dwelling unit. All fixtures shall be connected to the required hot- and cold-water supply lines. 
(Prior code § 32-52) 
15.12.390 - Required plumbing fixtures in rooming houses. 
    In every rooming house, the following minimum plumbing fixtures are required for each multiple of six sleeping rooms or fraction thereof: toilet, bathtub or shower and lavatory. Bathtubs, showers and lavatories shall be properly connected to both hot- and cold-water lines. All fixtures shall be so located as to be accessible to the occupant of each rooming unit, sharing the use of such facilities without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. Where sleeping accommodations are arranged as a dormitory, the same plumbing fixtures are required for each multiple of eight persons or fraction thereof. 
(Prior code § 32-53) 
15.12.400 - Heating facilities required. 
    Every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and rooming unit occupied during normal heating periods shall have heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms and bathrooms. 
(Prior code § 32-54) 
15.12.410 - Electrical service required. 
    Every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and rooming unit shall be provided with electrical service. 
(Prior code § 32-55) 
15.12.420 - Cooking facilities required. 
A.  No cooking shall be permitted in any unit of dwelling space unless there is provision for the following minimum cooking and sanitary facilities: 
1.  A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and drainboard of appropriate materials, connected to and having available at all times a supply of hot and cold water under sufficient pressure as required under N.J.A.C. 5:10-15. The kitchen sink shall be connected to a sanitary disposal or sewer system; 
2.  Cooking and preparation of food shall be undertaken only in areas designated therefor; 
3.  Means of natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation sufficient to remove promptly cooking odors to the exterior of the premises without first circulating them within the interior habitable space of the unit; 
4.  Place for storage of food free from infestation; 
5.  Facilities for refrigeration in good operating condition for protection of food from spoilage permitting maintenance of temperatures for storage above thirty-two (32) degrees and below fifty (50) degrees without regard to outside temperatures; 
6.  A cooking facility which, if electrical, is connected with safety to an electrical system of sufficient capacity, or if gas, connected by permanent fixtures and tubing to avoid leakage of gas. The use of gasoline stoves or other similar fuel-burning appliances using highly flammable liquids and the use of portable kerosene stoves or other similar fuel-burning portable appliances for cooking is prohibited; 
7.  Cabinets or drawers or other storage areas for utensils, dishes and other cooking and eating equipment; 
8.  Two (2) floor or wall electrical outlets for electrical appliances. 
(Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 3-22-2011; prior code § 32-56) 
Article VII - Installation and Maintenance of Facilities 

15.12.430 - Maintenance of plumbing fixtures. 
    Every water line, plumbing fixture and drain located in a structure used for human habitation shall be properly installed and connected in accordance with state law and applicable ordinances, and maintained and capable of performing the function for which it was designed. 
(Prior code § 32-60) 
15.12.440 - Maintenance of plumbing systems. 
    Every stack, waste and sewer line located in a structure used for human habitation, and every connecting sewer line, shall be installed in accordance with state law and applicable ordinances, and maintained as to function properly and not be a source of structural deterioration or a health hazard. 
(Prior code § 32-61) 
15.12.450 - Installation of heating equipment. 
A.  Every heating, cooling and water-heating device located in a structure used for human habitation shall be properly installed and connected in accordance with state law and applicable ordinances, and capable of performing the function for which it was designed. 
B.  All heating, cooking and water-heating equipment shall be rigidly and securely connected to a chimney or flue and rigidly and securely affixed to the floor or a suitable retaining device. Heating equipment burning liquid or gaseous fuels shall also be rigidly and securely connected to their supply lines. 
(Prior code § 32-62) 
15.12.460 - Maintenance and operation of heating equipment. 
A.  Every heating, cooking and water-heating device located in a structure used for human habitation shall be so maintained and operated as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a dwelling of four more units to annually service all heating units or systems therein and to make all repairs thereof. Such servicing and repairs shall be completed on or before September 15 of each calendar year. A certification shall be filed with the health officer of the department of health, welfare and housing no later than October 1 of each calendar year certifying that all repairs and servicing have been completed and by whom. Failure to file a certification by the date hereinabove cited shall be a prima-facie violation of the code and shall subject the violator thereof to the penalties set forth in the general penalty provision of this code. 
(Prior code § 32-63) 
15.12.470 - Storage of fuels. 
    All fuels stored on the premises for the operation of heat-producing equipment shall be stored in a safe manner. 
(Prior code § 32-64) 
15.12.480 - Maintenance of electrical wiring and devices. 
    Electrical wiring and devices located in a structure used for human habitation shall be so designed, installed and maintained as not be a potential source of ignition of combustible material or an electrical hazard, and in accordance with the Electrical Code of the city. 
(Prior code § 32-65) 
Article VIII - Occupancy 

15.12.490 - Required space in dwelling units. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the first occupant, at least one hundred (100) square feet for each of the next two occupants, and at least seventy-five (75) square feet of gross floor area for each occupant thereafter. 
(Prior code § 32-69) 
15.12.500 - Required space in sleeping rooms. 
    In every dwelling unit of two or more habitable rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least seventy-five (75) square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of fifty (50) feet per occupant thereof. Every room used for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum width of seven feet and a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of seven feet. 
(Prior code § 32-70) 
15.12.510 - Sleeping space in cellars prohibited-Exception. 
    No space in any cellar shall be used for sleeping purposes except when said cellar is occupied by the owner of the property. 
(Prior code § 32-71) 
15.12.520 - Required space in rooming units. 
    Rooms let to one or more persons shall contain a minimum gross floor area for sleeping purposes of ninety (90) square feet for a single occupant, and every such room occupied by more than one occupant shall contain a minimum gross floor area of seventy (70) square feet per occupant thereof. 
(Prior code § 32-72) 
15.12.530 - Use and occupancy of space. 
    At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the rooms for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(Prior code § 32-73) 
15.12.540 - Basement space prohibited as habitable room, dwelling unit. 
    No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
A.  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness. 
B.  The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required by Article IX of this chapter and is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area. 
C.  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under Article IX of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the housing inspector. 
D.  There are no pipes, ducts or other obstructions less than six feet six inches above the floor level. 
E.  All furnaces or other heating facilities are so located, insulated and separated from living areas by fireproof partitions or walls necessary pursuant to regulations of the fire director, so that the same do not constitute an undue hazard to the safety and health of the occupants. 
F.  There is a second means of egress conforming to the requirements of Section 15.12.270 of this chapter. 
G.  Basement space which shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit must conform to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances. 
(Prior code § 32-74) 
Article IX - Light and Ventilation 

15.12.550 - Required natural light in habitable rooms. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight, fifty (50) percent of which is openable, facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate area available for unobstructed light shall not be less than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the room. 
(Prior code § 32-78) 
15.12.560 - Required artificial light in habitable rooms. 
    All habitable rooms and bathrooms shall be provided with the means of electrical illumination as follows: In every kitchen, dining room, breakfast room, living room, parlor, library, den, sun-room, recreation room and bedroom, one receptacle outlet shall be provided for every twelve (12) linear feet or major fraction thereof of the total gross distance around the room as measured horizontally along the wall at the floor line. The receptacle outlets shall, insofar as practicable, be spaced equal distances apart. At least one receptacle of the grounding type shall be installed for the connection of laundry appliances. Receptacles installed in or on open porches, hallways, garages and the like, which may supply equipment to be used by persons standing on the ground, shall be of the grounding type. Receptacle outlets in the floor shall not be counted as part of the required number of receptacle outlets unless located close to the wall. Any usable wall space two feet or wider requires a receptacle. These required facilities shall be installed according to the requirements of the Electrical Code of the city. 
(Prior code § 32-79) 
15.12.570 - Required light in nonhabitable space. 
    In every common space, landing, stair, hall, cellar and basement located in a structure used for human habitation, light shall be equivalent to a minimum of five footcandles. 
(Prior code § 32-80) 
15.12.580 - Required light in public halls and stairways. 
    Every public hall and common stairway located in a structure used for human habitation, and which is used primarily for ingress and egress in connection with two or more dwelling units or rooming units, shall be supplied with lighting facilities controllable by the occupants of the structure and available at all times. 
(Prior code § 32-81) 
15.12.590 - Required light in garbage collection areas. 
    Every garbage collection area and all walks, steps and driveways leading thereto shall be supplied with lighting facilities so as to provide adequate lighting of said areas from dusk to dawn of each day and shall be constructed so as not to create a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 32-82) 
Article X - Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants 

15.12.600 - Sanitary maintenance of private space required. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit or premises thereof which he occupies or controls. 
(Prior code § 32-85) 
15.12.610 - Maintenance of plumbing equipment required. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the exercise of proper care and cleanliness in the use and operation of all plumbing fixtures, sanitary facilities, appliances and equipment therein. 
(Prior code § 32-86) 
15.12.620 - Regulations governing waste disposal. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of rubbish, garbage and other matter as provided in Sections 15.12.100 and 15.12.340. In a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, adequate rubbish and garbage containers shall be supplied by the owner. 
(Prior code § 32-87) 
15.12.630 - Extermination of rodents, vermin required. 
    Every occupant of a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any rodents, vermin or other pests therein or on the premises. When two or more dwelling units within a building are so infested, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to carry out the provisions of this chapter within such building, as cited above with respect to extermination. 
(Prior code § 32-88) 
15.12.640 - Sanitary maintenance of public space required. 
    Every owner of a building containing three or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(Prior code § 32-89) 
15.12.650 - Information required of owners. 
    Every owner who rents a dwelling unit shall inform the lessee of that dwelling unit, in writing, of the maximum allowable occupancy. 
(Prior code § 32-90) 
15.12.660 - Supplied heat-Supplied air conditioning-Times, temperatures required-Exceptions. 
A.  Every owner or operator of a building who permits to be occupied any dwelling unit or rooming unit therein under an agreement, express or implied, to supply heat, shall furnish heat adequate to maintain therein from September 15 to May 15 of the following year, a minimum inside temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms and toilet rooms or compartments. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the failure to maintain minimum requirements is caused by a general shortage of fuel, negligent or malicious act of the occupant, necessary repairs or alterations, or any cause beyond the control of the owner or occupant. 
B.  Every owner or operator of a building who permits to be occupied any dwelling unit or rooming unit therein under a lease agreement written or oral to provide air conditioning, shall furnish air conditioning adequate to maintain therein from May 16th to September 14th a maximum inside temperature of seventy-five (75) degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms or toilet rooms or compartments. In meeting the aforesaid temperature requirements, the owner shall not be responsible for cooling loss or temperature gain by the occupants leaving windows or doors open to the exterior of the building or willfully hindering the systems or by an external source not within the owner's control. 
(Prior code § 32-91) 
15.12.670 - Discontinuance of utilities prohibited-Exceptions. 
    No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required by the provisions of this code, to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit, except for necessary repairs, alterations or emergencies. 
(Prior code § 32-92) 
15.12.680 - Requirements for occupancy of vacant units. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or permit to be occupied by another, any vacant dwelling or dwelling unit, unless or until it is in good repair, clean, sanitary, in habitable conditions and in full compliance with all the provisions of this code and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 32-93) 
15.12.690 - Building security facilities. 
A.  Every multiple dwelling shall at every point of normal ingress leading into the building be equipped with a door with an operative lock. 
B.  Every exterior entrance door leading to interior common areas which provide access to two (2) or more interior dwelling unit entrance doors shall be a self-closing and self-locking door, shall be kept closed at all times except when in actual use and shall be equipped with a viewing device if it would not otherwise be possible to see a person seeking to enter without opening the door. In addition, the main entrance door shall be either attended at all times by a doorman or equipped with an electrically operated buzzer and latch-release system, individual exterior door bells connected to each dwelling unit, or an approved alternative security and entrance system. However, no building shall be equipped with an electrically operated latch-release system if such building is not also equipped with an intercommunication system allowing effective communication between a person in any dwelling unit and a person standing outside of the main entrance door. 
C.  Building entrance doors and other exterior exit doors shall be equipped with heavy-duty lock sets. 
D.  Latch sets shall have stopwork in the inside cylinder controlled by a master key only. 
E.  Outside cylinders of main entrance door locks shall be operated by the tenant's key which shall not be keyed to also open the tenant's apartment entrance door. 
F.  Main entrance door locks shall be kept in the locked position and shall be freely operable from the inside at all times. 
G.  Other exterior exit doors shall be locked to prevent entry and shall be freely operable from the inside at all times. 
H.  Doors to dwelling units shall be equipped with a heavy-duty lock set equipped with a chain door guard so as to permit partial opening of the door. 
I.  Doors to dwelling units shall be equipped with a viewing device located so as to enable a person on the inside of the entrance door to view a person immediately outside. 
J.  All openable windows shall be equipped with sash locks designed to be openable from the inside only. 
K.  The owner shall be responsible at all times for the installation, operation and maintenance of all such security or locking devices heretofore described and conforming with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 3-22-2011; prior code § 32-94) 
15.12.700 - Maintenance of refrigeration unit supplied by owner. 
    Every owner who rents a dwelling unit and supplies a refrigeration unit must maintain such refrigeration unit in good operating condition, for protection of food from spoilage by maintaining temperature for storage above thirty-two (32) degrees and below fifty (50) degrees without regard to outside temperature and for the freezer compartment of said refrigeration unit temperatures at thirty-two (32) degrees or less without regard to outside temperature. 
(Prior code § 32-95) 
Article XI - Enforcement 

15.12.710 - Housing surveys authorized. 
    The code enforcement agency shall be authorized to make surveys in any area of the city to determine the general condition of structures used for human habitation, and the extent of deterioration, lack of facilities, maintenance, unsafe and insanitary conditions, the extent of overcrowding, land use and other relevant factors. 
(Prior code § 32-97) 
15.12.720 - Inspection of dwellings authorized. 
    The head of the code enforcement agency shall be authorized to make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises in order to safeguard the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. The head of the code enforcement agency or his designated representatives shall be authorized to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises at any reasonable time during business hours, or at such other time as may be necessary in an emergency, for the purpose of performing his or her duties under this chapter. Inspections herein authorized shall be limited to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-98) 
15.12.730 - Access to dwellings provided. 
    The owner, operator, agent or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises shall give personnel authorized in Section 15.12.729 access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit and premises for the purpose of such inspections at any reasonable time during business hours, or at such other time as may be necessary in an emergency. 
(Prior code § 32-99) 
15.12.740 - Certificate of necessity. 
A.  Who May Apply. Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply with this code without having right of access to the building or premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or her or under his or her control, and where right of access has been refused such owner, operator or occupant, or where the owner or person responsible for granting such access cannot be found or located, then, upon the filing of an affidavit by such owner, operator or occupant with the director of the department of health, welfare and housing setting forth the facts and applying for a certificate of necessity, the director of the department of heath, welfare and housing shall serve written notice of a hearing on the application upon the applicant for such certificate and upon the owner or person responsible for granting such access. The notice of hearing shall state the matter to be considered at the hearing in accordance with the provisions for the service of complaints and orders contained in Section 15.12.780 of this chapter and N.J.R.S. 40:48-2.7, except that the director of the department of health, welfare and housing shall not be required to record or lodge a copy of such notice with the county recording officer of the county of Union. At least ten (10) days' notice of such hearing shall be given where the address of the owner or person responsible for granting such access is known. If such address is unknown or cannot be ascertained by the director of the department of health, welfare and housing in the exercise of reasonable diligence, at least thirty (30) days' notice thereof shall be given, calculated from the date of the first newspaper publication thereof. 
B.  Hearing. On the day fixed for the hearing, the director of the department of health, welfare and housing shall provide opportunity for the owner or person responsible for granting such access to state why such access should not be granted. 
C.  Issuance of Certificate-Conditions. If the director of the department of health, welfare and housing determines that such access is necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with this code, then the director of the department of health, welfare and housing shall issue a certificate of necessity granting and ordering such access and setting forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be necessary to protect such adjoining property, reasonable time limits during which such certificate shall operate, precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the director of the department of health, welfare and housing deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of the person seeking such access to secure such adjoining property owner against damage to persons or property arising out of such right of access. The amount set for the bond shall take into consideration the extent, nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement of the premises affected and the potential risk of damage thereto. Such bond, if required, shall be filed with the director of the department of health, welfare and housing. 
D.  Refusal to Comply with Certificate. Any refusal to comply with a certificate issued hereunder shall be a violation of this code; and in addition to the penalties provided hereunder, the director of the department of health, welfare and housing may, upon affidavit setting forth the facts, apply to the judge of the municipal court of the city for a warrant authorizing such access, and if the municipal court judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of such warrant permitting such access. 
(Prior code § 32-99) 
15.12.750 - Identification for inspectors provided. 
    Inspectors and authorized personnel of the code enforcement agency shall be supplied with official identification when entering any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises. 
(Prior code § 32-100) 
15.12.760 - Head of enforcement agency designated. 
    The head of the code enforcement agency shall be the director of health, welfare and housing, together with those officers, agents and employees delegated by the director. They are hereby appointed to exercise all the powers contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., and any amendments thereof or supplements thereto, as well as the additional powers, functions and duties set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-101) 
15.12.770 - Conditions, procedure leading to preliminary investigation-Basis for findings of unfitness. 
A.  Conditions, Procedure Leading to Preliminary Investigation. Whenever the director of health, welfare and housing determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or upon filing with him or her of a petition by at least five residents of the city charging such violation, the officer shall thereupon serve upon the owner of and parties in interest in such a building a notice stating the charges in respect to which such building is claimed to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, and setting a date for a hearing before the director of health, welfare and housing or his or her duly authorized agent not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the notice. The rules of evidence prevailing in the court shall not be controlling in hearings before the director. 
B.  Basis for Findings of Unfitness. 
1.  The director may determine that a building is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in the building which endanger or jeopardize the health or safety of those who occupy, inhabit or use said building or neighboring buildings or of persons in the vicinity of the premises. Such conditions shall include (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects in such buildings increasing the hazards of accidents, fire or other calamities; lack of adequate light or ventilation; lack of adequate sanitary facilities; unclean conditions; dilapidation, disrepair or structural defects. 
2.  In making such a determination, the director shall use the conditions listed below as building standards and he shall have sufficient reason to declare a building to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use when any one or more of such conditions shall be found to exist in it: 
a.  Buildings that lack or are deficient in one or more essential utilities, including electricity, potable water supply or public sewer. 
b.  Buildings that lack supplied heating facilities in working condition and capable of supplying heat herein as required by the applicable standards. 
c.  Buildings having any habitable or occupiable room or space, bathroom or water closet compartment without windows, skylights, glazed doors or other light-transmitting media opening directly to the outdoors, or without alternate methods or devices that will meet the equivalent minimum requirements for natural lighting and ventilation of rooms. 
d.  Buildings lacking the minimum number and types of means of egress specified in the applicable requirements. 
e.  Buildings where, by reason of infestation, insufficient or defective plumbing fixtures or plumbing system, or lack of maintenance of halls, floors, walls or other parts of the premises, conditions exist that are conducive to the contracting and spreading of disease. 
f.  Buildings that lack connections or have improper connections between their plumbing fixtures and the sanitary sewerage system of the city. 
g.  Buildings which do not have at least one flush toilet and one bathtub or shower in each dwelling unit. 
h.  Buildings in which the required flush toilet, bathtub or shower in one more dwelling units is unfit for use. 
i.  Buildings that do not have at least one private flush toilet and one lavatory basin per floor for the nonresidential tenants or occupants thereof; or buildings where the required fixtures are present but are unfit for use. 
j.  Buildings that do not have a permanently installed sink with running water and provisions for installation of a permanent gas or electric cooking stove in every dwelling unit. 
k.  Buildings lacking at least one safe and sound interior stairway leading from the basement or from any cellar or crawl space if the cellar or crawl space is used for meters and/or utility equipment, to the first floor and thence directly or indirectly to each and every floor above. 
l.  Buildings that have been damaged so by exposure, fire, vandalism, wind or other causes as to have become dangerous to the life, health or safety of those who occupy or use same or are in the vicinity of the premises. 
m.  Buildings that are so structurally defective there is a risk of collapse or of loose material falling and injuring persons or damaging property. 
n.  Buildings whose occupancy or use constitutes an unnecessary hazard to safety or health by reason of their inadequate original construction, the existence of one or more critical defects or so many intermediate defects as to require extensive repair or rebuilding, or a condition of continual dampness. 
o.  Buildings that, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) percent or more of damage, disrepair or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent of damage, disrepair or deterioration of nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
p.  Buildings whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
q.  Buildings that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the floors or roofs are overloaded or have insufficient strength to be safe for the purpose used. 
r.  Buildings that were not designed or constructed for human habitation and, by reason of this, their occupancy constitutes an unnecessary hazard to safety or health. 
s.  Buildings existing, occupied or used or constructed, altered or repaired in violation of any licensing, permit or variance requirement of the Building, Electrical, Fire Prevention, Health, Property Maintenance, Plumbing or Zoning Codes of this city. 
(Prior code § 32-102) 
15.12.780 - Hearing and determination-Placarding unfit buildings and units. 
A.  After the holding of a hearing, as prescribed in Section 15.12.770(B), if the director determines that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order: 
1.  Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the building vacated, boarded up and have all required exterior repairs or improvements made within the time set forth in the order. If the option is made by the owner to board up a building, after the building has been boarded up and made secure and safe, it must be completely renovated and made fit for human habitation or human use in cases of commercial buildings within six months or the building must be demolished at the owner's expense. Failure to renovate or demolish on behalf of the owner is sufficient reason to have the director of health, welfare and housing, or his designated agent, order the demolition of such building, with all fees and demolition costs to be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such charge was incurred. 
2.  If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the order, the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal and shall provide, if required by the director, a performance bond guaranteeing that the work will be done. 
B.  Placarding Unfit Buildings and Units. At the expiration of the time fixed in any order issued pursuant to this chapter, if the required work has not been done, the director shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place or places on the affected building a placard or placards bearing the following words: 
    "This building is unfit and its habitation or occupancy or use is prohibited and unlawful." 
    No person shall enter such building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. 
C.  Where the director finds that conditions on the premises constitute an immediate and substantial threat to the safety or health of occupants or persons in proximity of the premises, he may order and direct that the premises be vacated immediately, that placards be posted prohibiting occupancy thereof, that the premises be locked and that first story and basement or cellar doors and windows be barred or boarded so as to prevent entry. 
(Prior code § 32-103) 
15.12.790 - Compliance with order and removal of placards-Unfit buildings also public nuisances. 
A.  Compliance with Order and Removal of Placards. 
1.  Where an order is issued under Section 15.12.789(A), it shall be served on all persons affected thereby either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the director in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded with the registrar of the county of Union. 
2.  No building or dwelling unit that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use shall again be put to any use until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the director. The director shall remove such placard whenever the violations upon which the condemnation and placarding were based have been eliminated. 
B.  Unfit Buildings also Public Nuisances. All buildings and dwelling units condemned as unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use are declared to be public nuisances, and the director may take such further action under the criminal and civil laws of this state through any court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove or abate the nuisance. 
(Prior code § 32-104) 
15.12.800 - Repairs, alterations, improvements, demolition and removal of buildings by the director-Recovery of costs 
A.  Director Authorized to Remove Violations. If an owner of a building or structure fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or to vacate and close the building and repair the exterior, or to have such building or structure demolished and removed, the director may, in addition to any other penalty recoverable by law, enter upon the premises without the consent of the owner or occupant and cause or may contract for such building to be: 
1.  Repaired, altered or improved; 
2.  Vacated and closed and its exterior repaired; 
3.  Demolished and removed after advertisement and receipt of bids therefor. 
B.  Liens Covering Costs. 
1.  The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under this section of the ordinance determined in favor of the municipality shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such charge was incurred. 
2.  The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or of vacating, closing and repairing the exterior, or of removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such building, or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the director, he shall sell the materials of such building. The director shall credit against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, the director shall file a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the custodian of the records of tax liens of the city, and a copy thereof shall be forwarded forthwith to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the director, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within sixty (60) days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate. 
3.  Recoverable Costs. The amount of costs recoverable by the city under any provisions of this ordinance shall be certified by the director and shall bear interest on the unpaid part of the principal at the rate of interest for unpaid taxes and assessments until paid. 
4.  Wherever the term director of health, welfare and housing shall appear in any of the provisions of this section of the chapter, the term may be construed to include the superintendent of housing and inspections if the superintendent of housing and inspections is designated in writing by the director of health, welfare and housing to perform any of the duties authorized or required by any section of this article. 
(Prior code § 32-105) 
15.12.810 - Removal of placard prohibited-Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal of the placard referred to in Section 15.12.800 without the written consent of the director or authorized representative. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Prior code § 32-106) 
15.12.820 - Emergency powers authorized. 
    In addition to the foregoing provisions, in emergency cases where it reasonably appears that the building is in such condition as to render the same an immediate danger to the life or safety of any person or the safety of the adjoining property or properties, the director may forthwith enter upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the building to be made secure or demolished. It shall not be necessary under such circumstances to first give any notice to the owner or the parties in interest, nor shall it be necessary for the director to advertise for or receive bids for such emergency repair or demolition. Such repair or demolition shall become a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred, as provided in Section 15.12.800. 
(Prior code § 32-108) 
15.12.830 - Remedies of aggrieved persons. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the director under this chapter may, within sixty (60) days after the posting and service of such order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the director from carrying out the provisions of the order, and for any other appropriate relief in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 112, P.L. 1942: 40:48-2.3 et seq., as amended. 
(Prior code § 32-112) 
15.12.840 - Remedies to be exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this section shall be exclusive, and no persons affected by the order of the director shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the director, or designated representative, or because of noncompliance by any person with an order of the director. 
(Prior code § 32-113) 
15.12.850 - Additional powers of director. 
    In addition to the powers granted in this section to the director, he or she shall also have the following powers: 
A.  To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
B.  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Prior code § 32-114) 
15.12.860 - Certificate of occupancy required. 
    Before any structure for any use may be transferred, it shall be necessary for the purchaser to procure a certificate of occupancy from the division of housing and inspections. This certificate shall not be issued unless the building or structure conforms to all requirements of the building code, zoning ordinance and of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 32-115) 
Article XII - Rulemaking 

15.12.880 - Rules and regulations authorized. 
    The head of the code enforcement agency shall be the director of the department of health, welfare and housing, and is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement and interpretation of this chapter and to secure the intent thereof. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or of any other chapter of the city, nor shall they have the effect of waiving any provisions of this chapter or of any other chapter. The rules and regulations shall be on file and available as a matter of public record. 
(Prior code § 32-120) 
Article XIII - Administrative Liability 

15.12.890 - Individuals saved from liability-Municipal responsibility. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city, shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city, as a result of any act required or permitted in discharge of his or her duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Prior code § 32-122) 
Article XIV - Legal Officer 

15.12.900 - Powers, duties of legal officer. 
    The city attorney shall, upon complaint of the head of the code enforcement agency, or upon his or her own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enfold, abate, correct or remove such violation, and to take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law; any and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others. 
(Prior code § 32-124) 
Chapter 15.16 - CONSTRUCTION SITE BUILDING MATERIALS 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Obstructions prohibited-Exception. 
    No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, obstruct or encumber any street, avenue, highway or sidewalk, which has been opened, graded or regulated according to law, with any article or thing whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 126-30) 
15.16.020 - Building construction sites-Fence or bridge required-Specifications, fee. 
    Any person who shall pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) to the building inspector for a permit and to whom the building inspector may issue the same, and who desires to erect or alter any building or buildings, shall erect and maintain a suitable fence or bridge, constructed to the satisfaction of the building inspector. The bridge shall not exceed four feet in height above the sidewalk and eight feet in width, extending the whole length of the proposed building, the ramps leading to the same to rest upon the sidewalk of the adjoining premises. The fence shall not project beyond the building line more than four feet in width the entire length of the proposed building. 
(Prior code § 126-31) 
15.16.030 - Building materials in streets-Permit required. 
    The building inspector shall have the power to grant necessary permits to any person to occupy not to exceed one-third of the width of the thoroughfare with building material, provided that in the opinion of the building inspector the interest and convenience of the public will not suffer. At the time of placing such building material in the street, the permit so granted shall immediately be posted in some conspicuous place on or near the material and shall be kept there so as to be readily accessible for inspection by the public and director of public works. 
(Prior code § 126-32) 
15.16.040 - Obstruction of sidewalks, gutters prohibited. 
    Such permits granted by the building inspector shall provide that the permit is given and granted upon the express condition that the sidewalk and gutter shall, at all times during the existence of such permit, be kept clear and unobstructed and that all dirt, rubbish, snow and ice shall be promptly removed from time to time during the progress of such work by the person obtaining such permit and that all such permits may be revoked by the building inspector at his or her discretion. 
(Prior code § 126-33) 
15.16.050 - Deposit for removal required-Removal by building inspector authorized. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no permit shall be granted to any person unless the applicant for such permit shall at the time the permit is granted, deposit with the building inspector the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as a guaranty that such applicant, or the person will promptly comply with the conditions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and of any permit which may be so granted, including the prompt removal of all dirt and rubbish placed upon the street from time to time, and also for the prompt removal, after the expiration or the revocation of any such permit, of all building material placed upon any street or sidewalk thereunder. The building inspector is authorized and empowered to use so much of the moneys so deposited as may be required to effect the prompt removal of such dirt or rubbish as may from time to time be left upon the streets, sidewalks or gutters by the party making the deposit, and also for the purpose of removing any building material which may remain thereon after the expiration or the revocation of any permit under which such dirt, rubbish or material was so placed. In case any such cash deposit shall become impaired or exhausted by its use by the building inspector in the removal of dirt, rubbish or building material, the amount shall be made up forthwith by the permittee to the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) upon notice in writing from the building inspector, and in default thereof, permits theretofore issued to the person failing to comply with the requirements of such notice shall be revoked, and no permit shall be thereafter granted to such person until such deposit shall be replenished and made good to the extent of such required sum. Any person may, at any time, withdraw the deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), providing he or she shall hold no other unexpired permit and has fully complied with all the conditions of all other permits theretofore issued; otherwise, such person shall only be entitled to withdraw and be repaid as much of the deposit as may remain unexpended after the provisions of this section, relative to the use of the money for the removal of dirt, rubbish or building material, have been carried into effect. 
(Prior code § 126-34) 
15.16.060 - Building material in streets-Space restricted. 
    In placing building material in a street, avenue or highway, the material shall be so placed as not to occupy more than one-third of the width of the thoroughfare, and shall be kept well lighted at night for the protection of the traveling public. 
(Prior code § 126-35) 
15.16.070 - Regulations governing mixture of mortar, cement. 
    In no case shall building material be placed, nor shall mortar, cement or other materials be mixed, upon the pavement of any street or sidewalk, except under a permit issued by the building inspector, which shall contain a provision that such pavement shall be protected by first laying planks thereon and a watertight box for mixing mortar or other like material. The building inspector shall insert in each permit a clause requiring compliance with this provision. 
(Prior code § 126-36) 
15.16.080 - Removal of unauthorized material. 
    Whenever any wood, timber, stone, iron or other building material has been or shall be put or placed in or upon any street without a permit, the building inspector shall forthwith cause the same to be taken up and removed to the city yards, all expense for removal and storage to be paid by the person or persons, builder, firm or corporation having title to such material. 
(Prior code § 126-37) 
Chapter 15.20 - BUILDING NUMBERS 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Numbers required. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of every lot of land where there is a building to put up and maintain on the building or the fence in front of the building digital numbers at least three inches in height, the figures denoting the correct number of the lot. 
(Prior code § 59-1) 
15.20.020 - Verification. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer at all times, upon the request of the owner, to give the correct number of any lot. 
(Prior code § 59-2) 
15.20.030 - Placement authorized. 
    If the owner of any building shall neglect to cause the same to be so numbered, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to cause the correct number to be placed upon such building at the expense of the owner. 
(Prior code § 59-3) 
15.20.040 - Certificates of occupancy. 
    Upon transfer of title and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the provisions of this chapter shall be complied with. 
(Prior code § 59-4) 
Chapter 15.24 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Definitions. 
    The following terms as used or referred to in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. 
    "Building" means any building or structure or part thereof, whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    "Owner" means the holder or holders of the title in fee simple. 
    "Parties in interest" means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual possession thereof. 
    "Public authority" means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government of the city, county of Union or state of New Jersey relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the city. 
    "Public officer" means the "Board of Standards and Appeals of the City of Elizabeth" which was created pursuant to Article IV, Section 33 of the Building Code of the city, together with those officers, agents and employees delegated by the public officer to carry out its functions and powers. 
(Prior code § 138-1) 
15.24.020 - Legislative finding of fact. 
    It is found and declared that there exist in the city buildings which are so old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, and that the occupancy or use of such buildings for any purpose is inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the people of this city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such buildings. 
(Prior code § 138-2) 
15.24.030 - Statutory authority-Powers delegated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 40:48-2.3 et seq., and any amendments thereof or supplements thereto, the public officer as heretofore delegated is appointed to exercise all the powers contained in the foregoing statutes and this chapter. He or she shall serve as public officer without salary. 
(Prior code § 138-3) 
15.24.040 - Preliminary investigation. 
    Whenever it is found that there exists in the city any building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such building or buildings unsafe or insanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety, or otherwise inimical to the welfare, of the residents of this city, and in addition to the above, but not in limitation thereof, whenever it shall be found that a building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use because such building does not meet any of the minimum standards of all local ordinances, including the Building, Electrical and Fire Codes of the city, the public officer shall, upon filing with him or her of a petition by a public authority or by at least five residents of this city, charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or if it shall appear to the public officer (on his or her own motion) that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, for the reason above stated, the director shall make or cause to be made a preliminary investigation concerning the basis for such charges. 
(Prior code § 138-4) 
15.24.050 - Issuance of complaint-Notice of hearing. 
    If, after a preliminary investigation, it shall appear to the public officer that there is a basis for action to be taken, or if a preliminary investigation shall disclose to him or her a basis for charges that may be filed with him or her, he or she shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect. The complaint shall contain a description of the property affected, sufficiently definite in terms to identify it. The complaint shall also contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or designated agent at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the service of the complaint. 
(Prior code § 138-5) 
15.24.060 - Answer to complaint. 
    The owner and parties interested shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint with the public officer not less than three days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and to appear in person, by counsel or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
(Prior code § 138-6) 
15.24.070 - Rules of evidence. 
    The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(Prior code § 138-7) 
15.24.080 - Determination by public officer. 
    After such notice and hearing, the public officer may determine that the building which is the subject of the hearing is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that any or all of the conditions set forth in the foregoing Section 15.24.040 exists therein and that such conditions are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the city. 
(Prior code § 138-8) 
15.24.090 - Issuance of order to repair. 
    If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer shall determine that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use for any of the reasons set forth in the foregoing Section 15.24.040, he shall within ten (10) days from the date of said hearing state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall within ten (10) days cause to be served upon the owner of the buildings and the parties in interest a copy of the findings, and he or she shall also within said ten (10) days issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest an order: 
A.  Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the owner within such time as in the opinion of the public officer the need for and the extent of the needed repairs shall require, but not more than thirty (30) days from the date of the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the building vacated and closed within the time specified, provided that the building when vacated and closed will not then be dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of the occupants of the neighboring buildings or other residents of the city. The order shall set forth what repairs, alterations or improvements shall be made and the manner in which such repairs, alterations or improvements shall be carried out; and 
B.  If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and if the owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the order, and if the public officer shall also determine that the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises even if such building should be vacated and closed, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the building within such time as in the opinion of the public officer the need for such action shall require. The order shall set forth the manner in which such removal or demolition shall be carried out. 
(Prior code § 138-9) 
15.24.100 - Failure to comply-Powers of public officer. 
    If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words: 
    "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
    After a building has been so placarded and notice thereof given by the public officer to the occupants of such building, it shall then be the duty of such occupants, after having been so ordered by the public officer, to vacate the said building within such time as in the opinion of the public officer the health and safety of such occupants shall require such action. 
(Prior code § 138-10) 
15.24.110 - Removal of placard prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal of the placard referred to in Section 15.24.100 without the written consent of the public officer or authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 138-11) 
15.24.120 - Powers of removal, demolition. 
    If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or demolished, or he or she may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor. 
(Prior code § 138-12) 
15.24.130 - Emergency powers authorized. 
    In addition to the foregoing provisions, in emergency cases where it reasonably appears that the building is in such condition as to render the same an immediate danger to the life or safety of any person or the safety of the adjoining property or properties, the public officer may forthwith enter upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the building to be made secure or demolished. It shall not be necessary under such circumstances to first give any notice to the owner or the parties in interest, nor shall it be necessary for the public officer to advertise for or receive bids for such emergency repair or demolition. The cost of such repair or demolition shall become a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred, as provided in Section 15.24.140. 
(Prior code § 138-13) 
15.24.140 - Procedures in assessment of costs, liabilities. 
    The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceedings taken under this ordinance, determined in favor of the city, and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he or she shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sums derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the costs and the amounts so due shall be filed with the board of assessment and revision of taxes or other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. The amount so due shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected and at the same rate of interest. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court of New Jersey by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 138-14) 
15.24.150 - Recourse of owner. 
    Any owner or party in interest may, within sixty (60) days from date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate. 
(Prior code § 138-15) 
15.24.160 - Procedures for service of complaints-Publication of notice. 
    Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon said persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of the complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the register of Union County. 
(Prior code § 138-16) 
15.24.170 - Remedies of aggrieved persons. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer under this chapter may, within thirty (30) days after the posting and service of such order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and for any other appropriate relief in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 112, P.L. 1942, N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., as amended. 
(Prior code § 138-17) 
15.24.180 - Remedies to be exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this section shall be exclusive, and no persons affected by the order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer or designated representative, or because of noncompliance by any person with an order of the public officer. 
(Prior code § 138-18) 
15.24.190 - Additional powers of public officer. 
    In addition to the powers granted in this section to the public officer, he or she shall also have the following powers: 
A.  To investigate the building conditions in the city in order to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use. 
B.  To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
C.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, that such entrance shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
D.  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Prior code § 138-19) 
15.24.200 - Supplemental nature of chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provision of its charter or of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 138-20) 
15.24.210 - Rehabilitation, repair or renovation of property after a calamity-Duration. 
A.  Definition. "Calamity" or "calamitous event" means a great misfortune or disaster, including, but not limited to a flood, fire or an act of God, war or nature. 
B.  Within the discretion of the construction official as set forth in the Uniform Construction Code and/or the fire official as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, any property, building or residence that has been affected, destroyed, impaired or razed by a calamity, shall be required to be completely rehabilitated, repaired and/or renovated to the satisfaction of these officials, within a period of nine months from the date of the event. 
    In the event that the property has not been rehabilitated, repaired and/or renovated within a period of nine months, the proper city officials shall take any and all necessary action, including, but not limited to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for up to the first thirty (30) days and/or commencement of further remedial action as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, et seq., "The Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act." 
C.  An extension of time may be applied for and received, prior to the nine-month period elapsing, for good cause, from the construction official and/or the fire official. 
(Ord. 3893 §§ 1-3, 2007) 
Chapter 15.28 - TOURIST CAMPS AND TRAILERS 
Sections: 
Article I - Definitions and Terminology 

15.28.010 - Words and terms defined. 
    The words defined in this section shall have the meaning herein indicated for the purpose of this chapter, as follows: 
    "Trailer, camp trailer" or "house trailer" includes and means any vehicle used or intended for conveyance upon the public streets or highways, so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy of the vehicle as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, or for other occupancy or use, and capable of being transported either under its own power or by attachment to a motor vehicle or through other means of transportation. 
    "Tourist camp" means any site or tract of land occupied or used by one or more trailers, or available for such occupancy or use, with or without charge, and shall include any building, structure, tent, camp, cottage or enclosure used or intended for use as part of or in connection with such tourist camp. 
    The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards the effectuating of this chapter. 
    Personal pronouns mean either the singular or the plural, and the masculine, feminine or neuter gender shall be implied, whichever is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 135-1) 
Article II - Tourist Camps 

15.28.020 - License required-Application procedure-Inspection. 
    No person shall operate a tourist camp within the limits of the city without a license first secured from the central license bureau, for which written application shall be made by the owner, lessee or tenant, stating the location of the proposed camp and setting forth the available area and whether or not there are sanitary facilities for furnishing of water and for sewerage disposal. Upon application being made for issuance of a license, an investigation of the site and other data in connection with the application shall be made by the health officer, who shall report his findings to the license inspector, at least five days from the time of the filing of such application, and such report shall include the comment of the building inspector and plumbing inspector as to the sufficiency of the facilities at the proposed site. 
(Prior code § 135-2) 
15.28.030 - Fee-Duration of license. 
    A fee shall be paid to the city for each such license, graded according to the area of the tourist camp, at the rate of forty dollars ($40.00) for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of area, and an additional ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of area or fraction thereof. The fee in any case shall be not less than forty dollars ($40.00). The fee shall accompany the application and shall be returned if the license is not granted. Licenses shall be issued by the central license bureau upon direction of said license inspector. Each such license shall be effectual only up to and including the 31st day of December of the year in which it was issued, and shall then expire. 
(Prior code § 135-3) 
15.28.040 - Space required for trailers. 
    In each tourist camp there shall be reserved for every trailer camped therein a space of not less than twenty (20) feet wide by twenty-five (25) feet deep, or an area aggregating not less than five hundred (500) square feet. 
(Prior code § 135-4) 
15.28.050 - Specifications for parking of trailers. 
    Camp cars on trailers shall be arranged in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, which space shall have no obstructions and be accessible to a public street or alley, and no camp car or trailer shall be allowed to park within twenty-five (25) feet of the exterior boundaries of any tourist camp. No permit shall be granted for the installation or maintenance of a tourist camp which has no available space to accommodate at least twenty (20) trailers and automobiles. 
(Prior code § 135-5) 
15.28.060 - Sanitary facilities required. 
    In every tourist camp there shall be provided not less than one public toilet for each sex, and so indicated, for every five trailers or fraction thereof. In addition, there shall be one urinal for every ten (10) trailers. Provision shall also be made for washing, laundry and similar necessities on the part of the occupants of said camp. Plumbing construction shall be in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the city council of the city on the subject. 
(Prior code § 135-6) 
15.28.070 - Shower baths required. 
    There shall be provided in every tourist camp hereafter established at least one shower bath for each sex for every eight available trailer spaces in the tourist camp. 
(Prior code § 135-7) 
15.28.080 - Chemical toilets prohibited. 
    Chemical toilets or other similar fixtures are prohibited. 
(Prior code § 135-8) 
15.28.090 - Water supply required. 
    An adequate supply of clean water shall be supplied in each tourist camp, through faucets only. No dipping vessels or dipping cups shall be permitted or used. 
(Prior code § 135-9) 
15.28.100 - Sewer facilities required. 
    Each tourist camp shall possess adequate sewer facilities. 
(Prior code § 135-10) 
15.28.110 - Control of animals required. 
    No dog, cat or other animal shall be permitted to run at large in any tourist camp. 
(Prior code § 135-11) 
15.28.120 - Lighting facilities required. 
    Every tourist camp shall be provided with electric lighting for same at night, and outlets for trailer connections and all public water closets and bath units shall be provided with sufficient lighting facilities which shall be kept lighted during the time from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. 
(Prior code § 135-12) 
15.28.130 - Office, register required. 
    Every tourist camp shall have an office or place designated as such, with a sign thereon indicating it as the office, in which place shall be kept a register, and there shall be registered in such register the car license number of every trailer and automobile stopping at the camp, and the name, address, date of arrival and date of departure of the owner and each occupant. The permit must be publicly displayed. 
(Prior code § 135-13) 
15.28.140 - Orderly operation required. 
    The owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of a tourist camp shall see to it that said camp is conducted in a quiet, law-abiding manner so as not to occasion annoyance to neighbors, and also that it shall be conducted conformably with the provisions of this chapter; also the provisions of the division of health of the department of health, welfare and housing and of any municipal ordinance or regulation of the departments of the municipality having reference to the subject. 
(Prior code § 135-14) 
Article III - Trailers 

15.28.150 - Unlawful parking-Exceptions. 
    It is unlawful to park any trailer upon any of the public streets of the city, except for the time customarily needed for shopping or to pay any necessary call for a business or other proper purpose. 
(Prior code § 135-18) 
15.28.160 - Additional parking prohibition. 
    It is unlawful to park any trailer in any public street or thoroughfare in a place at which such parking would cause congestion or impede the normal flow of traffic or public use of the thoroughfare. 
(Prior code § 135-19) 
15.28.170 - Use of toilet facilities. 
    It is unlawful to make use of any of the toilet facilities in any trailer while within the limits of the city, and each such trailer while within the limits of said city shall have its toilet facilities, lavatories, basins and any other contrivances from which any liquid or excreta may flow, completely sealed while the trailer is in the city, except that such trailer while in tourist camp may be connected to permanent utilities installed in tourist camp and providing sewer, gas and water facilities. 
(Prior code § 135-20) 
15.28.180 - Use of tourist camp facilities required. 
    Whenever any trailer shall remain in the city at any tourist camp, its occupants shall make use of the water facilities and sanitary sewer facilities afforded by such tourist camp. 
(Prior code § 135-21) 
15.28.190 - Litter prohibited-Disposal of garbage, rubbish. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or dispose of any refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish or any other article from a trailer upon any of the streets of the city, except in receptacles especially provided for such purposes at the tourist camp at which the trailer is parked, and it shall be the duty of the licensee, manager or any other person in charge of such camp to provide such receptacles in sufficient amount, and they shall be kept closed except when in use, and shall be adequate for the purpose, to prevent leakage, seepage, blowing away of contents or the littering of the camp or any adjacent areas. The disposal of garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 135-22) 
15.28.200 - Sanitary maintenance required. 
    The occupants of trailers shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall, in use of the same, conform to all provisions of the division of health of the department of health, welfare and housing or any ordinance or regulation of the municipality or its departments that may pertain to the subject, so that trailers and tourist camps may be maintained in orderly manner, free from nuisance, infection or contagious disease. 
(Prior code § 135-23) 
15.28.210 - Maintenance within city limits restricted-Exception. 
    No trailer shall be permitted to remain within the limits of the city for a period or periods aggregating more than thirty (30) days during any one year. This provision shall not apply to trailers which are kept by the owners on their own or leased property solely for purposes of sale, display or storage, and not for sleeping or dwelling purposes. 
(Prior code § 135-24) 
15.28.220 - Rental by camp operators prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a tourist camp in the city for the purpose of renting or leasing any trailer or house trailer for living purposes for any period of time whatever. 
(Prior code § 135-25) 
Article IV - General Regulations and Limitations 

15.28.230 - Maintenance in licensed camps required-Exceptions. 
    It is unlawful to park, keep, house or maintain any trailer in or upon any street or in or upon any site, place or location in the city unless in a licensed tourist camp, except that parking for a brief time for shopping and other appropriate purposes may be permitted, pursuant to the provisions of this Section 15.28.150 of this chapter, and except also that this chapter shall not affect nor prohibit the keeping or storage of any trailer in the home premises of any owner, provided that such trailer is not used for living or sleeping purposes. 
(Prior code § 135-29) 
15.28.240 - Inspections authorized. 
    All trailers and tourist camps shall be subject to inspection by the health officer of the city, the building and plumbing inspectors and the police and fire departments, with a view to preservation of safe, sanitary and hygienic conditions, and observance of the ordinances and regulations of the municipality which may affect the premises. 
(Prior code § 135-30) 
15.28.250 - License revocation-Notice required-Hearing. 
    Any license may be revoked by the license inspector for violation of any of the conditions under which it is issued, or for violation of any of the ordinances of the city. Before any license is revoked, notice in writing shall be given the owner or person interested, setting forth the reasons for the proposed revocation and the time and place at which a hearing upon the complaint shall be held before the license inspector, such hearing to be within not more than five days from the time of the service of the notice. Such notice may be served personally or by leaving with a member of the family or at the residence of the owner or person interested in the conduct of the camp or in charge thereof, or if no such person can be found upon whom service can be made, then such notice can be served by posting the same upon the door of the office of the camp or by mailing it to the owner or person interested, addressed to the camp or the last known address. 
(Prior code § 135-31) 
Chapter 15.32 - PERMIT TO OPERATE A CONSTRUCTION CRANE 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    "Board" means the crane operators license advisory board established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3. 
    "Certification" means certification from the National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for Certifying Agencies. 
    "Commissioner" means the commissioner of labor. 
    "Construction crane" means a power-operated hoisting machine used in construction, demolition or excavation work that has a power-operated winch, load line and boom moving laterally by the rotation of the machine on a carrier and has a manufacturer-rated lifting capacity often tons or more. 
    "Crane operator" means an individual engaged in the operation of a crane. 
    "Owner" means the owner of the property/site where the crane is being operated. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 1, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.020 - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a construction crane within the city without having applied for and obtained a construction crane permit. In emergent situations, the construction official may waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator meets the balance of the requirements of this chapter. The permit will be maintained with the municipality as well as with the crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on the work site when requested. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 2, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.030 - Application for permit. 
    Application to operate a construction crane is made to the construction official on forms obtained from the construction department. The following information and documentation must be provided with the application in order to be granted a permit: 
A.  The names and addresses of the owners and operators of the crane. 
B.  The length, maximum height, lifting capacity and operating radius of the crane. 
C.  The proof of insurance coverage as required by section 15.32.060. 
D.  A copy of the operator(s) valid New Jersey Crane Operators License pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 12:121-1 et seq. 
E.  A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection for the crane being operated. 
F.  Proof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing program. 
G.  Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification course. 
H.  Location map showing the placement of the crane. 
I.  Proposed maintenance and protection of traffic plan (to be approved by the police department) if said crane will operate within, on or over a public right-of-way. 
J.  Proof of notification of the proposed crane operation to any adjacent property owner affected by the placement and/or operation of the crane within the radius of the fully extended boom, if applicable. 
K.  Any other information the construction official deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 3, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.040 - Issuance or denial of permit. 
    Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the construction official shall issue or deny the requested permit. If the application is denied, the reasons for the denial shall be furnished to the applicant in writing. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 4, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.050 - Application fee. 
    Application fee for a construction crane permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00). Permits are valid for a period of sixty (60) days and may be extended and/or renewed for an additional period of sixty (60) days provided that compliance with the requirements of this chapter continue to be met and the request is made prior to expiration of the current permit. Fee for an extended or renewal permit is fifty dollars ($50.00). Thereafter, the fee is the same as an original permit application. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 5, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.060 - Insurance requirements. 
    The applicant shall provide proof of general liability insurance policy coverage naming the city as an additional insured in the amount of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) and include an additional insured policy endorsement. The applicant shall also execute a hold harmless agreement indemnifying the city from any claim or loss arising from the use of the construction crane, in a form provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 6, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.070 - Safety requirements. 
A.  All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times by the owner and licensee. 
B.  If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order. 
C.  Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the board, commissioner, or municipality must be adhered to at all times. 
D.  Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month. Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, all blocks, shackles, sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master boom, controls and braking mechanisms. 
E.  A written, dated, and signed record of each such inspection shall be completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the municipality. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of said crane. 
F.  Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the first time on any job by a competent designated employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile crane, tower crane or derrick. 
G.  Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent designated persons. 
H.  Crane shall not be operated within, on, or over a public right-of-way or other publicly or privately owned property other than the owner of the crane or a person contracted for the use of such crane until such owner of the crane has applied for and obtained approval of a traffic control plan with the city's police department and an encroachment permit from the city's engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 7, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.080 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the construction official. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 8, 5-8-2018) 
15.32.090 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is a disorderly person and is liable for a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 5012 , § 9, 5-8-2018) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - SUBDIVISION OF LAND 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article I - Title 

16.04.010 - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as: "The Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Elizabeth." 
(Prior code § 129-1) 
Article II - Purpose 

16.04.020 - Legislative purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards to guide land subdivision in the city in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality. It is administered to insure the orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services. 
(Prior code § 129-2) 
Article III - Approving Agency 

16.04.030 - Approval by planning board. 
    The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by city council after favorable referral by the planning board in accordance with Section 14 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953. 
(Prior code § 129-3) 
Article IV - Definitions 

16.04.040 - Defined words and terms. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Circulation" means provision for the movement of people, goods, water, sewage or power by means of streets, highways, railways, waterways, airways, pipes, conduits or other means, and including facilities for transit, transportation and communication. 
    "Drainage right-of-way" means the lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes. 
    "Final plat" means the final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the planning board for consideration and referral to city council for final approval in accordance with these regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper county recording officer. 
    "Major subdivisions" means all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions. 
    "Master plan" means a composite of the mapped and written proposals recommending the physical development of the municipality which shall have been duly adopted by the planning board. 
    "Minor subdivision" means any subdivision containing not more than three lots fronting on an existing street, as defined in this section, not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities. 
    "Official map" means a map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953, or any prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks and playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon. 
    "Owner" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
    "Performance guaranty" means any security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the planning board or other approving body approves a plat, including performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements. 
    "Plat" means the map of a subdivision. 
    "Preliminary plat" means the preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the city clerk for planning board consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements of Article VI of this chapter. 
    "Sketch plat" means the sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements of Article VI of this chapter. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking area and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows: 
A.  "Arterial streets" means those which are used for fast or heavy traffic. 
B.  "Collector streets" means those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
C.  "Minor streets" means those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
D.  "Marginal access streets" means the streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
E.  "Alleys" means the minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    "Subdivider" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land for himself or herself or for another. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development; except that the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions, provided, however, that no new streets or roads are involved: division of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are three acres or larger in size, divisions of property by testamentary or interstate provisions, or division of property upon court order. "Subdivision" also includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided. 
    "Subdivision committee" means a committee of at least three planning board members appointed by the chairman of the board for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred on this committee by the board. 
(Prior code § 129-4) 
Article V - Procedure 

16.04.050 - Submission of sketch plat. 
A.  Submission. Any owner of land within the city shall, prior to subdividing or resubdividing land as defined in this chapter, submit to the secretary of the planning board at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting ten (10) copies of a sketch plat, in the form of a survey, of the proposed subdivision for purposes of classification and preliminary discussion. An application fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the plats for said application, which fee shall be paid by check made to the order of the city. 
B.  Approval of Minor Subdivision. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action of the subdivision committee, or, if no subdivision committee exists, by a majority action of the planning board, a notation to that effect will be made on the sketch plat, signed by the chairman of the planning board and the city clerk. No further approval shall be required. 
C.  Distribution of Plats. Before the secretary of the planning board returns any approved sketch plat to the subdivider, he or she shall furnish a copy of the plat to each of the following, retaining a copy for his or her files; 
1.  City clerk; 
2.  City engineer; 
3.  City inspector; 
4.  Tax assessor; and 
5.  County planning board, if any. 
D.  Filing. Either a deed description as usually contained in a deed, either by metes and bounds or by lot and block number as contained on a map already filed, or a plat map drawn in compliance with Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953, shall be filed by the subdivider with the county recording officer within ninety (90) days from the date of return of the approved sketch plat, provided there is a subdivision of more than three lots. 
E.  Classification of Major Subdivision. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, which will be returned to the subdivider for compliance with the procedure in Section 16.04.060 and Section 16.04.070 or this article. 
F.  Taxes, Assessments for Improvements, Minor and Major Subdivisions. As a condition of approval, it is required that the applicant submit satisfactory proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which any subdivision application is made. 
(Prior code § 129-5) 
16.04.060 - Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision for tentative approval. 
A.  Submission. At least ten (10) black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat, together with three (3) completed application forms, for preliminary approval shall be submitted to the city clerk two (2) weeks prior to the planning board meeting at which consideration is desired. At the time of filing, an application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid to the city clerk, to the order of the city treasurer. The city clerk shall immediately notify the secretary of the planning board upon receipt of the preliminary plat. 
B.  Notification. The subdivider shall notify by certified or registered mail at least five days prior to the hearing all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision as their names appear on the municipal tax record. Such notice shall state the time and place of hearing, a brief description of the subdivision and that a copy of the subdivision has been filed with the city clerk for public inspection. The subdivider shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, and submit an affidavit of publication to the planning board at the hearing. 
C.  Copies. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the city clerk, prior to the hearing, to the following persons for their review and consideration, retaining a copy for his or her files: 
1.  City engineer; 
2.  City inspector; 
3.  Health officer; 
4.  County planning board, if any; and 
5.  Secretary of the planning board. 
D.  Planning Board Action. The planning board shall act on the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days after submission to the city clerk, but in no case before the expiration of the twenty (20) day period within which the county planning board, if any, may submit a report on said subdivision. In all cases the recommendations of the county board shall be given careful consideration in the final decision of the local planning board. If the county board has approval authority pursuant to R.S. 40:27-12, its action shall be noted on the plat, and if disapproved, two copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If either the local planning board or county planning board disapproves a plat, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the action of the planning board within ninety (90) days of its submission. If approval is required by any other officer or public body, the same procedure as applies to submission and approval of the county planning board shall apply. 
E.  City Council Action. If the planning board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat and it shall be referred to the governing body for action. The governing body shall act within thirty (30) days. Its action shall be noted on the plat, signed by the president of city council, and be returned to the subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements. 
F.  Preliminary Approval Rights. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the subdivider the following rights for a three-year period from the date of approval: 
1.  That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. 
2.  That the subdivider may submit on or before the expiration date the whole or part or parts of said plat for final approval. 
G.  Aggrieved Persons. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the planning board, appeal in writing to the city council may be taken within ten (10) days after the date of the action of the planning board. A hearing thereon shall be had on at least ten (10) days' written notice by the aggrieved person to all parties in interest, who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the governing body may affirm or reverse the action of the planning board by a recorded vote of a majority of the total members thereof. The findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the governing body, and the applying party shall be given a copy. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 57, 8-24-2010; Prior code § 129-6) 
16.04.070 - Improvements or guaranties prior to final approval. 
    Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have installed the improvements required under Article VII of this chapter, or the planning board shall require the posting of adequate performance guaranties to assure the installation of the required improvements. 
(Prior code § 129-7) 
16.04.080 - Submission of final plat of major subdivision. 
A.  Submission. The final plat shall be submitted to the city clerk for forwarding to the planning board for final approval within three years from the date of preliminary approval. The city clerk shall immediately notify the secretary of the planning board upon receipt of a final plat, and the planning board shall act upon the final plat within forty-five (45) days after the date of submission for final approval to the city clerk. 
B.  Number of Copies. The original tracing, one translucent tracing-cloth copy, two cloth prints, six black-on-white prints and three copies of the application form for final approval shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning board at least five days prior to the date of a regular meeting of the planning board. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required by the planning board. 
C.  Statement by City Engineer. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the city engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one or both of the following: 
1.  Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of these regulations; or 
2.  A performance guaranty has been posted with the city clerk in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements. 
D.  County Planning Board Approval. Any plat which requires county planning board approval pursuant to R.S. 40:27-12 shall be forwarded to the county planning board, if any, for its action prior to final approval by city council. 
E.  City Council Action. If the planning board favorably refers a final plat to city council, the city council shall take action not later than the second regular meeting following the referral, noting its action on the plat, and the president of city council affixing his or her signature if said action is favorable. 
F.  Expiration of Time Limit. Failure of the planning board and city council to act within the allotted time or a mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable approval and the city clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect. 
G.  Aggrieved Persons. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the planning board, appeal in writing to city council may be taken within ten (10) days after the date of the action of the planning board. A hearing thereon shall be had on at least ten (10) days' written notice by the aggrieved person to all parties in interest, who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the governing body may affirm or reverse the action of the planning board by a recorded vote of a majority of the total members thereof. The findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the governing body, and the applying party shall be given a copy. 
H.  Distribution of Plats. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the following: 
1.  City clerk; 
2.  City engineer; 
3.  City inspector; 
4.  County planning board, if any; 
5.  Secretary of the planning board; and 
6.  Tax assessor. 
I.  Signing and Filing. The final plat, after final approval by city council, shall be filed by the subdivider with the county recording officer within ninety (90) days from the date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire unless extension thereof is granted in writing for one additional ninety-day period. 
J.  Approval Required. No final plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer unless it has been duly approved by city council and signed by the council president. 
(Prior code § 129-8) 
Article VI - Plat Details 

16.04.090 - Sketch plat. 
    The sketch plat shall be based on tax map information or some other similarly accurate base, at a scale [preferably not less than four hundred (400) feet to the inch] to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet, and shall show or include the following information: 
A.  The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the entire tract. 
B.  All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be subdivided and within two hundred (200) feet. 
C.  The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records. 
D.  The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers. 
E.  All streets or roads and streams within five hundred (500) feet of the subdivision. 
(Prior code § 129-11) 
16.04.100 - Preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. Preliminary plats shall be designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to surrounding areas. 
B.  The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot numbers, date, reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses. 
1.  Name and address of recorded owner or owners; 
2.  Name and address of the subdivider; and 
3.  Name and address of person who prepared map. 
C.  Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to nearest tenth of an acre. 
D.  Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative cross sections and centerline profiles for all proposed new streets. 
E.  The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any natural features such as wooded areas and rock formations. 
F.  Plans and profiles of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas and electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat. Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the established requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations shall not be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. 
G.  A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
(Prior code § 129-12) 
16.04.110 - Final plat. 
    The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet and in compliance with all the provisions of Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following: 
A.  Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic scale and reference meridian. 
B.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves. 
C.  The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than residential shall be noted. 
D.  Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be numbered consecutively beginning with number one. 
E.  Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites. 
F.  Location and description of all monuments. 
G.  Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land. 
H.  Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of plat. 
I.  Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the owner has given consent under an option agreement. 
J.  When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat. 
K.  Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the city engineer, may be required to accompany the final plat. 
L.  Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging ten (10) percent or greater, and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope. 
M.  Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(Prior code § 129-13) 
Article VII - Improvements 

16.04.120 - Improvements required-Specifications. 
    Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the following: 
A.  Streets. 
B.  Street signs. 
C.  Curbs and/or gutters. 
D.  Sidewalks. 
E.  Streetlighting. 
F.  Shade Trees. To be located on the street line so as not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks. 
G.  Topsoil Protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
H.  Monuments. To be of the size and shape required by Section 4 of Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953, and shall be placed in accordance with the statutes. 
I.  Water Mains, Culverts, Storm Sewers and Sanitary Sewers. All such installations shall be properly connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future development. 
(Prior code § 129-16) 
16.04.130 - Inspection and approval required. 
    All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved. 
(Prior code § 129-17) 
16.04.140 - Certification by planning board, city engineer-Performance guaranty. 
A.  No final plat shall be approved by the planning board until the completion of all such required improvements has been certified to the planning board by the city engineer, unless the subdivision owner shall have filed with the municipality a performance guaranty sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the city engineer, and assuring the installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date. Such performance guaranty may be in the form of a performance bond, which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved by city council; a certified check, returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any other type of surety approved by the municipal attorney. 
B.  The performance guaranty shall be approved by the municipal attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the planning board, but in no case for a term of more than three years. However, with the consent of the owner and the surety, if there be one, city council may, by resolution, extend the term of such performance guaranty for an additional period not to exceed three years. The amount of the performance guaranty may be reduced by city council, by resolution, when portions of the required improvements have been installed. 
C.  If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of the improvements not installed; and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the municipality shall install such improvements. 
(Prior code § 129-18) 
16.04.150 - Installation costs-Deposit required. 
    All improvements (except electric, gas and water lines) shall be installed under the supervision and inspection of the city engineer, the cost thereof to be borne by the developer. Such costs shall be estimated at five percent of the total cost of the improvement, and such amount in the form of cash or certified check, to the order of the city treasurer, shall be sent to the city engineer for deposit with the city treasurer before commencement of any construction. If the deposit shall be insufficient, any additional inspection costs shall be paid by the developer before the improvement is accepted by the city. Any balance from the deposit, after inspection costs have been deducted therefrom, shall be refunded to the developer. Upon completion of all improvements and prior to acceptance thereof by the municipality, the subdivider shall post a one-year maintenance bond (and deed to convey all streets and utilities and easements, same to contain metes-and-bounds description) in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 129-19) 
Article VIII - Design Standards 

16.04.160 - Compliance required. 
    The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof. 
(Prior code § 129-22) 
16.04.170 - General provisions. 
    The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage good development patterns within the municipality. Where either or both an official map or master plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on an officially adopted master plan or official map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where no master plan or official map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953, and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the following design standards. 
(Prior code § 129-23) 
16.04.180 - Streets. 
A.  The arrangement of streets not shown on the master plan or official map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets. 
B.  Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic. 
C.  Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the planning board may determine appropriate. 
D.  The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than the following: 
1.  Arterial streets, eighty (80) feet. 
2.  Collector streets, sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Minor streets, fifty (50) feet. 
4.  Marginal access streets, forty (40) feet. 
5.  The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily and commercial development shall be determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment. 
E.  No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed with city council under conditions approved by the planning board. 
F.  Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths as shown on the master plan or official map or the street width requirements of this ordinance shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated. 
G.  Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed four percent. Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten (10) percent. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than one-half of one percent. 
H.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and in no case shall be less than sixty (60) degrees. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
I.  Street jogs with center-line offset of less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be prohibited. 
J.  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
K.  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10) degrees and more than forty-five (45) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three hundred (300) feet for arterial and collector streets. 
L.  All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance. 
M.  Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties. 
N.  No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. 
(Prior code § 129-24) 
16.04.190 - Blocks. 
A.  Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
B.  In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required in locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway shall be ten (10) feet wide and be straight from street to street. 
C.  For commercial or group-housing use, block size shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use. 
(Prior code § 129-25) 
16.04.200 - Lots. 
A.  Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets. 
C.  Each lot must front upon an approved street at least fifty (50) feet in width, except lots fronting on streets described in Section 16.04.180(D)(4) and (5) of this article. 
D.  Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line and all setbacks shall be measured from such line. 
E.  Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the city council may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots. 
(Prior code § 129-26) 
16.04.210 - Public-use and service areas. 
A.  In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and located in consultation with the companies or municipal departments concerned. 
B.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or street, there shall be provided a storm-water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. 
C.  Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features. 
(Prior code § 129-27) 
Article IX - Waiver 

16.04.220 - Waiver of requirements authorized. 
    In any case in which a subdivision shows no new street or streets or is of such character that no new street or streets will be laid in the course of its development or are or will be required to afford proper ingress and egress to any lot or lots shown thereon, city council may, by resolution, expressly waive the requirements of approval of such subdivision, and in such event no approval of such subdivision shall be required. 
(Prior code § 129-30) 
16.04.230 - Procedure and notation. 
    Notation of these facts shall be endorsed upon the proposed subdivision which shall be represented in the form of a sketch plat, and the signature of the president of city council shall be affixed thereon. 
(Prior code § 129-31) 
16.04.240 - Distribution of plats. 
    Copies of the proposed subdivision in the form of a sketch plat shall be filed by the city clerk with the following: 
A.  City engineer; 
B.  City inspector; 
C.  Secretary of the planning board; 
D.  County planning board, if any; and 
E.  Tax assessor. 
(Prior code § 129-32) 
Article X - Penalty 

16.04.250 - Violations and penalties. 
    If, before favorable referral and final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the planning board and city council are required to act, such person shall be subject to Section 1.12.010, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Prior code § 129-34) 
16.04.260 - Provision for institution of civil action. 
    In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet requirements for a building permit under Section 3 of the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953), the city may institute and maintain a civil action: 
A.  For injunctive relief. 
B.  To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953, but only if the city has a planning board or a committee thereof with power to act and which: 
1.  Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis. 
2.  Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953. 
(Prior code § 129-35) 
16.04.270 - Regulations governing civil actions. 
    In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his or her assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title-closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land, or within six years if unrecorded. 
(Prior code § 129-36) 
Article XI - Administration 

16.04.280 - Variances authorized. 
    If the subdivider or agent can clearly demonstrate that because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these rules, regulations and standards is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the governing body may permit such variance or variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 129-39) 
Title 17 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Title. 
    This title shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development Control Ordinance of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey." 
(Prior code § 40-1) 
17.04.020 - Purposes. 
    There is ordained by the city council for the city, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, a land development control ordinance codified in this title for the following purposes: 
A.  To provide for the appropriate design, location and nature of the uses or development of all lands in this city, in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
B.  To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters. 
C.  To provide adequate light, air and open space. 
D.  To ensure that the development of the city does not conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the state as a whole. 
E.  To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, the city and the region and preservation of the environment. 
F.  To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the coordination of public development with land use policies. 
G.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all citizens. 
H.  To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight. 
I.  To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and good civic design and arrangements. 
J.  To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of land. 
K.  To encourage planning of developments which incorporate the best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular site. 
L.  To encourage senior citizen community housing construction consistent with provisions permitting other residential uses of a similar density in the same zoning district. 
M.  To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and activities shaping land development with a view to lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land. 
(Prior code § 40-2) 
17.04.030 - Interpretation of provisions-Definitions. 
A.  In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this title imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height or bulk of a building or requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this title shall apply. 
B.  Construal and Usage. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "used" includes the word "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional; and the word "abut" includes the words "directly across from." 
C.  Terms Defined. As used in this title the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Accessory use or structure" means a use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building. 
    "Administrative officer" shall be the director of the department of construction, who shall be the chief zoning administrator of the city. 
    "Alley" means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    "Amusement games or entertainment machines or devices" mean such games, machines or devices as defined in Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
    "Amusement machine complex" means a special grouping of games, machines or devices as defined in Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
    "Applicant" means a developer submitting an application for development. 
    "Application for development" means the application form and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or 27 of P.L. 1975, c.291. 
    "Approval authority" means the planning board or the board of adjustment pursuant to Section 17.28.110 of this title. 
    "Automobile or trailer sales area" means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
    "Automobile service station" means a building or place of business where gasoline is supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade at retail. 
    "Basement" means a partially subterranean story of a building connected with an interior passageway. 
    "Bedroom density" means the number of bedrooms per gross acre of residential land including streets and easements. 
    "Billboard" means a sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted at a location other than the premises on which the billboard is located. 
    "Board of adjustment" means the board established pursuant to Section 56 of P.L. 1975, c.192. 
    "Buffer" means an unoccupied area, located within the lot perimeter, which is required by this title. 
    "Building" means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except as regards minimum side yard requirements. 
    "Building inspector" means any city official or designee charged with inspection or enforcement duties under the various construction or land development codes. 
    "Building, principal" means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the zone lot on which it is located. 
    "Capital improvement" means a governmental acquisition of real property or major construction project. 
    "Cellar" means a subterranean room not connected to the interior of a building. 
    "Child care" means the provision of supervisory and/or educational services to two or more unrelated children which is not subject to the compulsory education requirements of the state. 
    "Circulation" means systems, structures and physical improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as street, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points. 
    "City" means the city of Elizabeth. 
    "City engineer" means the appointed municipal engineer or a consultant reviewing engineering drawings. 
    "City planner" means an appointed city planner or a consultant reviewing site plans. 
    "Commercial vehicle" means any vehicle not classified as a private passenger vehicle. 
    "Conditional use" means a use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in Schedule III of Chapter 17.36, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the planning board. 
    "County planning board" means the planning board of the county in which the land or development is located. 
    "Court" means any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more attached building walls. 
    "Days" means calendar days. 
    "Density' means the permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be developed. 
    "Developer" means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
    "Development" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure or land, or the extension of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this title. 
    "District or zone" means any portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements of various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title. 
    "Drainage" means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development and other means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
    "Drainage, right-of-way," see "public drainage-way." 
    "Dwelling" means any building used as the domicile of one or more persons. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a portion of a structure used for living purposes which is entirely separated from other portions of the structure by walls and floors which are not pierced except for access to the outside or to a common room or corridor. 
    "Educational use" means parochial and private, elementary and secondary schools duly licensed by the state of New Jersey, attendance at which is in sufficient compliance with the compulsory education requirements of the state. Summer day camps shall not be considered as educational uses or accessories to such uses. 
    "Erosion" means detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice and gravity. 
    "Essential service" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in condition therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service, by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
    "Family" means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    "Final approval" means the official action of the approving authority taken on a preliminary approved subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties. 
    "Floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of all buildings on a site excluding portions used for off-street parking, stairways, vertical shafts or with floor-to-ceiling height less than seven feet. 
    "Fly ash" means particles of gas-borne matter, not including process material, arising from the combustion of solid fuel, such as coal or wood. 
    "Garage, private" means a detached or attached accessory building used only for the storage of private passenger vehicles owned or rented. 
    "Garage, public" means any garage other than a private garage which is open to the public and used for the storage of motor vehicles. 
    "Garbage collection area" means that portion of the exterior property areas of premises, together with all walkways leading thereto, which are provided by every dwelling with three or more dwelling units for the storage of garbage and rubbish. 
    "Gas station" means the same as "automobile service station." 
    "Hotel" means a building designed for occupancy as the temporary residence of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    "Intersted party" means in a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the state of New Jersey; and in the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under this title or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this title or under any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this title. 
    "Land" includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface. 
    "Limited access highway" means a highway designed in such a manner as to provide no direct access to properties abutting its right-of-way and including all highways designated as "limited-access highways" by the planning board. 
    "Lot area" means the computed area contained within the lot lines. 
    "Lot or zone lot" means a piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this title, and having frontage on a public street. 
    "Lot. corner" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the "corner." 
    "Lot lines" means the property lines bounding the lot. 
1.  "Lot line, front" means the line separating the lot from a street. 
2.  "Lot line, rear" means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
3.  "Lot line, side" means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a "side-street lot line." 
4.  "Lot line, street or alley" means a lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. 
    "Lot of record or existing lot of record" means a piece or parcel of land which was duly recorded with the county recording officer prior to May 30, 1962. 
    "Lot width" means the distance between the two side lot lines measured at the required setback line. 
    "Maintenance guranty" means any security, other than cash, which may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by P.L. 1975, c.291. 
    "Master plan" means a composite of one or more written or graphic proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant to Section 19 of P.L. 1975 c.29l. 
    "Minor auto repair" means repair of automobiles not normally involving overnight storage or long-term repair, such as fender and body repair, suspension and chassis repair or transmission or motor rebuilding or overhaul. 
    "Minor subdivision" means a subdivision of land that does not involve the creation of more than two lots, any new streets or the extension of any off-tract improvement. 
    "Motels, motor courts and motor hotels" means a series of attached or semidetached dwelling structures, where each unit has convenient access to parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. The units, with the exception of the manager's or caretaker's, are designed to provide sleeping accommodations for automobile transients or overnight guests. 
    "Music machines or devices" means such machines or devices as defined in Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
    "Nonconforming lot" means a lot, the area, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment. 
    "Nonconforming structure" means a structure, the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment. 
    "Nonconforming use" means a use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment. 
    "Nursing home" means any premises licensed by the state of New Jersey to function as a nursing home. 
    "Official map"means a map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article V, P.L. 1975, c.291. 
    "Office building" means a building comprised of more than fifty (50) percent of its floor area as offices, as compared with offices which are permitted in the C-1 district and as compared with home occupations where professional offices are considered as a secondary or incidental use. 
    "Off-site" means located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is part) which is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way. 
    "Off-tract" means on the property which is the subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way. 
    "On-site" means located on the lot in question. 
    "On-tract" means on the property which is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way. 
    Owner. See "Developer." 
    "Parking area, commercial" means an open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
    "Parking area, aprivate" means an open area for the same uses as a private garage and regulated as a private garage. 
    "Party immediately concerned," for purposes of notice, means any applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under Section 7.1, P.L. 1975, c. 291. 
    "Performance guranty" means any security, which may be accepted by a municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not require more than ten (10) percent of the total "performance guaranty" in cash. 
    "Planned development" means an area to be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
    "Planned development groups" means a structure or group of structures designed to be maintained and operated as a unit in a single ownership or control by an individual, partnership, corporation or cooperative group and which has certain facilities in common, such as yards and open spaces, recreation areas, garages and parking areas. 
    "Planning board" means the planning board of the city of Elizabeth. 
    "Plat" means a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan. 
    "Preliminary approval" means the conferral of certain rights pursuant to Sections 34, 36 and 37 of P.L. 1975, c.291, prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant. 
    "Preliminary floor plans and elevations" means architectural drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to its site and immediate environs. 
    "Private garages" means accessory structure for use by private passenger vehicles operated by residents or owners of the primary structure. 
    "Private passenger vehicle" means a vehicle used for providing transportation for the owner or members of his family and so registered by the appropriate state motor vehicle agency. 
    "Private swimming pool" means any pool designed, used and maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his or her household and guests, including all equipment and appurtenances thereto, and located on property owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the owner of the swimming pool. "Private swimming pool" includes permanent pools either above surface or subsurface and also portable or temporary pools which exceed eighty (80) square feet in area and/or thirty-six (36) inches in depth at the deepest point. 
    "Professional office" means the office of a member of a recognized profession. When conducted in a residential district, a professional office shall be incidental to the residential use and shall be conducted by a member of the family occupying the residential building. Such uses shall include the office of doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists, ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, lawyers and such other similar professional occupations which may be so designated by the board of adjustment The issuance of a state or local license for regulation of any gainful occupation need not be deemed indicative of professional standing. 
    "Public drainageway" means the land reserved or dedicated for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion. 
    "Quorum" means the majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal agency. 
    "Recreation." 
1.  "Recreation, commercial" means recreation facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. 
2.  "Recreation, private, noncommercial" means clubs or recreation facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members of such nonprofit organization. 
    "Religious use"means a church, temple, synagogue, mosque or other similar place of worship. 
    "Residential street" means a street between two intersecting streets, upon which an R district abuts, or where fifty (50) percent or more of the abutting street frontage is in predominantly residential use. 
    "Restaurant without live entertainment" means an establishment serving food and liquid refreshment. The liquid refreshment shall not include wine, beer or other types of alcoholic beverages. 
    "Resubdivision" means the further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument. 
    "Rooming house" means a structure containing a guest room or rooms let to two or more persons. For the purpose of regulating density, provisions for each two guests shall be counted as a dwelling unit where more than two roomers occupy a structure. 
    "Row house" means a structure containing a number of dwelling units, each separated by vertical interior unpierced walls. 
    "Sedimentation" means the deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of erosion. 
    "Shelter, fallout" means any structure or part thereof constructed, erected, altered or enlarged for the purpose of furnishing protection from natural or man-made disasters. For the purposes of this title, a "fallout shelter" shall be considered as an accessory use. 
    "Sign" means a name, identification, description, display or illustration or any other visual display which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. However, a "sign" shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor any official traffic control device, nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group. A "sign" shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building, except for illuminated or animated signs within show windows. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a "sign." 
    "Sign, advertising" means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where the sign is located. 
    "Sign, business" means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
    "Sign, flashing" means a sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant in intensity and/or color at all times when such sign is in use. 
    "Sign, gross advertising area of" means the entire space within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
    "Site plan" means a development plan of one or more lots on which is shown: 
1.  The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways. 
2.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices. 
3.  Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans by the planning board adopted pursuant to Article VI of P.L. 1975, c.291. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    "Story, half" means a partial story directly under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any partial story shall not be used for residence purposes. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter; which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows: 
1.  "Arterial streets," those which are used for fast or heavy traffic. 
2.  "Collector streets," those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
3.  "Minor streets," those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
4.  "Marginal access streets," streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5.  "Alleys," minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    "Structural alterations" means any changes in the supporting members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    "Structure" means a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this ordinance if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the planning board, or division committee thereof appointed by the chairman, to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." 
    "Tract" means a designated parcel or area of land, including a lot, which is the subject of an application for development and which includes any contiguous portions of street rights-of-way in which the developer has property rights. 
    "Tutoring" means the teaching or instruction of academic or business subjects to not more than four students simultaneously. 
    "Variance" means the permission to depart from the literal requirements of the Zoning Article pursuant to Sections 47, 29.2b, 57c and 57d of P.L. 1975, c.291. 
    "Yard" means an area, other than a court, located within and adjacent to the lot perimeter, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted by this title. 
    "Zoning administrator" means the director of the department of planning and community development or his or her designee. 
    "Zoning map" means the zoning map or maps of the city, dated March 27, 1962, together with all amendments subsequently adopted. 
    "Zoning officer" means a city inspector empowered to make preliminary determinations regarding application of zone controls subject to review and approval of the zoning administrator. 
    "Zoning permit" means a document signed by the zoning administrator which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to Sections 47 and 57 of P.L. l975, c.29l. 
(Ord. No. 4434, §§ 1, 5, 10-22-2013; prior code § 40-3) 
17.04.040 - Administrative procedure. 
    The city council, planning board and zoning board of adjustment shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c.291, or this chapter for the administration of their functions, powers and duties and shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge a reasonable fee, as established by Chapter 17.52 of this title for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 40-4) 
17.04.050 - Scheduling of meetings by majority vote. 
    Every city agency shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by such agency. Regular meetings of the city agency shall be scheduled unless cancelled for lack of applications for development to process. The city agency may provide for special meetings at the call of the chairman or on request of any two of its members, which shall be held on notice to its members and the public public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act P.L. 1975, c.231, and agency regulations. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a majority of the members of the municipal agency being present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the municipal agency present at the meeting except as otherwise required by Sections 17.04.140(C), 17.12.070 and 17.16.020(A)(4) of this title. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve an application for development pursuant to the exceptional vote requirements of Sections 17.12.070 and 17.16.020(A)(4) shall be deemed an action denying the application. Nothing herein shall be constructed to contravene any statute providing for procedures for governing bodies. 
(Prior code § 40-5) 
17.04.060 - Public meetings and minutes. 
A.  All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act (P.L. 1975. c.231) and agency regulations. 
B.  Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of all persons appearing and addressing the city agency and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the city agency, the findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the secretary of the city agency. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee as established by Chapter 17.52 of this title for reproduction of the minutes for his or her use. 
(Prior code § 40-6) 
17.04.070 - Hearings. 
A.  The city agency shall hold a hearing on each application for development or adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan. 
B.  The agency shall make the rules governing such hearings. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the secretary of the city agency. The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents. 
C.  The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he or she may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c.38, shall apply. 
D.  The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses. 
E.  Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the chairman of the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. 
F.  The city agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means. The city agency shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording thereof on request to any interested party at his or her expense, which shall not exceed the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A: 11-15. Such request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by prepayment of the estimated fee. Such transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate. 
G.  Decision on Application. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to writing and shall include findings of facts and conclusions based thereon. 
1.  Reduction to writing shall be accomplished through: 
a.  A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the applicable time period for taking action on the application for development provided in Section 17.28.130; or 
b.  A resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the meeting at which action to grant or deny approval was taken memorializing such action. 
c.  Where the agency fails to adopt a resolution, any interested party may apply to Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time and the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the municipality. 
2.  The following members shall be eligible to vote on the resolution: 
a.  Where the action taken resulted from the failure of a motion to approve an application pursuant to Section 17.04.050, those members voting against the motion for approval shall be the members eligible to vote on the resolution. 
b.  In all other circumstances, only the members who voted for the action taken shall be eligible to vote on the resolution. 
3.  The following shall apply to adoption of the resolution: 
a.  The vote on a resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the agency and not to be an action of the agency. 
b.  The vote of a majority of those eligible members who are present at the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. 
c.  The date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings, and publications required. 
H.  A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the secretary of the city agency within ten (10) days of the date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his or her attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a fee as specified by Chapter 17.52 of this title. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the city agency in the office of the secretary of the city agency. The secretary of the city agency shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party for a fee as specified in Chapter 17.52 of this title and available for public inspection at his or her office during city business hours. 
I.  A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. Such publication shall be arranged by the secretary of the city agency, provided that the applicant may in any case provide for publication of the decision. The applicant shall pay a fee as designated by Chapter 17.52 for publication of such notice, unless the applicant submits proof acceptable to the secretary of the city agency within ten (10) days of the decision that he or she has provided for the required publication. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the decision, whether arranged by the city or the applicant. 
J.  A member of a municipal agency who was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such board member has available to him or her the transcript or recording of all of the hearing from which he or she was absent and certifies in writing to the board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such recording. 
(Prior code § 40-7) 
17.04.080 - Notice of hearing on development application or adoption of master plan. 
    Notices pursuant to Sections 17.04.090 and 17.04.100 of this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and, in the case of notices pursuant to Section 17.04.090 of this chapter, an identification of the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to tax account numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the city tax assessor's office and the location and times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available pursuant to Section 17.04.070(B) of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 40-8) 
17.04.090 - Notice of applications for development. 
    Notice pursuant to subsections A and B of this section shall be given by the applicant and shall be given ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
A.  Notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be given except for: 
1.  Applications for final approval pursuant to Section 17.28.050(H) of this title. 
2.  Applications which do not involve: 
a.  The creation of more than two lots: 
b.  Any new street; 
c.  Extension of any off-tract improvement; 
d.  An increase in parking by twenty (20) spaces or thirty-five (35) percent of the existing space, whichever is the greater; 
e.  A conditional use; or 
f.  Relief from Chapter 17.36 of this title. 
B.  Notice shall be given by the agency holding the hearing on the application for development in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  Notice shall be given by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to the following parties, where applicable. An affidavit of proof of service demonstrating compliance with this requirement shall be filed with the city agency holding the hearing on the application for development at least two days prior to the date of the hearing. 
1.  Owners of all real property located in the state and within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on each of the property owners as shown on the current tax duplicate of the municipality in which the property is located or his or her agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown on the current tax duplicate. 
a.  Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common elements or areas located within two hundred (200) feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation, without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas. 
b.  A list of the names and addresses of such owners of property located within the city shall be made and certified from the current tax duplicates. by the city assessor or a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) within seven days of a written request of an applicant. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list of owners of property in the city, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. 
2.  Clerks of adjoining municipalities within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such a municipality. 
3.  County planning board where the subject property is adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other county land or situated within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal boundary. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the county planning board. 
4.  Commissioner of transportation where the subject property is adjacent to a state highway. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the commissioner of transportation. 
5.  New Jersey Department of Community Affairs where the subject property exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or five hundred (500) dwelling units. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning and shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the city clerk pursuant to Section 17.04.070(B) of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 40-9) 
17.04.100 - Notice concerning master plan. 
    The planning board shall give: 
A.  Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan. Such notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
B.  Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoptions, revision or amendment of a master plan involving property situated within two hundred (200) feet of such adjoining municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of any hearing. 
C.  Notice by personal service or certified mail to the county planning board of: 
1.  All hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of the city master plan at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, and such notice shall include a copy of any proposed master plan or any revision or amendment thereto. 
2.  The adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan not more than thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment thereto. 
(Prior code § 40-10) 
17.04.110 - Effect of mailing notice. 
    Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to Sections 17.04.090 and 17.04.100 of this chapter shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Prior code § 40-11) 
17.04.120 - Notice of hearings on development regulations or capital improvement plan revisions. 
A.  Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of a development regulation involving property situated within two hundred (200) feet of such adjoining municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of any such hearing. 
B.  Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the county planning board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of any development regulation at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearings and the adoption, revision or amendment of the city capital improvement program or city official map not more than thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided for hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed development regulation, the municipal official map or the city capital program or any proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be. 
C.  Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Prior code § 40-12) 
17.04.130 - Filing of development regulations. 
    The city clerk shall file with the county planning board, as soon after passage as possible, all development regulations, including this title and any amendments or revisions thereto, and file and maintain for reasonably easy public inspection copies of said regulations in the office of the clerk. 
(Prior code § 40-13) 
17.04.150 - Conditional approvals. 
A.  In the event that a developer submits an application for development proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or any other party to protect the public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health or welfare, the approving authority shall process such application for development in accordance with this title, and, if such application for development complies with the requirements of this title, the approving authority shall approve such application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development. 
B.  In the event that development proposed by an application for development requires an approval by a governmental agency other than the approving authority, the approving authority shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency, provided that the approving authority shall make a decision on any application for development within the time period provided in this title or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the applicant unless the approving authority is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law. 
(Prior code § 40-15) 
17.04.160 - Certificates showing approval. 
A.  The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or which formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding August 1, 1976, may apply in writing to the zoning administrator for the issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the planning board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall make and issue such certificate within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefor. Such officer, shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his or her office. 
C.  Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of subdivision of land" and shall certify: 
1.  That there exists in the city a duly established planning board and that there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land adopted under the authority of the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c.29l. 
2.  Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in the application, has been approved by the planning board, and, if so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof, showing that the subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly existing subdivision. 
3.  Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7. 
D.  The zoning administrator shall be entitled to demand and receive for such certificate issued by him or her a reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so collected by the zoning administrator shall be paid by him or her to the city. 
(Prior code § 40-16) 
17.04.170 - Enforcement. 
    The city shall enforce this title through its zoning administrator. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city and its officers, agents or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(Prior code § 40-17) 
17.04.180 - Sale of land prior to subdivision approval. 
A.  If before final subdivision approval has been granted any person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which city approval is required by this title, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed on thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation. 
B.  In addition to the foregoing, the city may institute and maintain a civil action: 
1.  For injunctive relief; and 
2.  To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with Section 17.04.160 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 40-18) 
17.04.190 - Enforcement by building inspector. 
    The building inspector is given the duty, power and authority to enforce the provisions of this title. He or she shall examine all applications for permits and, with the approval of the zoning administrator, issue permits for the construction, alteration, enlargement and occupancy of all uses which are in accordance with the requirements of this title and all nonconforming uses existing at the time of passage of this title. The building inspector shall also record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents and make such reports to the board of adjustment and the planning board as may be required. 
(Prior code § 40-19) 
17.04.200 - Issuance of building permits for variance. 
    Building permits for a variance from the requirements of this title and for such conditional uses as may be enumerated in Chapter 17.36 of this title shall be issued only upon written order of the approving authority as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 40-20) 
17.04.210 - Complaints of violations. 
    Any person may file a complaint if there is any reason to believe a violation of this title exists. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the building inspector, who shall properly record such complaint and immediately investigate and report thereon to the zoning administrator. 
(Prior code § 40-29) 
17.04.220 - Procedures for abatement of violations. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used, in violation of this title or of any ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the governing body or, with its approval, the building inspector or other proper official, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use about such premises. 
(Prior code § 40-30) 
Chapter 17.08 - BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Building permits required. 
    To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part thereof, or alter the use of any land, subsequent to the adoption of this title, until a building permit has been issued by the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 40-21) 
17.08.015 - Construction permit-Duration of validity. 
A.  Any construction permit issued by the city of Elizabeth shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six months in the case of residential property or twelve (12) months in the case of commercial or mixed use property. 
    If upon the determination of the construction official, work that was authorized to commence under a valid construction permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months, the construction permit shall be revoked or suspended and reapplication shall be required. 
B.  Notwithstanding situations of work suspended or abandoned as set forth in subsection A of this section, an extension may be applied for and received from the construction official. An additional fee, as required by law, shall be charged accordingly for an extension. 
(Ord. 3892 §§ 1, 2, 2007) 
17.08.020 - Application for permits. 
    All such applications shall be made in duplicate and be accompanied by two sets of plans, drawn to the requirements contained in the building code of the city. 
(Prior code § 40-22) 
17.08.030 - Issuance of permits. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a building permit, provided that he or she has secured prior approval therefor from the zoning administrator and that he or she is satisfied that the structure, building, sign, parking area and the proposed use conform with all requirements of this chapter, and that all other reviews and actions, if any, called for in this title have been complied with and all necessary approvals secured therefor. 
B.  All building permits shall be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the premises affected and shall be protected from the weather, whenever construction work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor, workmen or other person shall perform any building operations of any kind unless a building permit covering such operation has been displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall they perform operations of any kind after notification of the revocation of such building permit. 
(Prior code § 40-23) 
17.08.040 - Denial of permits-Appeals. 
    When the building inspector is not satisfied that the applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this chapter, he or she shall refuse to issue a building permit and the applicant may appeal to the board of adjustment for a reversal of the inspector's decision. 
(Prior code § 40-24) 
17.08.050 - Revocation of permits. 
    If it shall appear, at any time, to the building inspector that the application or accompanying plan is in any respect false or misleading or that work is being done upon the premises differing materially from that called for in the applications filed with him or her under existing laws or ordinances, he or she may forthwith revoke the building permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to surrender it and all copies thereof to the building inspector. After the building permit has been revoked, the building inspector may, in his or her discretion, before issuing the new building permit, require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of the city with sufficient surety conditioned for compliance with this chapter and all laws and ordinances then in force, and in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building or structure if it does not so comply. 
(Prior code § 40-25) 
17.08.060 - Certificate of occupancy for new uses. 
A.  Compliance with Zoning Article Required. No building shall be occupied or used until such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building inspector. Such certificate shall be issued upon application by the owner, prospective occupant or purchaser only after the building inspector determines that the facts represented on the application are correct and that the building, structure or use is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Compliance with other Ordinances Required. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the building inspector receives written confirmation from the fire department and division of health that all applicable city codes and ordinances administered and enforced by the above-named departments have been complied with, as well as written approval for the issuance thereof by the zoning administrator. 
C.  Where a building is completed or sections are completed and safe for human occupancy, the building inspector, with the approval of the zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for that portion of the building which is safe for human habitation while work proceeds to bring the entire building into compliance with the city's codes. Such temporary certificate of occupancy may contain such restrictions as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of the building's occupants. 
(Prior code § 40-26) 
17.08.065 - Zoning permits. 
A.  A zoning permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of any use or the erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of any structure or building, confirming that such uses, structures, or building complies with the city zoning ordinance. 
B.  Zoning permits shall be required for the following buildings and uses: 
1.  Residential alterations to one- or two-family dwellings that do not result in any zoning bulk violation and which do not alter the footprint of the existing principal structure and accessory uses such as but not limited to driveways, patios, hardscaping, sidewalks, porches, fences, decks, sheds, pools (above ground and in-ground), garages, carports, etc. and any alterations to residential dwellings which change, enlarge or alter existing building footprint. 
2.  New residential one- and two-family dwellings. 
3.  New nonresidential structures. 
4.  Multi-family structures. 
5.  Alterations to multi-family, nonresidential structures: fences, retaining walls, accessory buildings, sheds, flat concrete, landscaping, signs, pools, pavers, decks, etc. 
6.  New or continued use/occupancy. 
C.  The zoning officer may revoke any zoning permit if it is determined that the actual conditions or construction does not adhere to the plans, specifications, terms and conditions or approvals upon which the construction permit was issued or there exist any violations of any applicable municipal or state regulations. 
D.  Approval is based on compiling with all conditions. Failure to comply with this section shall result in a fine and/or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4764 , § 1, 10-25-2016) 
17.08.070 - Certificate of occupancy for existing uses. 
A.  Upon written request from the owner, tenant, occupant or purchaser under contract, the building inspector, after inspection, and approval by the zoning administrator, shall issue an occupancy permit for a use legally existing at the time this title is made effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and whether any such existing use conforms with the provisions of this title. 
B.  No change or extension of use and no alterations shall be made in a nonconforming use or premises, without an occupancy permit having first been issued by the building inspector with the approval of the zoning administrator, stating that such change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
C.  Before any building or structure for any use may be transferred it shall be necessary for the purchaser to procure a certificate of occupancy from the division of building inspections after inspection by the building inspector and approval by the zoning administrator. This certificate shall not be issued unless the building or structure conforms to all requirements of the building code, the zoning article and the housing code. 
D.  Temporary Certificates of Occupancy. Where a structure is transferred and does not comply with the Uniform Construction Code or an approved site plan, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, provided that: 
1.  The building is structurally safe to occupy and the violations do not affect the health and safety of the occupants. 
2.  The building and electrical inspectors are satisfied that the site plan conditions or required repairs are of such a minor or noncritical nature that the health and safety of the occupants is not endangered for this brief period. 
3.  The site plan conditions or repairs can reasonably be completed within the authorized ninety (90) day period. 
4.  The owner furnishes an affidavit, duly sworn to, stating that he or she is aware of the site plan conditions or the required repairs and agrees to complete the same within ninety (90) days of the date of transfer. 
E.  Transfers without Certificates of Occupancy. 
1.  Where any building or structure to be transferred is in such a deteriorated condition that it cannot be occupied in accordance with the provisions of subsection D above, then the transfer of such property without a certificate of use and occupancy shall be permitted under the following conditions: 
a.  The building is demolished forthwith and an acceptable site plan is submitted, if required, for any new development on the site. 
b.  If the building is to be rehabilitated: 
i.  A notice shall be posted conspicuously on the front of the structure stating that the building is unfit for human habitation, 
ii.  An affidavit shall be furnished by the owner indicating that he or she is aware that the building may not be occupied until repairs are completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued, and that he or she agrees to submit an acceptable plan for the building's renovations within thirty (30) days of acquiring title, and 
iii.  The owner simultaneously makes application e for exemption from obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
2.  Where any transfer without a certificate of use and occupancy shall be authorized, the building inspector shall require the payment of a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), which may be credited toward the total fee for a certificate of occupancy after repairs are completed. 
F.  Fire protection systems. 
1.  Every building for single-family, two-family, three-family and four-family occupancy shall have installed therein and thereafter maintain an approved fire detection, products of combustion system. The detector shall be sensitive to any of the products of combustion except that detectors sensitive only to heat are not acceptable. Alarm signaling devices shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms when all intervening doors are closed. For the purpose of installation and maintenance, only the applicable sections of NFPA No. 74, Standard for the Installation, Maintenance and Use of a House Fire Warning System, shall be considered and accepted engineering practices. Installation of the fire detection system must have prior approval of the chief of the fire department of the city. 
2.  No residence shall be sold or rented and no structural change (repair of a value in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be made thereto unless and until the residence meets the requirements of this title. 
3.  The installation of any and all smoke detectors, battery-operated or hard-wire, shall be in accordance with tie approved method of the manufacturer and the fire prevention bureau as to the area to be installed and the number of detectors required. All such equipment and installations shall comply with regulations established by NFPA Standard No. 74 and the state Uniform Construction Code Act, where applicable. 
4.  It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner to maintain the operation of all smoke detectors after they have been inspected by the fire prevention bureau. 
(Prior code § 40-27) 
17.08.080 - Change of use. 
    No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy any building or structure thereafter erected or altered, the use of which shall be changed after the passage of this title without first procuring an occupancy permit, provided that an occupancy permit, once granted, shall continue in effect so long as there is no change of use, regardless of change in tenancy or occupancy. 
(Prior code § 40-28) 
17.08.090 - Building lot to abut street. 
    No permit for the erection of a building or structure shall be issued unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or structure. Such street shall have been duly placed on the official map or shall be an existing state, county or municipal street or highway; a street shown upon a plat approved by the planning board; or a street on a plat duly filed in the office of the county recording officer prior to the passage of this title or its predecessor or any prior law which required prior approval of plats by the governing body or other authorized body. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the city council, or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means of performance guaranty, in accordance with standards and specifications for road improvements approved by the city council, as adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare of the special circumstances of the particular street. 
(Prior code § 40-68) 
17.08.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Where the enforcement of Section 17.08.090 hereof would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances or the case do not require the building or structure to be related to a street, the board of adjustment may, upon application or appeal, vary the application of Section 17.08.090 hereof and direct the issuance of a permit subject to conditions that will provide adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will protect any future street layout shown on the official map or a general circulation plan element of the municipal master plan pursuant to Section 17.20.010(B)(4) of this title. 
B.  Chapter 17.28 of this title shall apply to applications or appeals pursuant to this section. 
(Prior code § 40-69) 
Chapter 17.12 - PLANNING BOARD 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Establishment. 
    A planning board is established pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291., Section 14. 
(Prior code § 40-36) 
17.12.020 - Membership. 
    The planning board shall consist of nine members. For convenience in designating the manner of appointment, the membership shall consist of and be divided into the following four classes: 
A.  Class I: the mayor or mayor's designee in the absence of the mayor. 
B.  Class II: one of the officials of the city appointed by the mayor. 
C.  Class III: a member of the city council to be appointed by it. 
D.  Class IV: six other citizens of the city to be appointed by the mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other city office. 
(Prior code § 40-37) 
17.12.030 - Terms of office-Removal-Citizen's advisory committee. 
A.  The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the mayor's official tenure or if the member is the mayor's designee in the absence of the mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor during the mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II or Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the environmental commission, if there is one in this municipality. The term of a Class II, Class IV member who is also a member of the environmental commission shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of his or her term of office as a member of the environmental commission, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the board of adjustment or board of education shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his or her Class IV term, whichever comes first. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after their appointment provided that the initial Class IV term of no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the Class IV term of each such member shall be four years, except as otherwise herein provided. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the planning board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term. 
B.  No member of the planning board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he or she requests one, may be removed by the city council for cause. 
C.  Citizens' Advisory Committee. The mayor may appoint a citizens' advisory committee composed of one or more persons to assist or collaborate with the planning board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action required by the board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
D.  Provision is made for two alternate members of the planning board. 
1.  Alternate members shall be appointed by the appointing authority for Class IV members and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members of nine member planning boards. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the mayor as "alternate no. 1" and "alternate no. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only. 
2.  No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause. 
3.  Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate no. 1 shall vote. 
(Prior code § 40-38) 
17.12.040 - Officers and employees. 
A.  The planning board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from the members of Class IV and shall select a secretary who may either be a member of the planning board or a municipal employee designated by it. 
B.  The planning board may employ or contract for, and fix the compensation of, legal counsel other than the municipal attorney, a licensed planning consultant, a licensed engineer and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the city council for its use. 
(Prior code § 40-39) 
17.12.050 - Powers. 
A.  The planning board shall follow the provisions of this title and shall accordingly exercise its power in regard to: 
1.  The master plan pursuant to Chapter 17.20 of this title. 
2.  Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of this title. 
3.  The official map pursuant to this title. 
4.  The zoning article, including conditional uses. 
5.  Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of this title. 
B.  The planning board may: 
1.  Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by state or federal law or regulations. 
2.  Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process. 
3.  Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the city council for the aid and assistance of the city council or other agencies or officers. 
(Prior code § 40-40) 
17.12.060 - Ancillary powers. 
A.  The planning board, when reviewing applications which require approval of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to Section 17.16.020(A)(4), shall have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the board of adjustment: 
1.  Variances pursuant to Section 17.16.020(A)(3). 
2.  Direction pursuant to Section 17.08.100 of this title for issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street. 
3.  Direction pursuant to this title issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, floor control basin or public area reserved pursuant to this title. 
B.  Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the application for development shall include reference to the request for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 40-41) 
17.12.070 - Referral powers. 
    Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, or revision or amendment thereto, the planning board shall make and transmit to the city council, within thirty-five (35) days after referral, a report including recommendations concerning the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment. The city council when considering the adoption of a development regulation or revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of the planning board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of the planning board to transmit its report within the thirty-five day (35) period provided herein shall relieve the city council from the requirements of this section in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment thereto referred to the planning board. 
(Prior code § 40-42) 
Chapter 17.16 - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Establishment, membership and organization. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.291, Section 56, a zoning board of adjustment, also known as the "board of adjustment," is established and shall consist of seven members. 
B.  The members of the board of adjustment shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of city council. The terms of the members first appointed under this title shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after their appointment, provided that present members may continue in office until the completion of their terms. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be four years. No member may hold any elective office or position under the city. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. A member may, after public hearing if he or she requests it, be removed by the city council for cause. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. 
C.  The board of adjustment shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its members and select a secretary who may or may not be a member of the board of adjustment or a municipal employee. 
D.  The board of adjustment may employ or contract for, and fix the compensation of, legal counsel other than the municipal attorney, a licensed planning consultant, a licensed engineer and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the city council for its use. 
E.  Alternate members may be appointed by the appointing authority to serve in the absence or disqualification of regular members and shall not exceed four in number. Alternate members shall serve for terms of two years. The terms of not more than two alternate members shall expire in any one year. Alternate members shall be designated "alternate no. 1," "alternate no. 2," "alternate no. 3," and "alternate no. 4" by the mayor. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate members shall vote in the order of their numeral designations commencing with alternate no. 1. 
(Ord. 3682 § 1, 2005; prior code § 40-46) 
17.16.020 - Powers granted by law. 
A.  The board of adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of Chapters 17.32 and 17.36 of this title. 
2.  To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the zoning map or article or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such board is authorized by this title to pass. 
3.  To grant, upon an application or an appeal, relief from regulations pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this title, except those departures enumerated in Section 17.16.020(A)(4), where: 
a.  The strict application of such regulation would result in particular and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of a property for any of the following reasons: 
i.  By reason or exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the specific piece of property; or 
ii.  By reasons of exceptional topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting the specific piece of property; or 
iii.  By reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing thereon; or 
b.  The purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq. would be advanced by a deviation from the zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment. 
4.  To grant, upon an application or an appeal, in particular cases and for special reasons, by affirmative vote of at least five members, a variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this title to permit the following: 
a.  A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal structure; 
b.  An expansion of a nonconforming use; 
c.  Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use; 
d.  An increase in the permitted floor area ratio; 
e.  An increase in the permitted density except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision. 
B.  No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning article. Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the planning board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the zoning board of adjustment shall act. 
(Prior code § 40-47) 
17.16.030 - Additional powers. 
    The zoning board of adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in Section 17.16.020 of this chapter, have power given by law to: 
A.  Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the official map. 
B.  Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building or structure not related to a street. 
(Prior code § 40-48) 
17.16.040 - Powers relating to subdivisions and site plans. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the power to review subdivisions and site plans pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of this title and conditional use applications pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this title whenever the board of adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a variance pursuant to Section 17.16.020(A)(4) of this chapter; and where such variance is granted, the board of adjustment shall have power to grant subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of this title and conditional use approval pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this title. 
(Prior code § 40-49) 
17.16.050 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any interested party aggrieved by any decision of the zoning administrator of the city based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance or official map. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days of filing a notice of appeal with the zoning administrator, specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  The board of adjustment shall render a decision not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of an appeal is taken from the decision of the zoning administrator. 
C.  Failure of the board to render a decision within such one hundred twenty (120) day period or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 40-50) 
17.16.060 - Modification on appeal. 
    The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Prior code § 40-51) 
17.16.070 - Stay of proceedings by appeal. 
    An appeal to the board of adjustment shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the zoning administrator from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Prior code § 40-52) 
Chapter 17.20 - MASTER PLAN 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Preparation-Contents-Modification. 
A.  The planning board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt or amend a master plan or component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands within the city in a manner which protects public health and safety and promotes the general welfare. 
B.  The master plan shall generally comprise a report or statement and land use and development proposals, with maps, diagrams and text, presenting, where appropriate, the following elements: 
1.  A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical, economic and social development of the city are based. 
2.  A land use plan element: 
a.  Taking into account the other master plan elements and natural conditions. including but not necessarily limited to topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage, floodplain areas, marshes and woodlands. 
b.  Showing the existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of development of land to be used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and other public and private purposes or combination of purposes. 
c.  Including a statement of the standards of population density and development intensity recommended for the city. 
d.  Showing the existing and proposed location of any airports and the boundaries of any airport hazard areas delineated pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazard Zoning Act. 
3.  A housing plan element, including but not limited to residential standards and proposals for the construction and improvement of new and existing housing. 
4.  A circulation plan element showing the location and types of facilities for all modes of transportation required for the efficient movement of people, goods and services in, about and through the city. 
5.  A utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing the future general location of water supply and distribution facilities, drainage and flood control facilities, sewage and waste treatment, solid waste disposal and provision for other related utilities. 
6.  A community facilities plan element showing the location and type of educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals, fire-houses, police stations and other related facilities, including their relation to the surrounding areas. 
7.  A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive and diverse system of areas and public sites for recreation. 
8.  A conservation plan element providing for the preservation, conservation, utilization and restoration of natural resources, including, to the extent appropriate, open space, water, forests, soil, marshes, wetlands, harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and other natural resources. 
9.  An energy conservation plan element which systematically analyzes the impact of each other component and element of the master plan on the present and future use of energy in the municipality, details specific measures contained in the other plan elements designed to reduce energy consumption and proposes other measures that the municipality may take to reduce energy consumption and to provide for the maximum utilization of renewable energy sources. 
10.  Appendices or separate reports containing the technical foundation for the master plan and its constituent elements. 
C.  The master plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging sequences. 
D.  The master plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the relationship of the proposed development of the city as developed in the master plan to: 
1.  The master plan of contiguous municipalities, 
2.  The master plans of Union County and Essex County, and 
3.  Any comprehensive guide plan pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1961, c.47. 
(Prior code § 40-58) 
17.20.020 - Periodic examination. 
A.  The city council shall, at least every six years, provide for a general reexamination of the master plan and this development ordinance by the planning board which shall prepare a report on the findings of such reexamination, a copy of which shall be sent to the county planning board and the municipal clerks of each adjoining municipality. The six-year period shall commence with the adoption or termination of the last general reexamination of such plan and regulations. The first such reexamination shall be completed within six years after August 1, 1976. 
B.  Such report shall state: 
1.  The major problems and objectives relating to land development in the city at the time of such adoption, last revision or reexamination, if any. 
2.  The extent to which such problems and objectives have been reduced or have increased subsequent to such date. 
3.  The extent to which there have been significant changes in the assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for such plan or regulations as last revised, with particular regard to the density and distribution of population and land uses, housing conditions, circulation of vehicles, pedestrians, and utilities, conservation of natural resources and change in federal, state, county and city policies and objectives. 
4.  The specific changes recommended for such plan or regulations, if any, including underlying objectives, policies and standards or whether a new plan or regulations should be prepared. 
(Prior code § 40-57) 
Chapter 17.24 - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Preparation of program. 
A.  The city council may authorize the planning board from time to time to prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects projected over a term of at least six years, and amendments thereto. Such program may encompass major projects being currently undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with federal, state, county and other public funds or under federal, state or county supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption by the city council, constitute the capital budget of the city as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4.43 et seq. The program shall classify projects in regard to the urgency and need for realization and shall recommend a time sequence for their implementation. The program may also contain the estimated cost of each project and indicate probable operating and maintenance costs and probable revenues, if any, as well as existing sources of funds or the need for additional sources of funds for the implementation and operation of each project. The program shall, as far as possible, be based on existing information in the possession of the departments and agencies of the city and shall take into account public facility needs indicated by the prospective development shown in the master plan of the city or as permitted by other municipal land use controls. In preparing the program, the planning board shall confer, in a manner deemed appropriate by the board, with the mayor, the chief fiscal officer, other municipal officials and agencies and the board of education. Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement of persons and establishments caused by each recommended project. 
B.  In addition to any of the requirements in subsection A of this section, whenever the planning board is authorized and directed to prepare a capital improvements program, every department, authority or agency shall, upon request of the planning board, transmit to the board a statement of all capital projects proposed to be undertaken by such municipal department, authority or agency, during the term of the program, for study, advice and recommendation by the planning board. 
(Prior code § 40-61) 
17.24.020 - Adoption of program. 
    Whenever the planning board has prepared a capital improvement program pursuant to Section 17.24.010 of this chapter, it shall recommend such program to the city council, which may adopt such program with any modification approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the city council and with the reasons for the modification recorded in the minutes. 
(Prior code § 40-62) 
17.24.030 - Review of capital projects. 
    Whenever the planning board shall have adopted any portion of the master plan, the city council or other public agency having jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure of any public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such project, shall refer the action involving such specific project to the planning board for review and recommendation in conjunction with such master plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until forty-five (45) days have elapsed after such reference without receiving such recommendation. This requirement shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district or other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar public agency, state, county or municipal. 
(Prior code § 40-63) 
Chapter 17.28 - DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Approvals required. 
    Approvals for development shall be required as hereinafter provided: 
A.  Subdivision Approval Required. Any owner of land within the city shall, prior to the subdivision of land as defined by this title, obtain final approval of a subdivision plat pursuant to Section 12.28.050. Such approval shall be a condition for the filing of such plat with the county recording officer. 
B.  Site Plan Approval Required. Any owner of land within the city shall, except as hereinafter provided, obtain final approval of a site plan pursuant to Section 12.28.050 of this chapter for development involving either: 
1.  Commencement, expansion, or relocation of any nonresidential principal or accessory use other than parking or loading which is not conducted wholly within an enclosed building, or 
2.  Development which entails the following: 
a.  A change of use from one schedule II category to another on a lot which exceeds eighty (80) feet in width, 
b.  Construction or reconstruction of a building or building addition which covers more than eight hundred (800) square feet of lot area, 
c.  Establishment, alteration, or elimination of stalls, aisles, or driveways comprising a parking area for five or more vehicles, 
d.  Fill or removal of soil exceeding one foot in depth, or 
e.  Provision of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of required open space. 
C.  Approval Required Prior to Issuance of a Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued for any structure or other construction until final approval has been granted to a site plan for such development or such development has been certified as exempt pursuant to Section 17.28.020 by the zoning administrator. No building permit shall be issued except in conformance with the approved site plan, and no building permit shall be issued until satisfactory proof has been exhibited by the applicant that he or she has all necessary easements, rights-of-way, leases or other documents required to commence and complete the work provided in said site plan, parking plan, drainage plan or other plan. 
D.  Development shall be exempt from site plan review requirements where: 
1.  Development is for a single detached one- or two-family dwelling structure, or 
2.  Development is encompassed by subsection (B)(2) of this section and wherein existing and proposed physical site improvements have been certified by the city engineer, the city planner, and the city zoning administrator as being in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, and changes are limited to: 
a.  An increase in the number of parking stalls of not more than ten (10) spaces or twenty-five (25) percent of the existing total spaces, 
b.  An addition to an existing building which extends not more than eighteen (18) feet beyond the existing structure, 
c.  A new building not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area, 
d.  Fencing, 
e.  Landscaping, 
f.  Exterior site lighting, and/or 
g.  Signage in conformance with master plan standards. 
(Ord. 3905 § 1, 2007; prior code § 40-71) 
17.28.020 - Conformance required prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any purposes, except transfer pursuant to Section 17.08.070 of this title; where site plan approval has been required unless such development is in conformance with an approved final site plan. 
(Prior code § 40-72) 
17.28.030 - Informal review. 
    At the request of the developer, the planning board shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit an application for development. The developer shall not be required to submit any fees for such an informal review. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is requested, and the planning board shall not be bound by any such review. 
(Prior code § 40-73) 
17.28.040 - Permissible use inquiry. 
    A developer may submit a written inquiry to the board of adjustment as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under the prior zoning ordinance or official zoning map. The board of adjustment shall issue a written response to the inquiry within forty-five (45) days after the next meeting following receipt of the request or within such additional time as may be consented to by the inquirer. 
(Prior code § 40-74) 
17.28.050 - Approval procedure. 
A.  The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of an application for development as specified in this title to the secretary of the city agency having jurisdiction, pursuant to Section 17.28.110 of this chapter, over the application. An application fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 17.52 of this title shall accompany the application, which fee shall be paid by check to the order of the city. 
B.  A developer may file an application for development with the board of adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application to the zoning administrator. 
C.  A developer whose proposed development requires a variance pursuant to this title may elect to submit a separate application requesting the variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate granting of the variance shall be conditioned upon the granting of all required subsequent approvals by the same approving authority. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial detriment to the zone plan and zoning ordinance. The number of votes of the board members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this title for the approval in question, and any special vote shall not be required. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the time period for granting or denying such separate application shall be as provided in Section 17.28.130 of this chapter. 
D.  Approval Procedure. The secretary of the approving authority shall distribute the application for review, report and approval when required, as follows: 
1.  The city engineer, 
2.  Department of community development, 
3.  The zoning administrator, 
4.  The department of public works, 
5.  The department of health, welfare and housing, 
6.  The police department, 
7.  The bureau of fire prevention, 
8.  The city planner, and 
9.  The recycling coordinator for preliminary site plans involving multi-family dwellings with three or more units. 
E.  A hearing shall be held on all applications for development. The procedures under Chapter 17.04 of this title shall apply. 
F.  Approval shall be granted or denied in accordance with findings pursuant to Section 17.28.180 of this chapter. Where the application involves a site plan or subdivision plat, such approval shall be deemed preliminary. 
G.  Where an application does not require public notice and hearing, receipt of favorable reports pursuant to subsection C of this section shall suffice in lieu of findings pursuant to Section 17.28.180 of this chapter. Approval shall be granted by the approving authority or a subcommittee of the approving authority appointed by the chairman. Such approval shall be deemed final approval of the application by the approving authority, provided that the approving authority or subcommittee may condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to this title. 
H.  Prior to the expiration of preliminary approval, the applicant may submit to the secretary of the city agency which granted such approval three copies of an application for final approval and, in the case of site plans, ten (10) black-on-white prints and, in the case of subdivision plats, one original drawing in black ink on translucent tracing cloth or its equivalent of good quality, with signatures in ink, or, as an equivalent, reproduction on translucent cloth or its equivalent, and two cloth print duplicates and ten (10) black-on-white prints. An application fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 17.52 of this title shall accompany the application, which shall be paid by check to the order of the city. 
I.  The approving authority shall grant final approval to the development application if the detailed drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final approval conform to the standards established by this title for final approval and the conditions of preliminary approval and the city engineer certifies that: 
1.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations or a performance guaranty has been posted with the city clerk in an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the cost of installation of required improvements. 
2.  A maintenance guaranty has been posted with the city clerk for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the cost of the improvement. 
3.  In the case of subdivision plats, that the plat conforms to the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141. 
(Prior code § 40-76) 
17.28.060 - Rights under preliminary approval. 
    Preliminary approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval: 
A.  That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, existing natural resources to be preserved on the site; vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading; screening, landscaping and location of structures; and exterior lighting both for safety reasons and street lighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety. 
B.  That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan. 
C.  That the applicant may apply for and the reviewing board may grant extensions on such primary approval for additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern. 
(Prior code § 40-77) 
17.28.070 - Rights and effect of final approval. 
    The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval, provided that in the case of subdivision the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required, the approving authority may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title or the Municipal Land Use Law, the granting of final approval terminates the period of preliminary approval. 
(Prior code § 40-78) 
17.28.080 - Filing of plats. 
A.  Recording of Final Approval of Subdivision. 
1.  Final approval of a subdivision shall be evidenced by the signature of the chairman and secretary of the approving authority on the instruments. 
a.  Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95) days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed with the county recording officer. The approving authority may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of signing of the plat. 
b.  Final approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat or a deed clearly describing the approved subdivision is filed with the county recording officer, the municipal engineer and the municipal lax assessor. 
2.  The signature of the chairman and secretary of the approving authority shall not be affixed except; pursuant to Section 17.28.050(H) of this chapter. 
B.  Filing of All Subdivision Plats. It shall be the duty of the county recording officer to notify the planning board and the city tax assessor in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing and official number. If the county recording officer records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the plan shall be expunged from the official records. 
(Prior code § 40-79) 
17.28.090 - Variances and exceptions. 
A.  Variance and Exception. The approving authority, when acting upon applications for development, shall have the power to grant variances from Chapters 17.36 and 17.44 in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
B.  Exceptions. The approving authority, when acting upon applications for preliminary subdivision or site plan approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for development approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for development review and approval of an ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter, if the literal enforcement of one more provisions of the ordinance is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question. 
C.  Expiration. Any variance or exception from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the approving authority permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by the variances or exception or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within the longer of nine months or the effective period of final approval of subdivision plats or site plans; except, however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the board of adjustment to the city council or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding. 
(Prior code § 40-80) 
17.28.100 - Simultaneous review. 
    The approving authority shall have the power to review and approve or deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision approval without the developer being required to make further application to the approving authority or the approving authority being required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by the approving authority, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such conditional use. 
(Prior code § 40-81) 
17.28.110 - Jurisdiction for applications. 
A.  The order of precedence of applications for development shall be as follows: 
Application Jurisdiction Variance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d) Board of Adjustment Subdivision Planning Board Site Plan Planning Board Conditional use Planning Board Variance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c) Board of Adjustment Building permit for structure not related to a street Board of Adjustment Building permit for structure in bed of mapped street, public drainageway, flood control basin or public area Board of Adjustment  
B.  The jurisdiction of the matter or greatest precedence shall apply, and the agency having jurisdiction over the application shall have jurisdiction over all types of development of lesser precedence as regulated by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 40-82) 
17.28.120 - Incomplete applications. 
    An application for development shall be deemed to be complete for the purpose of commencing the period within which board action is to be taken upon submission unless the board or the board's designee determines that it does not fulfill the criteria for a complete application. The board may subsequently require corrections, additions or revisions to the documents as needed to make an informed decision as to whether the application is entitled to approval. 
A.  Notification. The board or the board's designee shall have notified the applicant in writing of the deficiencies of the submitted application within forty-five (45) days of such application. 
B.  Waivers. The applicant may request that one or more of the completeness requirements be waived, in which event the board or its authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within forty-five (45) days. 
C.  Checklist. All applicants shall be provided with the criteria for a complete application which shall serve as a checklist. 
D.  Criteria for basic application documents shall be as follows: 
1.  All development applications shall include the following documents: 
a.  Completed application forms with original, signature of the applicant or an authorized representative and notarized, 
b.  Evidence of payment of required fees, 
c.  Disclosure statement of all ownership interests pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq., and 
d.  A development proposal containing the minimum elements as required and specified herein (the approving authority may, at its discretion, require building elevation drawings with specifications of facade materials). 
2.  In addition, final major subdivision and site plan applications shall include the following documents. 
a.  A statement as to the fulfillment of all conditions imposed by preliminary approval to which is appended a certified copy of the approving resolution, 
b.  Completed engineering plans, 
c.  A statement as to the installation of required improvements indicating whether the improvements have been installed, or that guarantees have been posted, or that guarantees are to be a condition of approval to which is appended the certifications of the municipal engineer or municipal clerk as appropriate, and 
d.  Certification showing all current tax/water rents paid. 
3.  In addition, applications for other that final subdivision and final site plan shall include the following additional documents. 
a.  A statement as to the existence and nature of protective covenants and deed restrictions, 
b.  A taxmap sheet(s) showing the property in question and all properties within four hundred (400) feet, and 
c.  A current survey showing all property lines with dimensions and bearings and depicting existing conditions. 
E.  Development proposals shall contain the following minimum elements. 
1.  Variances proposals shall include the following elements: 
a.  Building layout plan, 
b.  Other plans and schedules as required to demonstrate the nature of the relief sought, and 
c.  Zoning schedule. 
2.  Minor Subdivision proposals shall include the following elements: 
a.  Zoning schedule, and 
b.  Utilities plan. 
3.  Preliminary major subdivision proposals shall include the following elements: 
a.  Zoning schedule, 
b.  Proposed property lines with dimensions and bearings, 
c.  Building layout plan, 
d.  Drainage schedule, 
e.  Drainage plan, 
f.  Utilities plan, and 
g.  For areas within the public rights-of-way; 
i.  Pavement plan, 
ii.  Lighting schedule, 
iii.  Landscape schedule, and 
iv.  Landscape plan. 
4.  Preliminary site plan proposals shall include the following elements: 
a.  Zoning schedule, 
b.  Building layout plan, 
c.  Drainage schedule, 
d.  Drainage plan, 
e.  Utilities plan, 
f.  Pavement striping schedule, 
g.  Pavement plan, 
h.  Lighting schedule, 
i.  Landscape schedule, and 
j.  Landscape plan. 
F.  Proposal elements shall be prepared in accord with the format and content specifications for plans and schedules as follows. Schedules shall clearly note items which are variances from zoning requirements or exceptions from design standards. 
1.  Sheets for any drawing subject to site plan or subdivision approval shall conform to the following specifications: 
a.  All engineering drawings shall have individual sheets folded to fit with an eight and one-half by eleven (11) inch area. 
b.  All preliminary site plans, subdivision sketch plats and plot plans shall be submitted on standard eight and one-half by eleven (11) inch sheets. 
c.  Maps to be recorded with the county shall be on a sheet size meeting one of four standards: 
i.  Eight and one-half by thirteen (13) inches; 
ii.  Thirty (30) by forty-two (42) inches; 
iii.  Twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36), inches; and 
iv.  Or fifteen (15) by twenty-one (21) inches. 
d.  A title block shall contain: 
i.  Title of proposal; 
ii.  Name and address of applicant; 
iii.  Name, address and seal of architect/engineer/surveyor; and 
iv.  Date prepared with revision dates and descriptions. 
e.  Orientation shall be provided by: 
i.  Graphic scale; 
ii.  Numeric scale; 
iii.  North arrow; and 
iv.  Key map with reference to all streets within three thousand (3,000) feet at a scale of not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet to the inch to be provided on at least one sheet of any set. 
2.  Zoning schedules shall be titled and arranged in columns describing limits, proposed conditions, and compliance/variance status for: 
a.  Building height; 
b.  Front street setback; 
c.  Rear street setback; 
d.  Property line setback; 
e.  Building coverage; 
f.  Parking; 
g.  Loading; and 
h.  Any other code requirements; 
3.  Building layout plan drawings shall be titled and keyed to a legend depicting: 
a.  Building lines with setback dimensions and heights; 
b.  Building projection lines with dimensions, heights or clearances; 
c.  New construction; 
d.  Reconstruction; and 
e.  Demolition. 
4.  Drainage Schedules shall be titled and arranged in columns describing: 
a.  Runoff coefficient and limit; and 
b.  Design storm frequency. 
5.  Drainage plan drawings shall be titled and keyed to a legend depicting: 
a.  Drainage areas with discharge points and flow direction; 
b.  Open and piped interconnections between areas; 
c.  Location and height of terraced and bermed areas; and 
d.  Depth of sheet flow in pedestrian areas for design storm shown in one inch contours. 
6.  Utilities plan drawings shall be titled and keyed to a legend depicting: 
a.  Water service, hydrants and meters; 
b.  Sanitary sewer service; 
c.  Gas service and meters; 
d.  Electric service and transformers; and 
e.  Heating fuel tanks. 
7.  Pavement striping schedules shall be titled and arranged in columns describing: 
a.  Parking stall category (resident, employee, customer short-term, customer long-term, wheelchair accessible); 
b.  Parking stall width; 
c.  Stall angle; 
d.  Stall depth and overhang depth; 
e.  Pedestrian aisle width along side of stalls; and 
f.  Driveway aisle width. 
8.  Pavement plan drawings for vehicular areas shall be titled and keyed to a legend depicting: 
a.  Curbing with type of material; 
b.  Driveway aprons and driveways within public rights-of-way with pavement type; 
c.  Parking stalls, aisles and driveways outside public rights-of-way with pavement type; and 
d.  Sight distance triangle minimums for intersections of vehicular drives with streets, parking aisles, walls, building corners and walks. 
9.  Lighting schedules shall be titled and arranged in columns describing: 
a.  Functional area (parking/pedestrian area, driveway/aisle intersections, pedestrian hazards, building entry, loading dock); 
b.  Level (peak, off-hour, late-night security); 
c.  Minimum point illumination; 
d.  Maximum uniformity ratio of average illumination to minimum; 
e.  Maximum uniformity ratio of maximum illumination to minimum; 
f.  Fixture type (Flood, spot, cut-off [minimum eighty-one (81) degree]); and 
g.  Height limit for fixtures. 
10.  Landscape schedules shall be titled and arranged in columns describing: 
a.  Planting type (deciduous, coniferous, tree, shrub, groundcover); 
b.  Minimum planting size; and 
c.  Planting condition (bare root, balled, canned). 
11.  Landscape plan drawings shall be titled and keyed to a legend depicting: 
a.  Building entrances and exits; 
b.  Walks, patios and other paved surfaces showing material type; 
c.  Outdoor storage enclosures for refuse and recycleables; 
d.  Exterior utilitarian appurtanences which require visal screening (air conditioners, transformers, meters, etc.); 
e.  Fences and walls with height and function (screening, security, or delineative and classified as decorative or utilitarian); 
f.  Other landscape structures (patios, walks, pools); 
g.  Existing trees over eighteen (18) inches caliper; 
h.  Shade tree canopy drip line at maturity; 
i.  Screen planting areas with height at maturity; 
j.  Groundcover planting areas; and 
k.  Decorative planting beds. 
G.  Engineering plan drawings shall contain the following: 
1.  For any street improvements: plans, cross sections and center-line profile; 
2.  For any public utilities: plans and profiles with any easements delineated; 
3.  For any pavement: profiles and material specifications; 
4.  For any drainage facilities: contours or spot elevations, profiles and specifications including pipe sizes, invert elevations and capacity; 
5.  For any exterior lighting: location, mounting, fixture type and specifications for wattage and isofootcandle pattern; 
6.  For any walls or fences: profiles and specificae tions; and 
7.  For any planting: expanded planting schedule, including quantity, common and botanical name, height or caliper at time of planting, root condition, seasonal restrictions on installation; specifications for installation including profiles; and mixture for seeding. 
(Prior code § 40-83) 
17.28.130 - Time limits for approval. 
A.  Action by Planning Board. Upon the submission of a complete application for development, the planning board shall grant or deny approval within the maximum number of days of the date of such submission as specified below or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Where more than one type of application is involved, the longer time period shall apply: 
Type of Development Application Time 
Period 
(days) Subdivision plats and site plans  Preliminary approval 45  Final approval 45 Conditional use authorization 95 Variance 120 Direction for issuance of a building permit 95  
B.  Action by Board of Adjustment. Upon the submision of a complete application for development, the board of adjustment shall grant or deny approval within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of such submission by the applicant. 
(Prior code § 40-84) 
17.28.140 - Failure to decide. 
    Should the planning board or the zoning board of adjustment, as the case may be, fail to reach a decision within the specified time periods or extensions thereof, the applicant may request from the secretary of the approving authority a certificate indicating the approving authority's failure to act. Such certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other required evidence of approval. 
(Prior code § 40-85) 
17.28.150 - Amended application. 
    If the approving authority requires any substantial amendments in the layout of improvements proposed by the applicant that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application. 
(Prior code § 40-86) 
17.28.160 - Review by county planning board. 
    Whenever review, or approval of the application by the county planning board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c.285, in the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L. 1968 c.285, in the case of a site plan, the approving agency shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely recept of a favorable report on the application by the planning board or failure to report thereupon within the required time. 
(Prior code § 40-87) 
17.28.170 - Referral to other agencies. 
    An application may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the appointing authority shall act. 
(Prior code § 40-88) 
17.28.180 - Findings for approval. 
    The approving authority may grant approval to an application for development where it finds that: 
A.  The proposed development is consistent with the master plan proposals adopted by the planning board. 
B.  The proposed use shall be compatible with surrounding uses. 
C.  The proposed use shall not have any injurious effect on surrounding property values. 
D.  The proposed use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, welfare, safety and convenience of the citizens will be protected. 
E.  The interests of the public, and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development are protected. 
F.  The proposed layout of the development is consistent with the requirements of Chapters 17.32 and 17.36 of this title. 
G.  The streets are of sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide easy access for fire-fighting and emergency equipment to buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient and efficient system consistent with the official map and the circulation element of the master plan, provided that no street of a width greater than fifty (50) feet within the right-of-way lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street or a street shown on the official map which is of greater width. 
H.  Adequate potable and fire water supplies, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and other utilities necessary for essential service to residents and occupants are provided. 
I.  Off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street improvements which are necessitated by development are provided. 
J.  Development of lands designated as subject to flooding is designed so as to avoid danger to life or property. 
K.  Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind, water, excavation or grading and from contamination by unsanitary fill or dumping is provided for. 
L.  The applicant has submitted evidence that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which application is made. 
M.  Where deemed appropriate, that the proposed structures are suitably located. 
N.  Safe and efficient vehicular, and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading is provided. 
O.  Exterior lighting is adequate for safety and security reasons. 
P.  Existing natural resources are to be preserved by the development. 
Q.  The proposed development is suitably screened and landscaped. 
R.  The proposed development is in conformity with the standards for delineated airport hazard areas promulgated by the Commission of Transportation pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act or a waiver from those standards has been issued by the Commissioner. 
S.  Large scale development proposals achieve the following design objectives: 
1.  The overall plan shall provide for an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities of the site, making appropriate provision for the preservation of amenities of the site and the surrounding areas. 
2.  All buildings in the layout and design shall be an integral part of the development and shall have convenient access to and from adjacent uses and blocks. 
3.  Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design, masses, materials, placement and connections, to provide a visually and physically integrated development. 
4.  Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the planned development shall be comparable in building materials as to the treatment given to the fronts of these same buildings. 
5.  The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take advantage of the topography of the site, where appropriate, to provide separate levels of access. 
6.  All buildings shall be arranged so as to be accessible to emergency vehicles. 
7.  Facilities for the temporary storage of refuse,o f garbage and recyclables awaiting removal shall be designed and located in such a manner as to make the facilities inconspicuous to the general public and to prevent the spread of refuse to other areas. 
8.  Air conditioning and other mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view with suitable materials to harmonize with the total development. 
(Prior code § 40-89) 
17.28.190 - Guaranties required. 
A.  Before granting of final approval for subdivision plats or site plans, the approving authority shall require and accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this title for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements: 
1.  The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the city in an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the cost of installation for improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyors' monuments, as shown on the final map and as required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and landscaping, provided that no more than ten (10) percent of the total performance guaranty shall be required to be in cash and the balance shall be in the form of a bond from a bonding company approved by the city council. The city engineer shall review the improvements required by the approving authority which are to be bonded and itemize their cost. Such itemization shall be the basis for determining the amount of the performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty required by the approving authority. The city engineer shall forward his or her estimate of the cost of improvements to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a request sent by certified mail for the estimate. 
2.  The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the city council for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or that the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty; as the case may be, shall be required for such utilities or improvements. 
B.  The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the city council by resolution, when portions of the improvements have been certified by the city engineer to have been completed. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance guaranty has been provided may be established by the city or county resolution. 
C.  If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the city for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected, and the city may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such improvements. 
D.  When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obligor shall notify the city council in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the city clerk, of the completion of said improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the city engineer. Thereupon the city engineer shall inspect all of the improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the city ouncil indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected shall be set forth. 
E.  The city council shall either approve, partially approve or reject the improvements, on the basis of the report of the city engineer and shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of the report and the action of the approving authority with relation thereto, not later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the city council to send or provide such notification to the obligor within sixty-five (65) days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty. 
F.  If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed. 
G.  The obligor shall reimburse the city for all reasonable inspection fees paid the city engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements. 
(Prior code § 40-90) 
17.28.200 - Planned development approval procedures. 
A.  The planning board is authorized to approve planned developments in order to promote flexibility in the arrangement of land uses in accordance with this title and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and to grant approvals to general development plans consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45. 
1.  Prior to granting approval to any planned development, the planning board shall find the following facts and conclusions: 
a.  Departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to subsection N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.; 
b.  The proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the common open space are adequate; 
c.  Provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate; 
d.  The proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established; and 
e.  In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of the development are adequate. 
2.  Site plans for planned developments shall conform to the requirements for conventional site plans as well as to the requirements for planned developments. In the event of a conflict, the planned development requirements shall supersede site plan requirements. The following additional requirements shall be satisfied prior to final approval: 
a.  The staging proposals for any planned development shall ensure that each stage shall encompass a balanced mix of land uses in proportion to the mix for the entire development and that each stage shall provide for completion of all streets, utilities and services necessary for the section whether located within or outside the section. 
b.  The p1anning board may authorize a greater concentration of density or intensity within a stage but only where offset by a lesser concentration in any completed prior stages or offset by an appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining land by grant of easement or covenant in favor of the municipality. 
c.  The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions, cross access agreements and cross maintenance agreements have been submitted and found to satisfactorily provide for the public's interests. 
d.  All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel and maintained for the benefit of the owners and/or occupants of the development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43. 
3.  Subdivision plats for planned developments shall conform to the requirements for conventional subdivision plats as well as to the requirements for planned developments. In the event of a conflict, the planned development requirements shall supersede subdivision plat requirements. The following additional requirements shall be satisfied prior to preliminary approval. 
a.  The staging proposals for any planned development shall ensure that each stage shall encompass a balanced mix of land uses in proportion to the mix for the entire development and that each stage shall provide for completion of all streets, utilities and services necessary for the section whether located within or outside the section. 
b.  The planning board may authorize a greater concentration of density or intensity within a stage but only where offset by a lesser concentration in any completed prior stages or offset by an appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining land by grant of easement or covenant in favor of the municipality. 
c.  The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions, cross access agreements and cross maintenance agreements have been submitted and found to satisfactorily provide for the public's interests. 
d.  All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel and maintained for the benefit of the owners and/or occupants of the and found to conform with the objectives of the plans and proposals for the planned development and the intent of this chapter. 
i.  The enabling declaration shall set forth the developer's intent to charge an association with certain responsibilities, including the covenants, which set forth the purchaser's responsibilities and obligations including the provisions for ownership and management of the common areas, the establishment of association assessments as a lien against all lots, the rights of members including voting rights, the basis for assessments, the basis for enforcement of covenants by the association, and the process of amendments. 
ii.  The articles of incorporation shall establish the association, set forth the name of the association, the name and address of principal officers at the time of incorporation, and the purpose and powers of the association. It shall set forth terms of membership and voting rights, create the initial board of directors, establish procedures for dissolution, the duration of the association in the absence of dissolution, the basis for amendments to the articles of incorporation, and the severability of provisions. 
iii.  The bylaws shall set forth the meeting of the association; the basis for a quorum, provisions for vote by development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43. 
iv.  The planning board shall determine the appropriateness of proposed dedications of open space prior to granting subdivision approval. Unless dedicated for public use, organizations shall be established for the ownership and maintenance of all open space parcels. 
(A)  The developer shall provide for an organization pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 for the ownership and maintenance of open space created under a planned development. 
(B)  Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such development, and thereafter, such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the same to the municipality. 
(C)  All owners of property within a planned development shall be required to become members of the owners' association charged with ownership and maintenance of open space and other common facilities. All properties shall include a provision in their deeds requiring membership in the owners' association. This requirement shall pass from owner to owner as a deed restriction. 
(D)  The legal documents proposed in the establishment of the required owners' association shall have been submitted proxy, and the notice of meetings. Bylaws shall set forth the terms of office for the board of directors, the composition of the board, the method of nomination, the method of election, and the handling of resignations, removals, vacancies, and compensation, as well as the conduct of board meetings. They shall also set forth the power and duties of the board. The officers, their means of election, terms of office, and their duties shall be described. The committees required or the basis for their establishment shall be defined. The fiscal year shall be established, the indemnification of officers shall be described, and the basis for amendment shall be set forth. 
(E)  The proposed form of deed clause referring to the declaration and clanfying the title to common property adjacent to a lot. 
(F)  An information brochure designed to help to ensure that all purchasers are informed of the association. It shall restate in clear text the relationship between the association, the purchaser, and the developer. It shall cover the major elements of common area identification, ownership and use, the structure of the association, dues, officer and director selection and election, architectural controls, liens, annexation, dissolution, and other areas. 
v.  The plat shall contain specifics of the enabling declaration dealing with the title to the common property, the granting of easements of enjoyment, an indication as to whether the designated areas are dedicated for use by the general public or they are, or are intended to be, conveyed to an association. 
vi.  Any condominium or owners' association filings with the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs shall also be filed with the planning board. 
f.  Residential clusters shall conform to the following requirements: 
i.  Each cluster shall be restricted to one type of land use/housing type in a contiguous group. 
ii.  The total number of dwelling units, or lots for single-family dwellings, shall not exceed the allowable density multiplied by the tract area to be improved for residential use plus any open space set aside for residential use. 
iii.  Where proposed open space for residential use is not dedicated to public use, the cluster shall contain a minimum of eighty (80) dwelling units. 
iv.  Building lots shall conform with the requirements for the alternative zone as if developed in that zone and shall maintain continuing compliance with said zone requirements. 
v.  Developed open space parcels shall be designed to accommodate pedestrian ways of not less than ten (10) feet in width and recreation sites of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area. 
(Prior code § 40-94) 
Chapter 17.32 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Minimum standards established. 
    The following shall be deemed the minimum standards for development. 
(Prior code § 40-100) 
17.32.020 - Blocks. 
A.  Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size lot required in the area by Chapter 17.36, and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
B.  In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required in locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway shall be ten (10) feet wide and shall be straight from street to street. 
C.  For commercial or group-housing use, block size shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use. 
(Prior code § 40-101) 
17.32.030 - Lots. 
A.  Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of Chapter 17.36. 
B.  Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets. 
C.  Each lot must front upon an approved street at least fifty (50) feet in width, except lots fronting on streets described in Section 17.32.040(D)(4) and (5) of this chapter. 
D.  Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line. 
E.  Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the approving authority may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots. 
(Prior code § 40-102) 
17.32.040 - Streets. 
A.  The arrangement of streets not shown on the master plan or official map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets. 
B.  Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic. 
C.  Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the planning board may determine appropriate. 
D.  Right-of-Way Width. 
1.  The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than the following: 
Arterial streets 80 feet Collector streets 60 feet Minor streets 50 feet Marginal access streets 40 feet  
2.  The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily and commercial development shall be determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment. 
E.  No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed with the city council under conditions approved by the planning board. 
F.  Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths as shown on the master plan or official map or the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated. 
G.  Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed four percent. Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten (10) percent. No streets shall have a minimum grade of less than one-half of one percent. 
H.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and in no case shall be less than sixty (60) degrees. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
I.  Street jogs with center-line offset of less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be prohibited. 
J.  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
K.  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10) degrees and not more than forty-five (45) degrees they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three hundred (300) feet for arterial and collector streets. 
L.  All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance. 
M.  Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties. 
N.  No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. 
(Prior code § 40-103) 
17.32.050 - Driveways. 
A.  Access drives or driveways shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide for one-way traffic heading in the same direction and twenty (20) feet wide for two-way traffic in opposing directions. No access drive or driveway shall be obstructed and no architectural feature shall be permitted to project into the minimum established width of an access drive or driveway. If building depth is more than fifty (50) feet, there must be a pedestrian walkway. 
B.  Curbline openings for ten-foot wide access driveways or egress driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet. Curbline openings for twenty-foot (20) wide access or egress driveways shall be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(Prior code § 40-104) 
17.32.060 - Parking. 
    In all districts, every parcel of land or part thereof used as a public or private parking area or parking garage, excluding one- and two-family residential developments, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements. Plans for such areas shall be reviewed by the city engineer and planning board to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
A.  Stall Dimensions. 
1.  For all principal uses, each off-street parking area shall have a required depth of nineteen (19) feet exclusive of access drives or required aisles. 
2.  For all principal uses, each off-street parking space shall have the following minimum stall widths: 
Use Group Minimum Parking Stall Width A-I, K, L, N 10 feet 0 inches O-Q, R, S-W 9 feet 6 inches M, J 9 feet 0 inches X-CC 8 feet 6 inches  
B.  Ingress and Egress. 
1.  For each off-street parking space, there shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress, conforming to standards as set forth in Parking, published by Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York, New York, Copyright 1958. 
2.  All driveways, aisles and any other vehicular circulation area shall be designed to accommodate the following minimum turning radii: 
Type of Vehicle Radius Inside Radius Outside Autos (vehicle length to 20 feet) 15 feet 26 feet Straight trucks (vehicle length to 35 feet) 20 feet 6 inches 38 feet 0 inches Semitrailer (vehicle length to 50 feet) 26 feet 50 feet  
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  No off-street parking area or portion thereof shall be allowed within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line. 
2.  No off-street parking area or portion thereof shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or institution for human care located on an adjacent or adjoining lot. 
3.  No off-street parking area or portion thereof, including driveways and aisles, shall be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line or any principal or accessory structure. 
D.  Safety Lands. A ten-foot safety island shall be provided between the end of a parking bay and any driveway, aisle or any other area as required by the planning board or city engineer. 
E.  Curbing. 
1.  Poured-in-place concrete curbing shall be used in all off-street parking areas to separate vehicular from nonvehicular areas, as required and specified by the city engineer. 
2.  Where site improvements are placed within vehicular areas, poured-in-place concrete curbing shall be installed at a minimum radius of two feet from the edge of said improvements, as required and specified by the city engineer. 
F.  Obstructions. 
1.  Each off-street parking space shall maintain an unobstructed area equal to the required length of the space times the minimum width of the space. 
2.  Curbing where installed two feet from the head of a parking space, to serve as a wheelstop, shall not be considered an obstruction in the space. 
G.  Surfacing. Any off-street parking area shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland cement pavement or similar durable and dustless surface, as specified and approved by the city engineer. Each parking space shall be delineated with painted markings to provide for orderly and safe parking of vehicles. 
H.  Roof Parking. Parking shall be permitted on the roof of any structure, provided that a four-foot wall, sufficient to contain headlight glare and constructed of materials which are consistent with the architectural character of the structure, shall be constructed around the entire perimeter of the roof. 
I.  Drainage. Any off-street parking area shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without detriment to surrounding uses, as required by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 4-105) 
17.32.070 - Illumination. 
A.  Illumination Levels at Ground Level. 
1.  Minimum average design illumination levels shall be: 
a.  Parking areas: 
i.  Industrial: 1.5 footcandles. 
ii.  Other uses: two footcandles. 
b.  Loading area: five footcandles. 
c.  Pedestrian areas: 1.5 footcandles. 
d.  Driveway entrances: three footcandles. 
e.  Gasoline pump islands and service area: twenty (20) footcandles. 
f.  Streets: 
i.  Arterial: 1.4 footcandles. 
ii.  Collector: 0.9 footcandles. 
iii.  Minor: 0.6 footcandles. 
g.  Intersections shall be at least the sum of minimum illumination of the intersecting streets. 
2.  Minimum illumination at a point shall be not less than one-third of the above minimum design levels. 
3.  Maximum average design illumination levels shall not be greater than four times the above minimum design levels. 
4.  Maximum illumination at property lines on ground level and above shall not exceed one footcandle. 
B.  Location of Sources. 
1.  Sources of illumination shall be shielded so as not to be visible at property lines at an elevation of four feet and above. 
2.  Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises. 
C.  Poles for all but Street-Related Lighting. 
1.  Poles shall be rustproof metal or decorative wood, utilizing underground wiring. 
2.  Height of poles for: 
a.  Pedestrian areas shall be not more than fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  Parking, driveway and loading areas shall not be greater than twenty-five (25) feet or the maximum permitted building height, whichever is less. 
(Prior code § 4-106) 
17.32.080 - Landscaping. 
A.  All street trees and on-site deciduous shade trees shall be not less than two-inch caliper measured one foot above the root crown at the time of planting. Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks. 
B.  Evergreen trees shall not be less than four feet in height at the time of planting. 
C.  Deciduous trees shall not be less than seven feet in height at the time of planting. 
D.  Shrubs shall not be less than two feet in height at the time of planting. 
E.  All plants shall conform to the standards as set forth in American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., 855 Southern Building, Washington, D.C. 
F.  All planting shall conform with the United States Department of Agriculture map of hardiness zones for this area. 
G.  Trees when planted shall be balled and burlapped and properly staked. 
(Prior code § 4-107) 
17.32.090 - Screens-Opening for visibility required-Materials used for opening. 
A.  Any metal screen protective device installed by any person, firm or entity in the city shall be constructed of an open mesh grill or patterned, textured substance so as to blend architecturally with the community. Solid steel face or solid monolith metal screens are prohibited. Any metal protective screen shall be finished so as not to rust or stain either buildings or sidewalks. 
B.  Approval of Design-Permit Required. 
1.  No metal protective screen shall be installed without prior approval as to design by the construction official. 
2.  A permit shall be issued by the construction official prior to installation of any metal protective screen. 
3.  The term "metal protective screen" means any sliding or rolling horizontal or vertical gate on the front of any structure to prevent unauthorized entrance. 
C.  Where possible, the materials of which these metal screens are constructed shall be of a texture and design which shall blend with the structure being protected by the screen and shall be open mesh grill. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day in which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Prior code § 115-1) 
17.32.100 - Store fronts. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes general regulations and design standards for store fronts for commercial stores. 
1.  Any commercial store located in the general and special retail zone shall have a glass or other clear material store front. 
2.  A security gate/grill, a metal gate or other obstructive device which is utilized for the purpose of restricting or controlling or obstructing entry or exit into a commercial establishment shall not be permitted without there also being a glass or clear material store front. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person, entity or corporation to install a metal security gate or grill type door at the side of a commercial building facing onto a public street without the commercial space also having a store front which shall be comprised of glass and/or other material providing protection to customers and employees from the elements. 
B.  Penalty. A person or entity that shall violate any provision of this section or any other order promulgated hereunder shall, after summons are issued, be required to appear in municipal court and be subject to a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each violation of any of the provision of this section shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. A separate offense is deemed committed on each date during on or which a violation occurs or is continuous. 
(Ord. 3909 §§ 1, 2, 2007) 
Chapter 17.36 - ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Establishment of zones. 
A.  Designation of Zones. For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into zones, differentiated according to use and building regulations and to be designated as follows: 
Single-family residential zone R-1 Two-family residential zone R-2 Multifamily residential zone R-3 Four-family residential zone R-3A Elevator apartment zone R-4 Neighborhood commercial zone C-1 Community commercial zone C-2 Central commercial zone C-3 Special commercial zone C-4 Office commercial-1 zone OC-1 Office commercial-2 zone OC-2 Regional commercial zone RC Highway commercial zone HC Light industrial zone M-1 Medium industrial zone M-2 Manufacturing, research, and commercial zone MRC Open space zone O Public zone P Transportation zone T  
B.  Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the zones are established as shown on the zoning map of the city dated March 27, 1962, which is attached hereto and is made a part of this chapter. Such map or maps and all notations, references and designations shown thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the same were all fully described and set forth herein. 
C.  Designation of Zone Boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the boundary lines of streets, the centerlines of railroad rights-of-way, existing lot lines for lots of record, the mean water level of rivers, streams and other waterways or city boundary lines and to intersect street lines at right angles, all as shown on the zoning map. Its position may be shown on said zoning map by a specific dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary line as indicated. To satisfy the intent of this chapter, a mapped zone boundary line which does not follow a lot line of a lot of record shall be adjusted as follows: 
1.  Where the zone boundary line is within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line of a lot of record, the lot line shall be considered the zone boundary line, or 
2.  Where within a lot of record a zone boundary line intersects a street line at an angle other than ninety (90) degrees, said line shall be adjusted to follow a lot line of a lot of record within twenty-five (25) feet of an imaginary line extending perpendicular from street line to a point at which such line first intersects both the mapped line and an interior lot line. 
D.  Extension of Zone Boundaries. Where a public street right-of-way is vacated, the adjacent zone shall be deemed to extend to the former centerline of the street right-of-way, and where the mean water level of a waterway is altered by approved fill, the adjacent zone shall be deemed to extend to the limit of the fill. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Planned Development. As an alternative to conventional development, the planning board may authorize planned developments for areas designated PD in accordance with plans and proposals which conform to the requirements of this section. The standards herein establish the limits of discretionary action which may be taken by the approving authority administering these provisions. No deviation from these standards may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. 
1.  Standards for Type, Density or Intensity of Use. Planned developments may be approved by the planning board in conformity with the standards governing the type, and density, or intensity, of use set forth by this subsection and those set forth for each PD designated area. 
a.  The minimum tract size shall be five acres. 
b.  All residential developments shall be designed as residential clusters. 
c.  All lands remaining outside of public streets, building lots and any other parcels approved for special purposes shall be set aside as open space. The boundaries of any open space parcels shall be designed to coincide with adjoining open space parcels, whether existing or proposed, so as to extend and expand upon an overall open space network for the city. 
2.  Variations of Standards. The type and density or intensity shall be varied from that otherwise permitted within a planned development in consideration of the amount, location and proposed use of common open space; the location and physical characteristics of the site; and the location, design and type of dwelling units and other uses as set forth by this subsection. 
a.  Gross density/intensity shall be reduced in direct proportion to the extent that the improvable area of the tract is less than the minimum established for the PD designated area. 
b.  Gross density shall be reduced in direct proportion to the extent that the site is to be developed for nonresidential uses, other than open space, for each PD designated area. 
3.  Deviations within Planned Developments. Within planned developments, deviations in the standards for type, density or intensity of use may be authorized by the planning board by designating areas to be developed under different standards in accordance with the limitations set forth by this subsection and those set forth for each PD designated area. 
a.  A land use map delineating and classifying areas for each variation shall be established for all planned developments. Land use maps shall be approved where the planning board finds the following requirements to be satisfied: 
i.  The land use proposals are consistent with the policies articulated in the adopted master plan as relates to land use, community facilities and housing. 
ii.  The open space proposals protect any special environmental features by preserving land in an open undeveloped state, create suitable areas for organized outdoor recreation, and are consistent with the policies articulated in the adopted master plan as relates to open space and environmental features. 
iii.  The circulation proposals provide for a closed traffic circulation system, provide a pedestrian path network linking all parts of the development, and are consistent with the policies articulated in the circulation element of the adopted master plan. 
iv.  The utilities proposals are consistent with the policies articulated in the adopted master plan as relates to stormwater management, utilities, local services and fiscal impact on the county, municipality and special districts including the local school district. 
v.  The overall proposals are consistent, inasmuch as is reasonably practicable, with other existing, planned or potential developments. 
b.  Classifications for land use areas shall correspond with the optional zone classifications enumerated for each PD designated area. Substitute classifications may be approved by the planning board to accommodate substitute bulk standards and shall be consistent with this section as follows: 
i.  Substitute classifications shall provide for the type, density, or intensity, or use. 
ii.  Substitute classifications shall provide uniform standards which are of equal stringency for the type, density, or intensity, or use. 
iii.  Substitute classifications shall provide standards which are consistent with the limitations established for the PD designated area. 
c.  Bulk Standards. The standards for the design, bulk and location of buildings for planned developments shall be evaluated by the planning board and approved where they are found to be in conformity with the regulations set forth by this subsection and those set forth for each PD designated area. 
i.  The standards employed shall be those standards for the zones which correspond to the land use classifications established for each delineated land use area. The planning board may approve substitute bulk standards as follows: 
a.  Substitute bulk standards shall provide for: minimum lot area, width, and depth; minimum setbacks along streets and other lot lines; maximum lot coverage; maximum floor area ratio; minimum improvable tract area and general design standards for multifamily residential development; exceptions for accessory buildings; requirements for parking, landscaping, lighting and other improvements. 
b.  Substitute bulk standards shall provide standards which are of equal or greater stringency to the corresponding zones with respect to: minimum lot area; maximum building height measured in feet and stories; maximum floor area ratio; and minimum improvable tract area for multifamily residential development. 
c.  The planning board shall notify the governing body and tax assessor, by adopted resolution, within five days of approval, of the approval of substitute bulk standards for any planned development. 
d.  Zoning. Changes in zoning effectuated through the planned development approval shall be recorded on the zoning map. 
i.  Upon approval, the area comprising an approved planned development shall be delineated along with the name and date of approval of the proposed planned development on the zoning map. 
ii.  The zoning standards shall be recorded through deed restrictions upon final approval and the zoning map shall be periodically amended to reflect the completion of sections of a planned development. 
iii.  Plans. Development shall be in conformity with site plans, subdivisions and any general development plan as approved by the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016; prior code § 40-116) 
17.36.020 - Schedules and application. 
A.  Schedules of Requirements. The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each zone district are set forth in the attached Schedules IA, II, III and IB, which are supplemented by other sections of this chapter. 
B.  Application of Regulations. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided: 
1.  No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used or intended to be used, for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. 
2.  No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located. 
3.  No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any builthng be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located. 
4.  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
5.  Where a use is specifically enumerated in a less restrictive zone, such use shall not be permitted in a more restrictive zone unless it is specifically enumerated as a permitted use therein. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 1, 5-14-2013; prior code § 40-117) 
17.36.030 - Supplementary regulations. 
A.  Accessory Uses. Uses which are customarily associated with and subordinate to a principal use, including but not limited to off-street parking, customary home occupations and storage, may be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Accessory parking in residential zones shall be limited to passenger vehicles, except that not more than one of the following may be maintained for the exclusive use of the occupants of the principal residential structure, provided that off-street parking in accordance with Sections 17.40.010 and 17.40.040 is provided: 
a.  A commercial truck or van not more than five thousand (5,000) pounds in gross weight to be stored in a garage. 
b.  A trailer, recreational vehicle or boat not more than twenty-five (25) feet in length to be stored in a rear yard. 
2.  Home occupations may be conducted within a principal or accessory residential structure, provided that: 
a.  Not more than one home occupation is conducted on an individual lot. 
b.  No persons other than occupants of the dwelling are involved or employed on premises in the home occupation except in the case of a professional office where not more than one resident person may be employed. 
c.  The occupation is conducted within an enclosed building and does not involve outdoor storage or utilize more than thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. 
d.  Yard or garage sales do not occur more often than once in any three-month period. 
e.  The occupation does not involve child care for more than five children. 
f.  The occupation does not involve commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
g.  The following characteristics do not differ from that expected in a residential neighborhood: 
i.  The appearance of the premises, including colors, materials, construction, lighting or signs. 
ii.  The risk due to the nature or volume of materials stored. 
iii.  The creation of noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare or electrical interference. 
iv.  The volume and frequency of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any parking needs shall be met off-street in other than a front yard. 
v.  The combined use by a dwelling and home occupation of water, sewer, electricity or refuse collection. 
3.  Amusement games or entertainment machines or devices or music machines or devices may be operated as an accessory to any principal retail, personal service, entertainment or indoor amusement use, provided that the area devoted to such use does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet or thirty (30) percent of the street or ground level of the building in which it is conducted. 
B.  Temporary Tract Office. A temporary tract office shall be a temporary building, structure or trailer, which shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet. A temporary office is permitted in any district on the property to which it is appurtenant and shall be limited to a six-month period, except for construction projects which shall be permitted for a one-year period. At the expiration of this time the tract office shall be removed at the expense of the owner. If the temporary office is not removed within thirty (30) days of notification from the building or zoning official, than the city may fine the offender one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month and the city may remove said office at owner's expense. The building official may issue a six-month extension if the owner supplies a justifiable reason in writing to the city. Such temporary office may also be conducted in a building in a housing development as a real estate office for said development and may remain in place until said development is sold out. 
C.  Outdoor Storage Areas. Such uses shall be governed by the following provisions to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare and especially with regard to abutting properties and the occupants thereof: 
1.  Flammable and Explosive Liquids. No highiy flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices or appliances located on the same premises as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision. 
2.  Fencing and Setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities abutting, adjacent to or across from any residential district or otherwise visible from any residential district or public way shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents thereof from adjacent property as provided in Chapter 17.32 of this title. 
3.  Deposit of Wastes. 
a.  No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off of such premises by natural causes or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents, insects or animals shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers within a garbage collection area. 
b.  All dwellings containing three or more dwelling units shall provide closed containers for the storage of refuse and recyclable materials. The capacity of such containers shall be consistent with anticipated accumulation and removal rates. Storage areas shall be designed to protect against the spread of litter, infestations of vermin, persistent odors, saturation by precipitation or flooding and the theft of valuable materials. Storage areas shall be situated so as to provide unobstructed access. Appropriate directional signage and labeling shall be provided and containers for recyclable materials shall be clearly distinguished from refuse storage containers. 
D.  Hotels, Motels, Motor Court and Motor Hotel Units. Such uses shall be governed by the following provisions: 
1.  Each rentable unit shall have a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, exclusive of bathroom facilities. 
2.  Each rentable unit shall have a minimum of one bedroom and a bathroom with shower and toilet. 
E.  Enclosure of open porches existing prior to 1950 may be allowed as follows: 
1.  In any required side yard. 
2.  In any required front yard in locations specified as part of the city master plan where such development meets one of the following conditions: 
a.  Where off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with Section 17.40.040. 
b.  Where required off-street parking spaces are not provided and the building setback, exclusive of projections, is less than nineteen (19) feet. 
c.  Where required off-street parking spaces are not provided and the setback of the enclosed porch would be nineteen (19) feet or greater. 
F.  Use and occupancy of any structure containing three or more dwelling units is subject to and conditioned upon an equitable distribution of accessory parking spaces, whether on-site or off-site, among tenants occupying the structure. Where a ratio of one parking space to each dwelling unit is equaled or exceeded, use and occupancy is further conditioned upon the tenants of each dwelling unit having included in their leasehold sufficient parking for at least one automobile. Parking spaces required for a residential structure shall not be leased to any party other than a resident of the structure. 
G.  Eating and Drinking Estab1ishments. Such uses shall be governed by the following provisions: 
1.  Standard table/counter service restaurants, which include the serving of foods by an employee at the table or counter at which they are to be consumed, shall be permitted in all commercial districts, provided that no such restaurant containing more than twenty (20) seats shall be allowed in the C-1 district. 
2.  Self-service restaurants, which include the serving of foods at a window or counter where a seating area for consumption is provided, shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  In all C-4 zones. 
b.  In all C-3 zones provided that not less than forty (40) seats are provided. 
c.  In all C-2 zones provided that not less than twenty (20) seats are provided. 
3.  Walkup window service restaurants, which include the serving of foods at a window or counter where no seating area for consumption is provided, shall be permitted in the C-4 district only. 
4.  Curbside/carhop service, which includes the serving of foods to consumers in automobiles which drive up to a serving area, shall be permitted in the C-4 district only. 
5.  Driveup window service, which includes the serving of foods to consumers in automobiles where no drive up serving area is used shall be permitted in the C-4 district only, provided that sufficient vehicular staging for a ten (10) minute wait is provided where adequate seating is available and adequate staging for a twenty (20) minute wait otherwise and further provided that no parking area shall be provided downstream of the service window. 
6.  All restaurants which serve food in disposable containers shall be subject to the following refuse preventative measures: 
a.  Fencing of all outdoor areas other than front yards. 
b.  Provision for waste cleanup on site and in all public areas within a radius of eighty (80) feet. 
c.  Provision of waste receptacles at all public walkup windows, parking areas and outdoor eating areas. 
7.  Exit driveways for walkup window, driveup window, curbside/carhop or self-service restaurants which are situated on the approach side of an intersection shall be located at least forty (40) feet from such intersection. 
H.  Mandatory Recycling Program. Compliance with the foregoing,and in particular Sections 8.36.010 through 8.36.070 of this code shall be required in all applications for site plan approval by all applicants required to file site plans. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 2, 5-14-2013; prior code § 40-118) 
17.36.040 - Buffers. 
A.  Parking Buffers. 
1.  Between any garage entry or any driveway gate and any street line, a buffer sufficient to accommodate vehicles for which the garage or driveway is designed shall be required. 
2.  Between a dwelling window located at or below grade and any parking stall, a six-foot buffer shall be required. 
B.  Residential Property or Zone Lines. Buffers shall be required betwen any structure and a residential property or zone line as follows: 
Principal Use Buffer Dimension (feet) R,V,W,X and Y 10 Z 20 AA and BB 50  
C.  Uses in Buffer Areas. No use shall be established in a buffer area except the following: 
1.  Driveways necessary to provide proper means of ingress and egress. 
2.  Directional signs in conjunction with driveways which are necessary for the proper guidance and control of vehicular traffic. 
3.  Landscape screening or fencing. 
4.  Accessory uses permitted within the adjacent zone. 
(Prior code § 40-120) 
17.36.050 - Bedroom density. 
    For each residential structure on an individual zone lot, bedroom density shall not exceed the maximum density permitted in the district in which such structure is located, as specified in Schedule IB. 
(Prior code § 40-121) 
17.36.060 - Performance standards. 
A.  General application. Permitted and conditional uses enumerated in any C or M district, and uses accessory thereto, shall be subject to the following performance standards and procedures. 
B.  Procedures Enforcement. 
1.  Prior to Construction and Operation. Any application for a building permit for a use which shall be subject to performance standards shall be accompanied by a sworn statement filed by the owner of subject property or the operator of the proposed use that said use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein. 
2.  Continued Compliance. Continued compliance with performance standards is required and shall be enforced by the building inspector. 
3.  Termination of Violation. All violations shall be terminated within thirty (30) days or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day following, and violators shall be subject to fines as set forth herein. 
C.  Regulation of Nuisance Elements. 
1.  Definition of Nuisance Elements. A nuisance element is any noise, radioactivity, vibration, glare, smoke, odor, air pollution or dust which exceeds the performance standards established under this section. 
2.  Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of performance standards. The determination of the existence of nuisance elements shall be made at: 
a.  Any residential property line, for noise, vibration, glare and dust. 
b.  Anywhere within the city, for elements involving radioactivity, smoke and other forms of air pollution. 
c.  The zone district boundary line, for odor. 
D.  Radioactivity. No activities shall be permitted which cause radioactivity in violation of Title 10, Chapter I, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, Standards for Protection Against Radiation, dated June 16, 1957, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto. 
E.  Noise. 
1.  At the points of measurement specified in subsection (C)(2), the maximum sound-pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility, other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work, shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table I, II and III. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting ANSI (American National Standards Institute) S1.4 or the latest revision thereof. 
2.  Sound level is the measured level of a sound expressed in dB (decibels) re 0.0002 microbar, obtained using a sound level meter. Sound levels include all factors inherent in measuring with a sound level meter including microphone frequency response, amplifier characteristics, meter damping, observer effects and weighting networks. 
3.  The sound pressure level, in dB (decibels), of sound is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure. Sound pressure level is measured with a sound level meter meeting ANSI (American National Standards Institute) S1.4 or the latest revision thereof. 
4.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit sound from any industrial or commercial operation which, when measured at any residential property line, is in excess of any of the following: 
a.  From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
i.  Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of sixty-five (65) dBA. 
ii.  Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one or more octave bands: 
Table I 
Octave Band Center 
Frequency (Hz) Octave Band Sound Pressure Level (dB) 31.5 96 63 82 125 74 250 67 500 63 1,000 60 2,000 57 4,000 55 8,000 53  
iii.  Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in excess of eighty (80) decibels. 
b.  From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
i.  Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of fifty (50) dBA. 
ii.  Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one or more octave bands: 
Table II 
Octave Band Center 
Frequency (Hz) Octave Band Sound Pressure Level (dB) 31.5 86 63 71 125 61 250 53 500 48 1,000 45 2,000 42 4,000 40 8,000 38  
iii.  Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in excess of eighty (80) decibels. 
c.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit sound from any industrial or commercial operation which, when measured at the property line of any other commercial operation, is in excess of any of the following: 
i.  Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of sixty-five (65) dBA. 
ii.  Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one ir or more octave bands: 
Table III 
Octave Band Center 
Frequency (Hz) Octave Band Sound Pressure Level (dB) 31.5 96 63 82 125 74 250 67 500 63 1,000 60 2,000 57 4,000 55 8,000 53  
iii.  Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in excess of eighty (80) decibels. 
5.  Enforcement of subsections C and E shall be by the department of health, welfare and housing. 
F.  Vibration. No vibration which is detectable without instruments at the points of measurement specified in subsection (C)(2) shall be permitted. 
G.  Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from flood lights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall be visible at the points of measurement specified in subsection (C)(2). 
H.  Smoke. No emission of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart, published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., copyright 1954 (being a direct facsimile reproduction of a standard Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines), shall be permitted. Visible gray smoke of a shade equal to No. 3 on the chart may be emitted for not more than three minutes in any fifteen (15) consecutive minutes when a firebox is cleaned or when a new fire is built. 
I.  Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable without instruments shall be permitted. 
J.  Dust. Solid or liquid particles shall not be emitted in concentrations exceeding three-tenths grain per cubic foot of the conveying gas or air. 
K.  Fly Ash. 
1.  No emission of any fly ash shall be permitted to be discharged from any stack or chimney into the open air in excess of the quantity set forth in the following table. 
Fly Ash 
Heat in Fuel Burned 
(British thermal units 
per hour) Rate of Emission 
(pounds per hour) 1,000,000 1 100,000,000 100 400,000,000 330 1,000,000,000 750 2,000,000,000 1,365 3,000,000,000 1,850 4,000,000,000 2,260 5,000,000,000 2,640 6,000,000,000 2,950 7,000,000,000 3,200 8,000,000,000 3,410 10,000,000,000 3,750  
2.  For heat content between any two consecutive heat contents, the fly ash limitation shall be as determined by interpolation. 
(Prior code § 40-122) 
17.36.070 - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses shall be permitted under the same restrictions as permitted principal uses, provided that the required conditions specified in Schedule III are met. 
(Prior code § 40-123) 
17.36.080 - Prohibited uses. 
    Specificially prohibited from any zone district in the city is the manufacture of explosives and the permanent and/or continual use of any lands upon which there shall be conducted or maintained any business, operation or process for the cleaning, maintenance, repair, renovating, painting, servicing, storing or emptying used portable toilets or other tanks or containers used in connection therewith containing human waste, including the emptying of the contents thereof into any container, waste line or sewer line, including the waste or sewer lines or pipes contained within the city sewerage system, and aircraft landing facilities except as otherwise provided in this title. 
(Prior code § 40-124) 
17.36.090 - Nonconformance. 
    Nonconforming uses shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  Continuation of Use. A use, building or structure lawfully in existence at the effective date of any ordinance codified in this chapter, which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this chapter, or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any person with an interest in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists may apply in writing to the zoning administrative officer for "certificate of non-conformity" stating that the use or structure preexisted the adoption of any ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof. Application pursuant to this provision can be made to the city zoning officer within one year of the adoption of an ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. After one year all request for a certificate of non-conformity must be made to the city zoning board. 
B.  Regulation of Nonconforming Uses. No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, except when changed to a conforming use or when required to do so by law and as follows: 
1.  Restoration. Any nonconforming structure damaged to an extent of less than fifty (50) percent of its previous existing floor area may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided that the floor area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the floor area which existed prior to such damage. All repairs shall be completed within one year after damages occur, or such use shall not be rebuilt, except as a conforming use. 
2.  Repairs. Normal maintenance repair and incidental alteration of a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, provided that it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use. 
3.  Alterations. A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livabililty. No structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or bedrooms. 
C.  Termination of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use not used for a reasonable period of time, accompanied by an intent on the part of the owner to abandon such use as evidenced by some overt act or some failure to act which carries with it a sufficient implication that the owner neither claims nor retains any interest in the subject matter of the abandonment, shall be considered an abandonment thereof and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived, except as a conforming use. Any nonconforming use changed to a conforming use, or a use allowed in a more restricted district and used as such for any period of time, shall not be used as a nonconforming use thereafter. 
D.  Preexisting Nonconforming Lots. On any nonconforming lot, a detached one- or two-family dwelling which is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter may be erected, provided that: 
1.  No vacant lot is adjacent. 
2.  No adjacent lot has an adjacent side yard exceeding fifteen (15) feet in width exclusive of driveway. 
3.  The required front and rear yards are provided. 
4.  Side yards of not less than three feet are provided. 
5.  Required off-street parking spaces are provided. 
6.  The building conforms to the height limitations. 
7.  The use is permitted in the district. 
E.  Where an existing building is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the nonconforming portion of the structure may remain and further development may be permitted on the site, provided that the proposed development is in conformance with the restrictions and use requirements of this title. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 3, 5-14-2013; prior code § 40-125) 
17.36.098 - Residential buildings-Elevator requirements. 
A.  Pedestrian/Loading Elevators. All residential buildings with ten (10) or more units and are three (3) or more stories in height located within the City of Elizabeth must construct an elevator large enough to house pedestrians and their furniture. This elevator must be electric or hydraulic and meet all applicable building codes. 
(Ord. No. 4920 , § 1, 10-10-2017) 
17.36.099 - Calculation of prevailing conditions. 
A.  To establish prevailing lot widths, frontages, front yard setbacks and rear yard setbacks, the applicant must perform the following: 
1.  Utilize all existing lots, including the property in question, as per the city tax maps. Proposed lots to be created by the application are not to be included. 
2.  Include only lots located within the same zone, within the same (entire) block and on both sides of the street as the subject parcel. 
3.  The prevailing percentile shall be sixty-five (65) percent. This is to say that the prevailing lot dimension shall be the lot which constitutes sixty-five (65) percent of the neighborhood. Example, if there are twenty-five (25) lots that meet the criteria of subsections 17.36.099 A. and 17.36.099 B. and you create a table listing the lots minimum to maximum dimensions, the 16th lot going from low to high is the prevailing lot dimension to utilize. 
(Ord. No. 4920 , § 5, 10-10-2017) 
17.36.100 - Lot dimensions. 
A.  The following parcel and yard dimensions shall apply to all residential projects except one- and two-family homes in all permitted zones within the City of Elizabeth. 
1.  Lot width prevailing, but at no time less than sixty (60) feet. 
2.  Lot frontage prevailing, but at no time less than sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Lot depth prevailing, but at no time less than one hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Front Yard Setback Prevailing. If no prevailing exists within the block, then the front yard setback shall be thirty (35) feet. 
5.  Side Yard Setback. Minimum of thirty-three (33) percent of building height, but at no time less than ten (10) feet. All structures which abut each other must be at least fifteen (15) feet apart, including off-site structures. 
6.  Rear Yard Setback. Thirty-five (35) percent of the lot depth but not less than thirty-five (35) feet. Measured form the rear lot line to the most outward rear building projection. Excluding projections permitted under subsection B. 
7.  Requirements specific to corner lots (corner lots shall be considered to have two (2) front yards, one rear yard and one side yard): 
a.  Front Yard Setback. Prevailing on both lot frontages. 
b.  Interior side yard same as subsection 17.36.110 C.2. 
c.  Rear yard setback same as subsection 17.36.110 C.3. 
B.  Requirements Specific to Corner Lots. 
1.  Minimum Lot Width. One and one-half (1.5) times the prevailing, measured at the front yard setback from the shortest street line. 
2.  Minimum Lot Frontage. One and one-half (1.5) times the prevailing, measured along the shortest street line. 
3.  Lot Depth. One hundred (100) feet minimum, measured perpendicular to the lot frontage. 
_____
C.  Lot width and frontage for one- and two-family residential lots in all permitted zones within the city shall be based on the following table: 
Table No. 1 
Zone Ward Standard (A) Prevailing (B) Prevailing (C) R-1 All except #2 50 feet 40 feet 40 feet R-1 #2 50 feet 35 feet 35 feet All listed #1 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet All listed #2 50 feet 33 feet 25 feet All listed # 3 & #4 50 feet 40 feet 33 feet All listed #5 & #6 33 feet 30 feet 25 feet  
    Conditions of Table No. 1: 
1.  Column (A) is the standard minimum required lot width and frontage where a prevailing does not exist. 
2.  The standard lot width and frontage may be reduced to Prevailing (C) provided that sixty-five (65) percent of existing lot widths and frontages are less than or equal to the listed dimensions. 
3.  The standard lot width and frontage may be reduced to Prevailing (B) provided that fifty (50) percent of existing lot widths and frontages are less than or equal to the listed dimensions. 
4.  To establish prevailing lot widths and lot frontages, a table is required to be submitted with each application for each development or variance application, depicting the following criteria: 
a.  All existing lots, including the property in question, as per the city tax maps. Proposed lots to be created by the application are not to be included. 
b.  Include only lots located within the same zone, within the same (entire) block and on both sides of the street as the subject parcel. 
c.  An existing lot or proposed lot that falls within the range between columns (A) and (B) of the table or (B) and (C) may be considered to be prevailing if the corresponding percentage of existing lots fall within that range. For example, a forty (40) feet wide lot in Ward #2 can be considered to be prevailing if fifty (50) percent of the existing lots are forty (40) feet or less in width or frontage. Also, if the subject lot is thirty (30) feet in width, the lot can be considered to be prevailing if sixty-five (65) percent of the existing lots are thirty (30) feet or less in width or frontage. In no case shall a lot be considered to be prevailing if its width or frontage is less than that indicated in column (C) of Table No. 1. 
_____
D.  The following requirements for lot dimensions shall apply to all non-residential properties in zones in which the use is permitted within the city. 
1.  Lot Area. Minimum five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Lot Width. Minimum fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Lot Depth. Minimum one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4920 , §§ 2-4, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 4373, § 4, 5-14-2013; prior code § 40-126) 
17.36.110 - Yard dimensions. 
    All buildings and structures shall provide open areas which conform with the limitations set forth hereinafter: 
A.  The following requirements for yard dimensions shall apply to all one- and two-family residential dwellings in all zones permitted within the city. 
1.  Front Yard Setback. Twenty (20) feet minimum, measured from the street line to the most outward front building projection, excluding projections permitted under Paragraph B. The front yard can be less if it meets the prevailing setback based on sixty-five (65) percent of the existing properties. 
2.  Side Yard Setback. Minimum twelve (12) percent of required lot width but not less than three (3'-1") feet. All structures which abut each other must be at least five (5) feet apart, including off-site structures (fireman's rule). 
3.  Rear Yard Setback. Twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth but not less than twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the rear lot line to the most outward rear building projection, excluding projections permitted under Paragraph B. 
4.  Requirements specific to corner lots (corner lots shall be considered to have two (2) front yards, one rear yard and one side yard): 
a.  Front Yard Setback. Twenty (20) feet minimum measured from the shortest street line to the most outward rear building projection, excluding projections permitted under Paragraph B. 
b.  Interior Side Yard Setback. Minimum twelve (12) percent of required lot width but not less than three (3'-1") feet. 
c.  Corner Side Yard Setback. Fifteen (15) feet minimum or eighteen (18) feet minimum for corner side yards containing a driveway. 
d.  Rear Yard. Twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth but not less than twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the rear lot line to the most outward rear building projection, excluding projections permitted under Paragraph B. 
5.  The following requirements of yard dimensions shall apply to all non-residential properties in all zones within the city, except if that particular zone has its own separate standards. 
a.  Minimum Front Yard Setback. Prevailing. If no prevailing exists within the block than the front yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Minimum Side Yard Setback. Ten (10) percent of lot width with a not to exceed distance of twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Minimum rear yard setback is twenty-five (25) feet. The minimum shall be thirty-five (35) feet when property is adjacent to a residential zone, noncommercial use or a non-industrial use. 
d.  To establish prevailing setbacks for all yard dimensions, a table shall be provided depicting the following: Include all existing lots, excluding newly created lots, as per the current City of Elizabeth Tax Maps on file in the city engineer's office; only include lots within the same zone as the subject parcel; and include all lots shall be within the existing block only, and on both sides of the street as the subject parcel. 
B.  Building projections into required yards shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Cornices, eaves, canopies, awnings and fireplaces may project into any yard for a distance not to exceed six feet, provided that they are no closer than two feet to any property line. 
2.  Open porches, stairwells and balconies may project into any yard for a distance not to exceed eight feet, provided that they are no closer than three feet to any property line. 
3.  Fire escapes may be located in any side or rear yard and may project into such yards a distance not to exceed three feet. Provided that they are no closer than two feet to the property line. 
4.  Projections into yards shall be permitted to accommodate the needs of individuals with disabilities which do not conform provided that a deed restriction is recorded preventing the transfer of title until such altered structures are restored or made to conform. Projections shall be limited to open structures located where possible outside the front yard and may vary from requirements only to the minimum degree necessary to afford access. Proof of handicap must be supplied to the City of Elizabeth Construction Department. 
C.  Accessory structures may be erected in accordance with the following restrictions: 
1.  Accessory Buildings. 
a.  Residential accessory buildings or other accessory buildings situated in a residential district shall be permitted in any side or rear yard. Up to three one-story acccessory buildings shall be permitted provided total accessory building coverage is not more than thirty-three (33) percent of the principal building coverage. Not more than one accessory building shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet or a height of more than eight feet. No accessory building shall exceed ten (10) feet in height allowing for a pitched roof projecting above that height. All accessory buildings shall be set back not less than two feet to a rear lot line and not less than three feet to a side lot line. Accessory buildings may be attached to a principal building. 
b.  Commercial and industrial accessory buildings shall be permitted in any yard provided they are limited to one story and fifteen (15) feet in height. In a front yard such buildings shall be set back not less than three-quarters of the height of the building wall from any property line. 
2.  Accessory patios and decks may be located in any side or rear yard, and shall be limited so that the floor of such structures rises no higher than the ground floor elevation, extends no more than eighteen (18) feet from a building and is no closer than three feet to any lot line. At least two sides shall remain open and any cover shall be limited to a vertical height of ten (10) feet at any point. 
3.  Accessory parking and loading areas, including driveways, may be located in any yard area, provided that no such area may be located within three feet of any lot line except as necessary to provide street access. Parking may be situated directly in front of a dwelling only in a driveway leading to a garage and circular driveways are prohibited unless leading to a garage. 
4.  Accessory facilities including swimming pools may be located in any side or rear yard provided they are set back from any lot line a distance not less than twice the prevailing side yard setback. Motorized elements shall be set back three times the required setback. 
5.  Accessory patios, decks, parking areas, loading areas, fences and walls may be erected in any yard as follows: 
a.  Accessory patios, decks, and parking may be located in any side yard or rear yard, provided that no such structure may be located closer than three (3) feet to any lot line. 
b.  Accessory parking and loading areas, including driveways, may be located in any yard area, provided that no such area shall be located within three (3) feet of any lot line. 
c.  In industrial districts, fences or walls may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
d.  In commercial districts, fences or walls may not exceed eight (8) feet in height. In front yards, fences or walls shall be of a decorative material or obscured by plant material with visually solid portions limited to a height of three (3) feet. 
e.  For residential uses in any district, fences or walls may not exceed six (6) feet in height in any side or rear yard. In front yards, fences or walls shall be of a decorative material or obscured by plant material and may not exceed three (3) feet in height. Where a lot has more than one frontage, a height of six (6) feet may project into one front yard, provided that the projection consists of only two (2) angled segments such that the fence extends in a straight line from one pint on the front yard setback line to a second point within the front yard and returns to a third pint on the setback line. Barbed wire or razor wire may not be used as part of a fence or wall, or as fencing material in any residential zone. 
f.  No barbed or razor wire fences shall be permitted anywhere within the city boundaries. 
6.  Walks, standards for signs or lighting and other similar accessory structures may be erected in any yard. 
D.  Open space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Open space shall be provided for all projects containing three (3) or more dwelling units. Mixed use projects shall provide open space for the residential component. 
2.  Open space for all residential units except one- and two-family dwellings shall be two hundred (200) square feet per unit. The open space shall have a cap of four thousand (4,000) square feet for buildings over four (4) stories. 
3.  Open space shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Exterior yards, courts and recreational areas, not devoted to auto usage with a minimum dimension of twenty (20) feet in width and minimum area of five hundred (500) square feet. 
b.  Common areas including balconies and porches with a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Interior multi-family communal spaces, exclusive of passageways, with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet. 
4.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the total required open space is required to be exterior lawn and/or court yard areas suitable for recreational use. 
E.  Private Swimming Pools. 
1.  A private swimming pool shall be permitted on any lot that contains a dwelling structure. 
2.  A private swimming pool and appurtenances may be located in a side or rear yard with a setback of not less than four (4) feet, measured from the nearest vertical wall of the pool. 
3.  A private swimming pool shall not be located closer than eight (8) feet to a dwelling structure and four (4) to an accessory building. 
4.  The yard in which a pool is located shall be provided with a six-foot high fence, meeting the requirements of the International Building Code. 
5.  All private swimming pools shall be equipped with the necessary equipment for disinfection and filtering. 
6.  There shall be no physical connection between a potable water supply and any private swimming pool. 
7.  No private swimming pool shall be constructed until such time that all required permits have been obtained from the construction department. 
F.  Impervious Lot Coverage. Impervious surface is defined as a surface that is resistant to infiltration by water, including but not limited to roofs, pavement and sidewalks. The following are limits to the amount of impervious surface permitted: 
Residential Lots 2500 to 3500 sq. ft 77% max 3501 to 4500 sq. ft. 65% max 4501 and beyond 60% max  
    All non-residential lots shall have a max impervious coverage of seventy-five (75) percent. 
G.  Building Coverage. 
1.  Principal Buildings and Structures. All non-residential lots shall have a minimum floor area ration (FAR) of eleven (11) percent. There is no FAR for residential zones within the city. 
2.  Accessory buildings and structures cannot exceed ten (10) percent of the principal building square footage. 
(Ord. No. 4920 , §§ 6-8, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 4646 , § 1, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 4373, § 5, 5-14-2013; Ord. 3906 § 1, 2007; prior code § 40-127) 
17.36.120 - Principal building regulations. 
A.  Height limitations shall be maintained as follows at any time a building or other structure is constructed or altered. A basement which rises not more than four (4) feet above grade shall not count as a story. No occupancy of a basement or one-half (1/2) a story shall be permitted in the city for residential purposes in any zone. 
1.  In the R-1 residential district, buildings shall be limited to three stories. No occupancy for any purposes (office, storage, residential uses, etc.) shall be permitted above the third story. Building height shall be prevailing or if a prevailing does not exist thirty-eight (38) feet. Building height shall be measured by using the average of the existing grades where the future building will be placed (all four (4) corners and ten (10) feet within that area) and the "roof top" of the structure (peak). 
2.  In all residential districts except R-4, all commercial districts except C-3 and C-4, building height shall be the same as the R-1 requirements. 
3.  In the R-4 and C-3 districts, building height shall be limited to sixteen (16) stories and one hundred sixty (160) feet. Residential buildings with four or fewer units to be same as R-1 requirements. 
4.  In the C-4 and Manufacturing districts, building and other structure height shall be limited to five stories and sixty (60) feet. 
B.  No structures may project above the roof eaves or cornice line except as follows: 
1.  Decorative elements such as chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes and monuments may project fifty (50) percent higher than otherwise limited. 
2.  Utilitarian appurtenances such as vents and utilities may project not more than two feet unless they are enclosed within parapet walls. 
3.  Freestanding poles or masts for flags, whip antenna, or light fixtures may extend to one and one-half times the height permitted for buildings. 
4.  Parapet walls may project not more than four feet plus one-half the setback from the roof edge to a maximum of twelve (12) feet above the roof of the building. 
5.  Dormers or penthouses may project as necessary to provide clearance for stairways or equipment in vertical shafts. 
(Ord. No. 4920 , § 9, 10-10-2017; prior code § 40-128) 
17.36.125 - Minimum square footage for commercial space. 
A.  The minimum square footage for any commercial space located in the general and specialty retail zones shall be five hundred (500) square feet. 
B.  Each store front shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet frontage on a public street. 
C.  The establishment of any alcove stores not meeting the minimum square footage established in this section is prohibited. 
D.  Penalty. A person or entity that shall violate any provision of this section or any other order promulgated hereunder shall, after summons are issued, be required to appear in municipal court and be subject to a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each violation of any of the provision of this section shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. A separate offense is deemed committed on each date during on or which a violation occurs or is continuous. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 6, 5-14-2013) 
17.36.130 - Visibility at intersections. 
    At all street intersections, no obstruction to vision between a plane three feet above the established grade of the street at the property line and a plane ten (10) feet above said grade shall be erected on any lot within a triangle bounded by the street center lines and a line connecting points on each center line one hundred ten (110) feet from the intersection of such lines. 
(Prior code § 40-129) 
17.36.140 - Landscaping. 
A.  Screening and Landscaping. Outdoor storage or work areas other than an automobile service station shall be enclosed by a solid and continuous wall, fence or landscaping sufficient to screen such activity from view. 
B.  Service areas, transformer compounds, external heating and cooling equipment and other strictly utilitarian improvements shall be screened as fully as practicable. 
C.  Parking areas with six or more spaces shall be: 
1.  Screened from adjacent residential open space and dwelling areas by a solid and continuous wall, fence or landscaping of not less than six feet in height. 
2.  Screened from public streets by a wall, fence or landscaping sufficient to effectively reduce headlight glare. 
D.  Adjacent parking areas with ten (10) or more parking spaces shall be delineated by an appropriately landscaped strip. 
E.  Landscaped areas shall be provided on each tract and planted with trees, shrubs and groundcovers or may include pedestrian structures such as plazas, malls, pedestrian walkways, sitting areas, patios, pools, fountains and incidental furnishings. Such areas when enclosed shall be regarded as complying only when their minimum dimension exceeds fourteen (14) feet. 
1.  Street areas outside of roadway and driveway areas shall be landscaped in their entirety. 
2.  Front yards outside of parking and driveway areas shall be landscaped in their entirety. 
3.  Buffer areas shall be landscaped in their entirety. 
4.  Parking areas shall be accompanied by landscape areas amounting to twenty (20) percent of the paved parking and driveway area. 
5.  Outdoor work and storage areas need not be landscaped. 
6.  All remaining areas not occupied by buildings shall be suitably landscaped. 
(Prior code § 40-135) 
17.36.145 - Design standards for facades within all commercial zones. 
A.  Facades. These design standards for facades, security gates, and exterior lighting shall be applicable to zones C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5. 
1.  Design Standards. 
a.  The facades of newly-constructed buildings, or renovations of existing facades shall maintain the architectural harmony of the zone. 
b.  New Construction or Renovation. New buildings and facade renovations shall be designed so that their appearance reflects the historic development patterns of the existing mixed-use buildings within the commercial districts. All new construction and/or exterior improvements to mixed use buildings shall be designed so as to be harmonious with the existing neighboring buildings in terms of material, height, scale, facade proportions, window patterns, color, decorative features and architectural styles. Styles of other periods may be permitted provided that they are determined to be harmonious with the existing architectural style of the zone. 
c.  Matching of Cornice Lines. At the top of the base, and as recommended where neighboring buildings provide cornices or belt lines, a visual cue or indicator such as cornice, belt coursing, a change in glass-to-solid ratio, or any other indicator consistent with the design, proportions, and materials of the base shall be provided. 
d.  Facade Renovation. The applicant should: 
(1)  Retain and maintain all building cornices, features and details; and not remove a building cornice without providing a compatible new cornice of similar scale and detailing. 
(2)  Maintain the rhythm, size and shape of upper floors, windows and associated trim and moldings. 
(3)  Reopen previously in-filled windows, and not fill or alter window openings. 
(4)  Not enclose or remove elements, such as transom windows, or display windows. 
(5)  Not locate air conditioners in street elevation windows or create new openings for thru-wall air conditioners that are visible from the street. 
e.  Incongruous Features. Incongruous features including but not limited to air conditioners, radio or telephone antenna, wireless telecommunications apparatus, ductwork, loose wiring, or other fixtures not otherwise identified herein as permitted facade features, are not permitted in any facade treatment or other area visible from the street. 
f.  Grandfathering. Any change to the exterior structure shall void the legality of any "grandfathered" non-conforming feature, whether that feature be a sign, a security gate, an awning, a door or window, or other feature regulated by these standards, and the new building owner or commercial tenant must correct non-conforming features to adhere to these standards, or be subject to enforcement and penalty. 
g.  Rooftop Fixtures. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning ("HVAC") fixtures, mechanical units, elevator shafts, skylights, wireless telecommunications apparatus and equipment cabinets, solar panels, and other fixtures on rooftops shall not be visible to pedestrians on the street. They must be setback far enough to be out of view of a pedestrian on the opposite block below, or screened by appropriate, architecturally harmonious screening. 
h.  Ductwork. Restaurant ventilation ductwork shall not be visible to pedestrians on the street; where possible it should be installed within the wall, or to the rear or side of the building in a position that is out of the public view, or screened from view. 
i.  Preservation of Architectural Features. No fixture of any type should be affixed to any building in a way that damages, or obscures architectural design features of the building. In any building renovation, traditional design features of the commercial building should be preserved. Traditional features include the kick plate (the area below the display window), display windows, clerestory windows (above the display window), transoms (window above the entry door), the sign band, angled entry doors on building corners, recessed central entry doors, building belt lines, lintels, cornices, and parapets. 
j.  Building Materials. Acceptable building materials for renovation or redevelopment include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Brick and stone masonry, or stucco cast concrete to simulate these. 
(2)  Wood or simulated wood details, such as window frames or shutters. 
(3)  Finished painted metal and sheet metal, such as alpolic panels. 
(4)  Clear or lightly tinted glass. 
(5)  Stone or ceramic tile. 
(6)  Concrete or stone lintels. 
(7)  Wood, simulated wood, concrete, or stone columns. 
(8)  Stucco shall only be permitted above first floors. 
k.  Unacceptable Building Materials. Unacceptable building materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Rustic materials, such as wood shakes, shingles, barn board, Texture 111 siding or other plywood siding, or rustic finishing techniques. 
(2)  Vinyl or aluminum siding. 
(3)  Glass block. 
(4)  Indoor-outdoor carpeting or astro-turf. 
(5)  Corrugated metal or fiberglass. 
(6)  Drive-it or similar materials. 
l.  Maintenance. Building facades, signage, windows, and all display elements visible to the public must be maintained in good structural and visual condition. Fading, frayed, disconnected, unseasonal, untimely, or otherwise neglected elements are not permitted to be on display in the district. 
m.  Blank Walls. Blank walls facing the commercial corridor. 
(1)  Display windows are recommended at grade. 
(2)  Where display windows cannot occur, decorative architectural treatments, plantings, murals, or other visual element in keeping with the architectural style of the area or shopping district are required to eliminate blank walls with no visual interest. 
2.  Color Management. Reserved. 
B.  Windows and Doors. 
1.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm or corporation. 
    "Public view" means any window display area or any part thereof which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, open air parking lot or from any adjoining neighboring premises. 
    "Window display area" means any area within the corners of a window frame normally used for the display of merchandise for retail sale to the public. 
2.  Use of Window Display Areas. 
a.  No storage of materials, stock or inventories shall be permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view, except when necessary in the course of changing displays and then only temporarily for a reasonable period of time. 
b.  Display Windows. All retail uses shall have display windows constituting a minimum of 70 percent surface area at grade, and the bottom edge of the display window(s) shall be no more than four feet in height above grade. The glass is to be clear and not tinted, except that film to block ultra-violet sunlight is permitted. All window frames shall be of a color that is complementary to the facade color scheme. 
c.  Interior Visibility. Product displays and/or store signage is permitted to occupy no more than 25 percent of the glazed area of the storefront. The interior of the store should be clearly visible from the sidewalk through the display window. 
d.  Main Entry Doors. Business entry doors shall be composed chiefly of clear glass, and the interior of the store shall be visible from the sidewalk through the door. 
e.  Cleanliness. The glass of the display windows and doors shall be kept clean at all times. 
C.  Security Gates. 
1.  Permitted Security Gates. Security gates that are manually or power operated, that utilize an open linkage design, and that are mounted only on the interior of the window glass and/or entry door(s) are permitted. 
2.  Prohibited Security Gates. The following security gate systems are prohibited: 
a.  Solid, metal security gates that obscure the view into the store. 
b.  Gates covering the exterior of the facade at grade. 
3.  Preferred Alternative to Security Gates. "Hurricane" high-impact glass is a recommended alternative to security gates in the zone. 
4.  Nonconforming Gates. Nonconforming gates shall not be rebuilt, replaced, enlarged, or altered unless made to conform to regulations. 
D.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Lighting fixtures must illuminate facades, entrances and signage; they may also be used to decoratively illuminate facade architecture. 
2.  Lighting must enhance, not obstruct, visibility of street for residents/offices above grade, and therefore must avoid casting glare into upper story windows. Display window lighting should contribute to exterior lighting of the pedestrian area. 
3.  The use of flashing or blinking lights is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4072, 9-22-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4072, adopted September 22, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as sections 17.49-17.52. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 17.36.145. 
17.36.150 - Schedule IE, C-5 Commercial Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this new zoning district is to provide less industrial and greater commercial zones in the city of Elizabeth. 
B.  1.  Principal permitted uses shall include: 
a.  Professional offices, studios and clinics; 
b.  Business offices; 
c.  Neighborhood convenience; 
d.  Local convenience; 
e.  Community retail; 
f.  General and specialty retail; 
g.  Indoor amusement; 
h.  Hotels; 
i.  Major entertainment; 
j.  Major retail commercial; 
k.  Arterial commercial; 
l.  Residential, see subsection (B)(8) of this section. 
2.  Accessory uses. 
a.  Customary and incidental uses. 
3.  Area, yard and building requirements for principal and accessory buildings. 
a.  Lot area: minimum six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
b.  Lot width: minimum forty (40) feet; 
c.  Lot depth: minimum one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
4.  Impervious lot coverage. 
a.  Buildings and impervious surfaces: one hundred (100) percent; 
b.  Accessory buildings: ten (10) percent. 
5.  Principal building height. 
a.  Six stories/sixty-five (65) feet along Broad Street, East Grand Street, East Jersey Street, Madison Avenue, Jefferson Avenue, Hampton Place, Dickinson Street, Elizabeth Avenue, Winfield Scott Plaza and Commerce Place; 
b.  All other areas: three stories/thirty-five (35) feet. 
6.  Minimum yard dimensions. 
a.  Front yard: prevailing; 
b.  Side yard: prevailing; 
c.  Rear yard: prevailing. 
7.  Off-street parking and loading shall be as follows: 
a.  Parking and deliveries shall occur only in the rear and side yard areas, when possible; 
b.  Parking requirements as set forth in Sections 17.40.020 and 17.40.030 of the city of Elizabeth ordinance. 
8.  Requirements specific to residential uses. 
a.  Residential shall be permitted above first floor permitted uses; 
b.  Minimum net floor area for residential units shall be eight hundred fifty (850) square feet; 
c.  Maximum number of bedrooms per residential unit shall be two. 
(Ord. 3810 § 1, 2006: prior code § 40-136) 
17.36.160 - Schedule IF, Office Commercial-1 (OC-1) Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to encourage the preservation of classic older residential structures along Newark Avenue and North Avenue, where feasible, for office use which is compatible with uses on the opposite sides of these avenues. The preservation of the residential structures will allow the enhancement of many architectural element which should be preserved. The architectural design of the existing and proposed structures shall be residential in nature fitting the area and style of the good quality structures in the general area. 
B.  1.  Principal permitted uses shall include: 
a.  Professional offices, studios and clinics; 
b.  Business offices; 
c.  Instructional and educational uses; 
d.  Governmental uses, including governmental and administrative offices. 
2.  Accessory uses. 
a.  One business sign per property; 
b.  Rear parking lot. 
3.  Conditional uses. 
a.  Restaurants with not less than forty (40) seats; 
b.  Specialized shops and boutiques. 
4.  Area, yard and building requirements for principal and accessory buildings. 
a.  Lot area: minimum six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
b.  Lot width: minimum forty (40) feet; 
c.  Lot depth: minimum one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
5.  Impervious lot coverage. 
a.  Buildings and impervious surfaces: one hundred (100) percent; 
b.  Accessory buildings: ten (10) percent. 
6.  Building height: maximum three stories/thirty-five (35) feet. 
7.  Minimum yard dimensions. 
a.  Front yard: prevailing; 
b.  Side yard: prevailing; 
c.  Rear yard: prevailing. 
8.  Off-street parking and loading shall be as follows: 
a.  Parking and deliveries shall occur only in the rear and side yard areas, when possible; 
b.  Parking requirements as set forth in Sections 17.40.020 and 17.40.030 of the city of Elizabeth ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 4373, § 6, 5-14-2013; Ord. 3910 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 3790 § 1, 2006) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, adopted April 12, 2016, changed the title of section 17.36.160 from "Schedule IF, PO Professional Office Zone" to "Schedule IF, Office Commercial-1 (OC-1) Zone." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
17.36.170 - Office Commercial-2 (OC-2) Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Office-Commercial-2 (OC-2) Zone District is to encourage the mix of office and commercial uses with low intensity residential development within areas depicted on the zoning map, last amended March 15, 2016. 
B.  Principal Permitted Uses. 
1.  Professional offices, studios and clinics; 
2.  Business offices; 
3.  Reserved; 
4.  Instructional and educational uses; 
5.  Governmental uses, including governmental and administrative offices; 
6.  Specialized shops and boutiques; 
7.  Residential uses as allowed in the R-3 Zone District provided that no site is developed with more than twelve (12) residential units and provided that all open space and off-street parking requirements are satisfied. 
C.  Area, yard and Bulk Requirements for All Principal Permitted Uses Other Than Residential Uses. All residential uses shall comply with the area, yard and bulk requirements of the R-3 Zone District. 
1.  Lot area: minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
2.  Yards: 
a.  Front Yard Setback: prevailing; 
b.  Side Yard Setback: prevailing; 
c.  Rear Yard Setback: prevailing. 
3.  Lot depth: minimum of one hundred (100) feet; 
4.  Lot width: minimum of sixty (60) feet; 
5.  Height: three (3) stories/thirty-five (35) feet; 
6.  Open space: twenty (20) percent; 
7.  Buildings and impervious coverage: seventy-five percent (75%); 
8.  Off-Street Parking and Loading requirements shall be the same as in the OC-1 Zone District. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, adopted April 12, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as sections 17.36.170-17.36.200 is at the discretion of the editor. 
17.36.180 - Public (P) Zone. 
A.  Purpose. As recommended in the Land Use Plan Element of the Master Plan adopted by the Planning Board, the Open Space (OS) Zone District is being split into two (2) separate zone districts. The Public (P) Zone District is designed to contain publicly owned buildings, land and other institutions and separate the publically owned lands into a separate zone district to be known as the Open Space (O) Zone District as depicted on the zoning map, last amended March, 2016. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Public buildings and structures. 
2.  Public and private schools and grounds. 
3.  Governmental Buildings and Institutions and other governmental uses. 
4.  Related Commercial or Industrial Uses. Related commercial or industrial uses are intended to support or enhance the activities occurring within the associated improved or unimproved open space. 
C.  Accessory Uses. Customary and incidental uses. 
D.  Conditional Uses. None. 
E.  Permitted Signage. Signs permitted in the C-1 and C-2 districts. 
F.  Required Bulk Conditions. 
1.  Minimum lot area: one acre. 
2.  Lot frontage: one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
3.  Yards. 
a.  Front Yard Setback: twenty (20) feet or prevailing; 
b.  Side Yard Setback: none; 
c.  Rear Yard Setback: none. 
4.  Lot depth: n/a. 
5.  Lot width: n/a. 
6.  Maximum principal building height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less; 
7.  Maximum accessory building height shall be one and one-half (11/2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less; 
8.  Open space: n/a. 
9.  Building coverage: n/a. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Note- See editor's note at section 17.36.170. 
17.36.190 - Highway Commercial (HC) Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Highway Commercial (HC) Zone District is to promote services, retail uses and commercial activity along a major transportation corridor and to limit auto related uses and one- and two-family homes and apartment uses on the first floor in areas as depicted on the Zoning Map, last amended March, 2016; 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Professional offices. 
2.  Business offices. 
3.  Neighborhood convenience uses. 
4.  Local convenience uses. 
5.  Community retail. 
6.  General and specialty retail. 
7.  Indoor amusement. 
8.  Hotels. 
9.  Major entertainment uses. 
10.  Major retail and community services. 
11.  Residential apartments on second and third floors only and consistent with the R-3 Zone District standards. 
C.  Required Bulk Conditions. 
1.  Lot area: ten thousand (10,000) square feet; 
2.  Yards: 
a.  Front Yard Setback: prevailing; 
b.  Side Yard Setback: prevailing; 
c.  Rear Yard Setback: twenty (20) feet; 
3.  Lot depth: one hundred (100) feet; 
4.  Lot width: one hundred (100) feet; 
5.  Height: three (3) stories and thirty-five (35) feet except for Hotels which are permitted to be five (5) stories; 
6.  Open space: twenty (20) percent; 
7.  Maximum impervious coverage: eighty (80) percent; 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Note- See editor's note at section 17.36.170. 
17.36.200 - Transportation (T) Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Transportation (T) Zone District is to contain all of the publicly owned tracts of land in the city which are utilized for public transportation. The Transportation Zone District is being created to establish a separate zone for all of the publicly owned street rights-of-way and transportation rights-of-way as depicted on the zoning map, last amended March, 2016; 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Public streets and rights-of-way. 
2.  Public transportation rights-of-way. 
C.  Required Bulk Conditions. 
1.  Lot area: n/a. 
2.  Yards: 
a.  Front: n/a. 
b.  Side: n/a. 
c.  Side: n/a. 
3.  Lot depth: n/a. 
4.  Lot width: n/a. 
5.  Height: n/a. 
6.  Open space: n/a. 
7.  Building coverage: n/a. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Note- See editor's note at section 17.36.170. 
Schedule IA - Permitted Uses. 
Schedule IA 
Permitted Uses 
Use R-1 R-2 R-2C 2 R-3 R-3A 3 R-4 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-3A 4 C-4 M-1 M-2 M-3 A 1 Single-family x x x x x x x x B Duplex x x x x x C Rowhouse x x x x x D Two-family dwelling x x x x x x x E Three-to-four family x x x x x F Garden apartment x x x x G Multifamily x x x x H Elevator apartment x x x I Nonprofit organization J Government, educational and religious K Clinics and hospitals L Professional offices x x x x x M Business offices x x x x N Neighborhood convenience x x x x O Local convenience x x x x P Community retail x x x Q General and specialty retail x x x x R Indoor amusement x x x S Hotels x x x T Major entertainment x x x U Major retail and commercial x x V Arterial commercial x x W Auto-related services x x x x X Selected commercial and light manufacture x x x x Y Wholesale and storage x x x x Z Distribution and trucking x x x AA Light manufacture x x x BB General industrial x x CC Sulfur and nitric acid manufacture x  
Notes: 
1  Editor's Note: for expansion of Symbols A through CC, see Schedule II which follows. 
2  [Added 7-24-79 by Ord. No. 1175] 
3  [Added 6-10-81 by Ord. No. 1369] 
4  [Added 3-12-85 by Ord. No. 1794] 
(Prior code Schedule IA) 
Schedule IB - MRC District Zone Contro1s. 
Schedule IB 
MRC District Zone Contro1s 
Bulk Standard Large Scale Retail Uses All Other Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Frontage 150 50 feet Minimum Front Yard 0 35 feet Minimum Rear Yard 25 (1) 25 feet (1) Maximum Height (Principal) 3/40 3/40 stories/feet Maximum Height (Accessory) 2/45 2/25 feet Minimum Lot Size (non-residential) 1 acre None Minimum Principal Building Size 15,000 square feet None Maximum Building Coverage 35 percent None Parking Requirements 1/300 square feet floor area 1/1400 square feet site area  
A.  Rear yards abutting rail rights-of-way may be reduced to 0 feet. 
    Permitted Uses: 
1.  Corporate business and professional offices. 
2.  Research laboratories. 
3.  Large scale retail uses such as supermarkets and community shopping centers containing permitted retail and service uses in the C-2 Zone. 
4.  Light manufacturing, including the manufacture, assembly, packing or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared material subject to performance standards of Section 17.36.060, including, but not limited to pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, food products, electrical and electronic equipment, precision equipment, textiles and apparel. 
5.  General commercial uses, such as wholesale business uses, office supplies and services, photo processing plants, lithograph, typesetting ruling and binding establishments, electrical sales and contracting, plumbing sales and contracting. 
6.  Indoor amusement facilities, including theaters, bowling alleys and skating rinks, and full service restaurants, other than drive-in, drive-thru and/or fast food establishments. 
a.  Accessory Uses. Customary and incidental accessory uses pursuant to Section 17.36, Schedule IB.A.6.a inclusive of bars and cocktail lounges without live entertainment or dancing as part of indoor amusement facilities. 
b.  Conditional Uses. None. 
c.  Permitted Signage. Signs permitted in the C-3 and C-4 Districts. 
(Prior code Schedule ID) 
Schedule C - O District Zone Controls. 
A.  Purpose. As recommended in the Land Use Plan Element of the Master Plan adopted by the planning board, the Open Space (OS) Zone District is being split into two (2) separate zone districts. The Open Space (O) Zone District is designed to contain publicly owned open space and separate the publicly owned buildings, land and other institution into a separate zone district to be known as the Public Space (P) Zone District as depicted on the zoning map, last amended March, 2016. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Improved Open Space. Improved open space is intended to provide site for recreational facilities. Improved open space may include, but shall not be limited to: landscaped lawn areas, golf courses, stormwater detention and groundwater recharge areas, walkways, pedestrian bicycle paths, paved terraces and sitting areas, and recreational facilities such as playfields, playgrounds, tot lots, swimming pools, sports courts, community centers, boat slips, boat launching and storage facilities and docks, but not repair facilities and any ancillary roadway or parking. 
2.  Unimproved Open Space. Unimproved open space is intended to preserve lands in a natural state for recreation and conservation purposes and shall include: wetlands, woodlands, wildlife preserves, manmade and natural bodies of water, scenic areas, hedgerows and treelines, natural wooded areas. Improvements in unimproved open space shall be limited to the following: woodland trails, foot paths, jogging trails, bridle paths, bicycle paths, nature walks; nurseries for the trees, shrubs and other plants to be used in the development; roads and ancillary parking for access to unimproved open space sites; lighting, retaining walls, and other features necessary to protect the land or people who will use the unimproved open space. 
3.  Related Commercial or Industrial Uses. Related commercial or industrial uses are intended to support or enhance the activities occurring within the associated improved or unimproved open space. 
C.  Accessory Uses. Customary and incidental uses. 
D.  Conditional Uses. None. 
E.  Permitted Signage. Signs permitted in the C-1 and C-2 districts. 
F.  Required Bulk Conditions. 
1.  Minimum lot area: one acre; 
2.  Lot frontage: one hundred fifty (150) feet; 
3.  Yards: 
a.  Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet or prevailing; 
b.  Side Yard Setback: none; 
c.  Rear Yard Setback: none; 
4.  Lot depth: none. 
5.  Lot width: none. 
6.  Maximum principal building height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less; 
7.  Maximum accessory building height shall be one and one-half (11/2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less; 
8.  Open space: n/a. 
9.  Building coverage: n/a. 
(Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, 4-12-2016; prior code Schedule IC) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4695 , § 1, adopted April 12, 2016, changed the title of schedule C from "OS District Zone Controls" to "O District Zone Controls." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purpose. 
Schedule ID - RC District Zone Controls. 
Schedule ID 
RC District Zone Controls 
A.  Development Standards. 
1.  Minimum lot area: three acres. 
2.  Minimum lot frontage: two hundred (200) feet. 
3.  Minimum front yard: thirty-five (35) feet. 
4.  Minimum rear yard: twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard: twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Maximum principal building height: sixteen (16) stories or one hundred sixty (160) feet, whichever is less. 
7.  Maximum accessory building height: three stories or forty (40) feet, whichever is less. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Major retail and commercial uses. 
2.  Business offices: major office buildings with gross floor area of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
C.  Accessory Uses. Customary and incidental uses including eating establishments and other convenience retail sales or services. 
D.  Conditional Uses. None. 
E.  Permitted Signage. Signs permitted in the C-1 and C-2 districts. 
(Prior code Schedule IF) 
Schedule II - Principal Uses. 
Schedule II 
Principal Uses 
A.  Single-family detached dwelling; 
B.  Detached duplex; 
C.  Rowhouses or townhouses; 
D.  Two-family dwelling; 
E.  Three- or four-family dwelling; 
F.  Garden apartments; 
G.  Apartment house; 
H.  Elevator apartments; 
I.  Quasi-public uses, such a community buildings, country clubs, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and similar uses; 
J.  Govemmental services and uses of an educational or religious nature; 
K.  Medical facilities, such as infirmaries, health clinics and hospitals; 
L.  Professional offices, including the offices of doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists, ministers, priests, rabbis, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, professional planners, lawyers, certified public accountants and such other similar professional occupations which may be so designated by the board of adjustment; 
M.  Business offices such as administrative, clerical or other nonprofessional offices; undertakers, funeral parlors or embalmers; medical and dental office buildings and testing laboratories; and other office buildings; 
N.  Neighborhood convenience retail and services, such as barbershops or beauty parlors; cigar stores or newsstands; food stores; drugstores or soda fountains; and shoe repair shops; 
O.  Local convenience retail and services, such as stationery and book stores; branch banks; dry goods and variety stores; home radio and TV repair; hand or automatic laundries; florists; hardware stores or locksmiths; office equipment and business machine sales and service; package liquor sales; tailois or dressmakers; and dry-cleaning and clothes-pressing establishments, provided that no flammable cleaning agents are used; 
P.  Community retail and services such as paint and wallpaper stores; furniture stores; sporting and athletic goods; photographing equipment and supplies; end professional, business and technical schools; and studios for photography, art, music and dance; 
Q.  General and specialty retail and services, such as wearing apparel stores; and jewelry and gift shops; 
R.  Indoor amusement enterprises, including theaters, biffiard or pooi parlors, bowling alleys, skating rinks or similar uses or places of assembly; and bars and cocktail lounges without live entertainment; 
S.  Hotels; 
T.  Major entertainment facilities intended and designed to serve the city as a whole, such as nightclubs; 
U.  Major retail and commercial services, such as major department stores; specialty shops and personal service enterprises which are intended and designed to serve the city as a whole; office buildings exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in floor area; and banks and other financial institutions; 
V.  Arterial commercial services, such as new car dealers' sales and showrooms; newspaper publishing plants; bus terminals; storage garages; and the following limited light industrial uses, when conducted within an enclosed building and not on the ground floor: 
1.  Manufacturing of dresses and garments, jewelry, musical instruments, precision equipment and toys and novelties, 
2.  Photo processing, 
3.  Printing, lithographing, typesetting, ruling and binding establishments, and 
4.  Laboratories; 
W.  Auto-related services, such as vehicle sales, servicing and washing; boat sales and service; automobile radio sales and service; and motels; 
X.  Selected commercial and light industrial uses, such as woodworking, furniture repair and custom upholstery; metal working; electrical sales and contracting; plumbing sales and contracting; wholesale bakeries, dairies and bottling plants; and large-scale laundering, cleaning and dyeing establishments; manufacturing of awnings, venetian blinds and shades; and major automobile repair; 
Y.  Wholesale, storage and agricultural uses, such as wholesale business, storage and warehousing; animal sales and treatment; live poultry markets; and outdoor amusement uses; and horticulture and greenhouses; 
Z.  Distribution and trucking services, such as distribution plants, parcel delivery and service industries and truck terminals; 
AA.  Light manufacturing uses, such as laboratories; manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics but not the rendering of fats and oils; the manufacture, assembly, packing or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials; glass and textile manufacturers; lumber and building material sales and storage yards; contractors' equipment, sales and service; tool and die and other machine shop operation; 
BB.  General industrial uses, such as any manufacturing use involving primary production from raw materials; bulk storage of petroleum and similar fluids; vehicle manufacturing and assembly; structural steel fabricating shops; and boat building; and 
CC.  The manufacture of sulfuric and nitric acids. 
(Prior code Schedule II) 
Schedule III - Conditional Uses. 
Schedule III 
Conditional Uses 
A.  Rooming Houses. Rooming houses shall be permitted in the R-3 and R-4 Districts, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  Nonvehicular open space shall be provided in the amount required for the district in which such rooming house is located. 
2.  The premises shall be utilized exclusively for residential purposes only. 
3.  At least eight-tenths off-street parking space per bedroom shall be provided. 
4.  A current rooming house license shall be maintamed. 
5.  The bedroom density requirements applicable to the district in which such rooming house is located shall be complied with. 
B.  Mausoleums. Mausoleums shall be permitted in all districts, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  In accordance with N.J.S.A. 8A1-1, et seq., a cemetery shall be defined as any land or place dedicated for use, used or intended to be used for the interment of the human dead in the ground, in a mausoleum or crypt located in the cemetery and a columbarium for cinerary interments or lands held for burial purposes. 
2.  All mausoleums shall be located in cemeteries. 
3.  Permitted uses shall be in the establishment, preservation, construction, and operation and maintenance of cemeteries, public mausoleums, crypts, chapels, columbaria, conservatories, and other necessary buildings and improvements (hereinafter "structures") for the burial, and care of the remains of the dead. 
4.  Minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be five feet. 
5.  Property line structures shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, except as hereinafter provided. 
6.  Structures exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be permitted, proyided a setback is maintained equal to one foot for every foot in height of the structure, not to exceed seventy (70) feet in any case, except that fifty-five (55) feet shall be the maximum height of any structure abutting a residential property line. 
7.  Property line structures along the common property line with a residential zone or use shall maintain a ten (10) feet set back and be limited to fourteen (14) feet in height. 
C.  Child-Care Facilities. Child-care facilities for less than six children shall be permitted in the R-2 or R-3 districts, and facilities for at least six children shall be permitted in the C-2 district, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  Centers for six or more children shall be licensed by the state, and facilities for at least two but not more than five children shall be affiliated with a licensed child-care center. 
2.  Child-care facilities shall not be located where the concentration of carbon monoxide and dioxide gases equals or exceeds ten (10) milligrams per liter. 
3.  At least one hundred (100) square feet of open play area shall be provided for each child, based on the maximum design capacity of the facility, and such area shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall or fence at least six feet in height. 
4.  Play activity in outdoor play areas which are located in or adjacent to residential uses shall be rericted to between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and the areas shall be screened from such uses with massed evergreen plantings at least six feet in height. 
5.  Facilities shall provide doors for ingress and egress which are not more than six feet above or below existing grades and which discharge onto open areas with a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  The entire operation of the facility shall be on one floor which is not more than one-half-story (six feet) above or below grade. 
D.  Nursing Homes. Nursing homes shall be permitted in an R-2, R-3 or R-4 zone, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  A current license to operate a nursing home shall be maintained. 
2.  Such facility shall be located on a lot at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. 
E.  Essential Services. 
1.  Enclosed or Permanent, Structures. In, adjacent to, abutting or across from R Districts, such uses shall include electric substations, transformers, switches, auxiliary apparatus serving a distribution area and water-pumping stations and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Such facility shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets. 
b.  The location, design and operation of such facility may not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area. 
c.  Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.130. 
d.  Noise and interference emitted from such public utility services shall not be greater than permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth in Section 17.36.060. 
2.  Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other govemmental agencies, or underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other govemmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. The landscaping regulations of Chapter 17.36 shall apply if the essential service facility occupies a plot of ground greater than six square feet. Performance standards as set forth in Section 17.36.060 herein shall also apply. 
F.  Automobile Gas Stations. Automobile gas stations shall be permitted in the C-2 and C-4 districts, provided that the following conditions are maintained. 
1.  Each station shall provide at least two driveway aprons measuring at least twenty (20) feet in width and located no closer than forty (40) feet to the nearest street line of a perpendicular street. 
2.  All accessory structures, such as filling pumps, vents and underground bulk storage of flammable materials, shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential property line and at least twenty (20) feet from any other property line other than a street line. 
3.  All pump islands shall be located so that there is sufficient space within the property lines in each direction to accommodate at least three waiting vehicles in addition to those being serviced. 
4.  All washing, lubricating, draining or repairs of other than an incidental nature shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. 
5.  A curbed safety island at least five feet in width shall be located between pump islands and any property line abutting a street. 
G.  Minor Auto Repair and Service. Minor auto repair and service shall be allowed in the C-4 district, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  All repair and servicing operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. 
2.  No vehicles other than those under or awaiting repair or awaiting delivery or pickup after repair shall be stored on the premises. 
3.  All such establishments shall comply with the performance standards specified in Section 17.36.060 herein. 
4.  All such establishments shall provide at least eight off-street parking spaces, plus two spaces for each work or service area. 
H.  Automobile Salvage and Wrecking Operations, Outdoor Storage and Junkyards. Such uses shall be permitted in an M-2 zone, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  Such operation is conducted not less than two hundred (200) feet from any R district and C district. 
2.  All operations are conductd within a solid wall or tight board fence not less than eight feet high. 
I.  Commercial Parking for Residents. Commercial parking for residents shall be permitted in R-3 and R-4 districts, provided that such parking is restricted by deed, filed with the Register of Union County, binding the owner and his or her heirs, successors and assigns for the life of such use to lease such spaces only to residents of dwelling structures located within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the lot boundary and to lease such spaces at monthly rates only. 
J.  Gas Storage Tanks. Gas storage tanks shall be permitted in an M-2 or M-3 district, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  No tank or other structure for the storage of gas, natural or otherwise, or any mixture of gas or gases, natural or otherwise, either in their vaporous or liquefied form, of any type suitable for light, heating, power or other purpose shall be constructed, erected or maintained in any populated area so as to create the possibility of a public disaster from fire or explosion; nor shall any such tank or structure be constructed, erected or maintained so as to create the possibility of extensive damage to property or the interruption of essential public services from such fire or explosion. 
2.  An environmental impact study shall be submitted with each application and no conditional use shall be approved unless the same can be granted without substantial detriment to the natural resources, in. cluding but not limited to light, water, air and land. 
3.  No such conditional use shall be granted unless the economic necessity therefor shall be clearly exhibited. 
4.  No such conditional use shall be granted if it impairs the preservation of tangible and intangible property values, both public and private. 
5.  No such conditional use shall be granted if the applicant has an unsatisfactory operating safety record. 
6.  All applications shall include detailed construction plans and all safety procedures and standards to be followed not only during construction but thereafter, together with copies of all approvals of state and federal regulatory bodies and agencies. 
K.  Retail Sale for Guests-Bakeries. 
1.  Retail sales for members and guests of quasi-public uses shall be permitted in any residential zone, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
a.  Only customary and appropriate retail activities such as gift shops, soda fountains, etc., are conducted; 
b.  All retail activity is conducted from within the principal structure; 
c.  Access to the retail activity may be had only from within the principal structure; and 
d.  No external evidence of retail activity is discernible from the outside of the structure. 
2.  Bakeries. Bakeries shall be permitted in a C-1 commercial zone, provided that the following condition is maintained: Goods produced shall be sold only at retail on the premises. 
L.  Helicopter Landing Facilities. A private helistop used solely for the landing and takeoff of helicopters may be established as an accessory use in an M-2 or M-3 district, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  Such facility is located not less than nine hundred (900) feet from any R district. 
2.  Restrictions have been established to prevent the development or occurrence of man-made or natural obstacles within the final eight hundred (800) feet of any approach/departure flight paths. 
3.  Flight paths are designed so as to comply with noise performance standards in nonindustrial zones as measured from the maximum permissible building height. 
4.  Landing areas in which helipads are located are suitably paved, marked and fenced. 
5.  A fire protection plan approved by the fire department has been established for protection of adjacent property. 
6.  No tanks, drums or other structure for the storage of flammable and explosive helicopter fuel, natural or otherwise, or any mixture of helicopter fuel or fuels, natural or otherwise, in liquid, solid or gaseous state shall be located on the same or within close proximity of any helicopter landing areas so as to create the possibility of a public disaster from fire or explosion; nor shall any such tank, drum or structure be constructed, erected or maintained so as to create the possibility of extensive damage to property or the interruption of essential public services from such fire or explosion. 
M.  Amusement Machine Complexes. Amusement machine complexes shall be permitted in any C-3 district, provided that the following conditions are maintained: 
1.  The applicant has met all the requirements of Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
2.  Parking spaces for motor vehicles and motorcycles to accommodate customers or patrons shall be provided at the ratio of one parking space for every two games, machines or devices so licensed. Bicycle racks shall be provided for use by customers or patrons at the ratio of one rack space for every two games, machines or devices so licensed. No access or egress driveway may cross a pedestrian walk which has a peak hourly volume in excess of fifty (50) persons. 
3.  Provisions sufficient to prevent the assembly of persons in public areas within three hundred (300) feet of any entrance and/or exit of the premises or building in which such complex is located. 
N.  Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled and Community Shelters for Victims of Domestic Violence. Community residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence shall be a permitted use in all residential zones of a municipality, and the requirements therefor shall be the same as for single family dwelling units located within such zones; provided, however, community residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, housing more than six persons excluding resident staff, shall be permitted as a conditional use in all residential zones provided the following conditions are met or maintained: 
1.  A conditional use permit shall not be granted for any such community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing community residence for developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2. 
2.  A conditional use permit shall not be granted if the number of persons, other than resident staff, resident at existing community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence within the city, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, exceed fifty (50) persons or five-tenths of one percent of the population of the city, whichever is greater. 
3.  A conditional use permit shall not be granted for any such community residence for developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any school or day care center, and no school or day care center shall be permitted within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence. 
4.  A community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence for more than six persons, excluding resident staff, must be licensed or have a purchase of service contract or affiliation agreement from the appropriate state agency. The applicant for a conditional use permit shall provide documentation that a purchase of service contract or affiliation agreement exists, or that an application for a license has been submitted to the appropriate state licensing agency. If the community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for the victims of domestic violence is to be licensed, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy ("CO") for the proposed residence will be conditioned on the applicant subsequently providing documentation that the residence is fully licensed by the appropriate state agency. 
5.  The application for a conditional use permit shall contain a brief statement identifying the number of persons to reside in the community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence, and a general description of their classification (i.e., adult versus child, mentally ill versus developmentally disabled). 
6.  Each community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence in an R-1 (single family) or R-2 (two family) zone intended to provide housing for between seven and twelve (12) persons, excluding resident staff, shall provide one off-street parking space per community residence. Each community residence in an R-1 or R-2 zone intended to provide housing for between thirteen (13) and fifteen (15) persons, excluding resident staff, shall provide two off-street spaces per community residence. 
7.  Any building constructed or altered for use as a community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence in any R-1 (single family) or R-2 (two family) zone shall reflect a residential character. Any construction, renovations or alterations made to accommodate handicapped persons or to satisfy applicable state and local building codes or fire prevention/fire safety codes shall not be considered as making the community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence conflict with this requirement. 
8.  Any conditional use approval granted under subsection N of this schedule shall contain the following restrictions: 
a.  Any reversion of a community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence to a permitted use shall comply with all applicable zone requirements. 
b.  The name of the facility may be displayed in conformity with the sign ordinance of the city. 
c.  Occupancy of any community residence for the developmentally disabled or community shelter for victims of domestic violence which receives a conditional use permit under this section is restricted to persons who are developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2a, or persons who are victims of domestic violence as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2b. 
d.  Community residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence shall be permitted as a conditional use in all other zoning districts provided the criteria set forth herein for location in residential districts is satisfied. 
O.  Billboards. Signs for off-premises advertising (billboards) shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met and maintained: 
1.  Billboards shall be permitted in any district when located on or within three hundred (300) feet of state or federal highway routes or passenger rail facilities. 
2.  Billboards shall be permitted in accordance with a billboard siting plan conforming with the following requirements. The siting plan shall control the entire system of billboards to be maintained by any applicant along any one route or rail line and consider the impacts of all billboards in their totality whether maintained by the applicant or others and whether inside or outside of the municipality. 
a.  The plan shall ensure that billboards do not intrude on residential areas. Billboards shall not be located in any area designated by the master plan as a residential area and visibility of billboards and support structures located within six hundred (600) feet of such areas shall be effectively mitigated through appropriate measures, including height limitations or funding of off-site plantings to screen views of billboards from dwellings. 
b.  The plan shall ensure that billboard messages do not intrude on places of assembly. To ensure that messages are not comprehendible, mitigation measures shall be employed where billboard faces would otherwise be directly viewable from any church, school, playground or park within one thousand (1,000) feet. 
c.  The plan shall ensure that billboards do not unreasonably intrude on scenic vistas. Billboards shall not be located so as to significantly degrade the appearance of any scenic views. The optimal viewing locations should be identified for any historically or architecturally significant structures within two thousand (2,000) feet and for any scenic skylines or vistas. The obscuring impact of billboards on the panoramic background seen from these locations shall be minimized. 
d.  The plan shall ensure that billboards do not interfere with traffic safety devices or signs. Billboards shall not obstruct views of such signs and devices located within two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
e.  The plan shall ensure that billboards do not unreasonably obscure the business signs, building entry facades or entrance driveways on neighboring properties. Billboards shall be erected outside of clear sight triangles to be established in accordance with master plan principles and standards. 
f.  The plan shall ensure that billboards remain in reasonable harmony with the existing aesthetic character of the area in which they are located. Billboards shall conform to design limits specified in the plan with particular attention to size, height and ilumination. 
3.  Billboards and freestanding signs (greater than three hundred (300) square feet) shall be subject to special location and design controls and shall be classified as a conditional use. Criteria for same shall be the following: 
a.  Billboards shall be located, under all circumstances, at least two thousand (2,000) feet apart from all other billboards or freestanding signs, whether a component of a billboard system or as an independent billboard or freestanding sign. (Pursuant to subsection 3 above.) A survey, signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor, shall be required to document existing billboard sign locations. 
b.  Billboards shall be located, in excess of five hundred (500) feet from any residential use. 
c.  Following an approval by the planning board, a billboard of freestanding sign (greater than three hundred (300) square feet) shall obtain a square footage license and pay an annual license fee of eighty cents ($0.80) for each square foot of advertising space provided that the minimum annual license fee shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00). 
d.  Billboards and freestanding signs greater than three hundred (300) square feet existing prior to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to continue if they are less than two thousand (2,000) square feet apart and providing that the applicant obtain an annual license starting on July 1, 1998. 
_____
TABLE #1 
RESIDENTIAL LOT WIDTHS AND DIMENSIONS 
Zone Wards Prevailing (A) 
Lot Width Prevailing (B) 
Lot Width Standard (C) 
Lot Width R-1 
R-1 All except #2 
#2 40 ft 
35 ft 50 ft 
50 ft R-2, 2A 
R-3, 3A   
#1   
25 ft   
25 ft R-2, 2A 
R-3, 3A   
#2   
25 ft   
33 ft   
50 ft R-2, 2A 
R-3, 3A   
#3 & 4   
33 ft   
40 ft   
50 ft R-2, 2A 
R-3, 3A   
#5 & 6   
25 ft   
30 ft   
33 ft  
    The prevailing lot width (A) is the bench mark width for all zones in the city. Use standard (C) lot width when a prevailing width does not exist. 
    Conditions of Table #1: 
(A)  To meet the prevailing lot width requirement sixty-five (65) percent of all existing lot widths must be less than or equal to the listed lot dimension. 
(B)  To meet the prevailing lot width requirement fifty (50) percent of all existing lot widths must be less than or equal to the listed lot dimension. 
(C)  Standard lot width shall be utilized when no prevailing lot width can be established. 
    To establish prevailing conditions (for all lot requirements), in all zones within the city the applicant must produce a table depicting the following criteria: 
1.  All existing lots (including property in question), per current city tax maps on file in the city engineer's office. Do not include any new lots which are to be created by the application. 
2.  Include only lots in the same zone as the subject parcel. 
3.  Include all lots within die entire city block on both sides of street as subject parcel. 
4.  Select the prevailing condition requested, the proposed lot width must equal or exceed the numerical number listed. 
Building; front yard setbacks, side yard setbacks and rear yard setbacks: 
    To establish prevailing setbacks for all yard dimensions the applicant must produce a table depicting the following: 
1.  Include only existing lots (do not include newly created lots), per current city tax maps on file in the city engineer's office. 
2.  Include only lots in the same zone as the subject parcel. 
3.  Include all lots within the entire city block on both sides of street as subject parcel. 
    The prevailing lot dimension shall be a dimension which exists for sixty-five (65) percent of all existing lots. To further explain, sixty-five (65) percent of all compatible structures must exhibit a dimension which equals or is less than the setback established for the proposed application. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 7, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 3273, § 2, 12-12-2000; prior code Schedule III) 
Chapter 17.40 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Off-street parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  General Requirements. In all districts, in connection with every manufacturing, business, institutional, recreational or other use, there shall be provided, at the time that any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity or changed in use, parking spaces, in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 17.40.040 of this chapter, except that residential uses shall conform to the requirements of the residential site improvement standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21 and parking in the C-3 and C-5 zones shall not be required for commercial uses less than two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet. 
B.  Proximity of Parking to Principal Use. All permitted and required accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located on the same lot as the use to which such spaces are accessory, except that such spaces may be provided within a radius of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the lot boundary, and provided further that required spaces are provided off the site in accordance with Table I in Section 17.40.040. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions filed with the register of Union County binding the owner and his or her heirs, successors and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout the life of such use. 
C.  Location of Exits and Entrances. No commercial parking area or garage for twenty-five (25) or more motor vehicles shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet along the same side of a street on which is located a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for dependents or for children, except where such property is in another block or on another street on which the zone lot does not abut. Such access shall not be closer to the intersections of any two streets than fifty (50) feet. No access drive or driveway shall be located in any R district to provide access to uses other than those permitted in such R district. 
(Ord. 3809 § 1, 2006; prior code § 40-130) 
17.40.020 - Off-street loading. 
    In any district, in connection with every building or building group or part thereof hereafter erected which is to be occupied by manufacturing or commercial uses or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same zone lot with such building, off-street loading berths not less than ten (10) feet in width and thirty-five (35) feet in length in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.40.040, Table II. Such berths shall have a minimum clearance of fourteen (14) feet and may occupy all or any part of any required yard. 
(Prior code § 40-131) 
17.40.030 - Parking and loading. 
A.  No off-street parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
B.  Joint Facilities for Parking or Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use and provided that all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the approving authority in accordance with the purposes and procedures set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 40-132) 
17.40.040 - Number of parking and loading spaces required. 
A.  The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as set forth in Table I below. 
Table I 
Uses Minimum Required Off-Street Parking Spaces Automobile major repair shop 3 per each 300 square feet of floor area Automobile minor repair shop 2 per each 300 square feet of floor area Automobile service stations 1 for each employee Bowling alleys 5 for each alley Churches, synagogues and houses of worship 1 for each 5 permanent seats. When individual seats are not provided, each 20 inches of bench shall be considered 1 seat. The number of required off-street parking spaces may be eliminated or reduced if there exists within 500 feet of the church, synagogue or house of worship, public or private parking lots containing a sufficient number of off-street parking spaces to satisfy the requirements. The church, synagogue or house of worship must provide the difference if the number of parking spaces in the private or public lots is below the number required. Any spaces provided in public or private lots must be shown to be available for worshipers on the day or days of greatest use. Community buildings, country clubs, social halls, lodges, fraternal and accessory organizations and similar uses 1 for each 200 square feet of floor area occupied by all principal structures. Doctors in other than office buildings 3 for patients' use for each doctor's office. Dentist in other than office buildings 2 for patients' use for each dentist's office. Funeral homes and mortuaries 15 for visitors. Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes 1 for each 3 beds. Hotels, motels and rooming houses 1 for each rentable unit. Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale, distribution and selected commercial (use groups X-CC) 1 ground level space per each 1,400 square feet of site area. The number of spaces to be installed at any time is to be based on a current and valid parking management plan approved by the zoning administrator and a final site plan approved by the approving authority. Offices 1 for every 400 square feet of rentable floor area. Quick-service eating and drinking establishments 10 plus 1 for every 2 employees on the maximum shift, plus 1 for every 2 seats. Residential All residential developments shall comply with the requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS Table 4.4). Tandem parking may be permitted for dwelling structures containing no more than 2 units. No more than 2 parking spaces will be permitted to be in tandem configuration. Curbside parking shall be permitted to be credited toward the required parking at the discretion of the planning board, zoning board of adjustment or the administrative authority. Curbside parking which exists only along the frontage of the property in question may be counted. No obstructions are permitted within proposed parking spaces. If the parking spaces are internally located within a structure no columns shall be permitted within the space. A clearance distance of 18 inches must be adhered to from all columns to all parking spaces. The column must also be protected from being contacted by vehicles via concrete curbing. No parking lots or driveways for residential uses greater than 2 units are permitted within 25 feet of rear property line and 10 feet from side property line. Restaurants without live entertainment, bars and nightclubs 1 for every 2 employees on the maximum shift, plus 1 for every 4 seats. Retail shops, store groups, shops, etc. 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area where the floor area shall exceed 1,000 square feet. Schools Senior high schools 1 for every 10 classroom seats Elementary and junior high schools 1 for every 15 classroom seats  
B.  The number of off-street loading spaces required shall be as set forth in Table II below: 
Table II 
Uses Square Feet of Total Floor Area Required Off-Street Loading Berths Schools 15,000 or more 1 Hospitals (in addition to space for ambulances) From 10,000 to 30,000 1 For each additional 30,000 or major fraction thereof 1 additional Undertakers and funeral parlors 5,000 1 For each additional 5,000 or major fraction thereof 1 additional Offices, hotels retail, commercial, wholesale, manufacturing, storage and miscellaneous uses From 10,000 to 25,000 1 From 25,000 to 40,000 2 From 40,000 to 60,000 3 From 60,000 to 100,000 4 For each additional 50,000 or major fraction thereof 1 additional  
C.  In the case of any building, structure or premises which is not specifically mentioned herein, the approving authority shall determine the amount of off-street parking or loading required. 
( Ord. No. 4647 , § 1, 11-24-2015; Prior code § 40-133) 
17.40.050 - Lighting of off-street parking. 
A.  Off-street parking areas with six or more spaces shall be adequately and properly lighted. 
B.  All lighting shall be shielded so as not to affect adjacent properties. 
C.  No lighting shall be installed which exceeds the maximum illumination levels pursuant to Chapter 17.32 of this title. 
(Prior code § 40-134) 
Chapter 17.44 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the City of Elizabeth, of Union County, New Jersey does ordain as follows. 
A.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, an to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
4.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 4457, § 1, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 4394, § 1, 7-23-2013; Ord. 3832 § 1, 2006) 
17.44.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Advisory base flood elevation (ABFE)" means the elevation shown on a community's advisory flood hazard area map that indicates the advisory stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Advisory flood hazard area (AFHA)" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to flooding from the one percent annual chance event depicted on the advisory flood hazard area map. 
    "Advisory flood hazard area map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the construction official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) with a one percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" the flood elevation shown on a published flood insurance study (FIS) including the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A-30 the elevation represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For zones VE and V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Best available flood hazard data" means the most recent available flood risk guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may be depicted on but not limited to advisory flood hazard area maps, work maps or preliminary FIS and FIRM. 
    "Best available flood hazard data elevation" means the most recent available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data elevation may be depicted on an advisory flood hazard area map, work map, or preliminary FIS and FIRM. 
    "Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    "Coastal high hazard area" means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
    "Development" means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    "Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In areas of coastal high hazard "elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" ever though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls. 
    "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study (FIS)" means the official report in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood insurance rate map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than two-tenths (0.2) foot. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). A unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of both applicable nonelevation design requirements of CFR Section 60.3. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    "Manufactured home park" or "manufactured home subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "New construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality. 
    "Preliminary flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the draft version of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and adoption. 
    "Primary frontal dune" means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Sand dunes" means naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    "Start of construction," for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 4457, § 2, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 4394, § 2, 7-23-2013; Ord. 3832 § 2, 2006) 
17.44.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Elizabeth, Union County, New Jersey. 
B.  Basis For Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Elizabeth, Community No. 345523, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: 
1.  A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Union County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 20, 2006. 
2.  Flood Insurance Rate Map for Union County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s) 0014, 0015, 0022, 0023, 0024, 0025, 0026, 0034, 0035, 0036, 0037, whose effective date is September 20, 2006. 
3.  Best Available Flood Hazard Data. These documents shall take precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or base flood elevation conflict or overlap with the best available flood hazard data, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement shall prevail. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study, maps and advisory documents are on file at City Hall, 50 Winfield Scott Plaza, Elizabeth, New Jersey 07201. 
C.  Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, re-located to, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Elizabeth, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
    This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Elizabeth, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4457, § 3, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 4394, § 2, 7-23-2013; Ord. 3832 § 2, 2006) 
17.44.040 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Subsection 17.44.030.B. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the construction official and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed. 
3.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Subsection 17.44.050.B.2; and 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Designation of the Local Administrator. The construction official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the construction official shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Permit Review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Subsection 17.44.050.C.1 are met. 
d.  Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood damage. 
e.  Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood level in accordance with Subsection 17.44.050.D.2.d. 
2.  Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with Subsection 17.44.030.B, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the construction official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Subsection 17.44.050.B.1, Specific standards, residential construction, and Subsection 17.44.050.B.2, Specific standards, nonresidential construction. 
3.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
b.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
(1)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
(2)  maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Subsection A.3. 
c.  In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of Subsections 17.44.050.D.2.a. and 17.44.050.D.2.b.(1) and (2) are met. 
d.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Alteration of Watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Subsection D. 
D.  Variance Procedure. 
1.  Appeal Board. 
a.  The planning board or zoning board of adjustment as established by the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  The planning board or zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the construction official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
c.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the planning board or zoning board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided in law. 
d.  In passing upon such applications, the planning board or zoning board of adjustment, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
e.  Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D.1.d. and the purposes of this chapter, the planning board or zoning board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
f.  The construction official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
2.  Conditions for Variances. 
a.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing Items (1)-(11) in Subsection D.1.d. have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
b.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
c.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
d.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
e.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and, 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection D.1.d., or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
f.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. No. 4457, § 4, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 4394, § 4, 7-23-2013; Ord. 3832 § 4, 2006) 
17.44.050 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
d.  For all new construction and substantial improvements the electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  Subdivision Proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed new development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less). 
5.  Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
B.  Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Subsection 17.44.030.B., Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard or in Subsection 17.44.040.C.2., Use of other base flood data, the following standards are required: 
1.  Residential Construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) or the best available flood hazard data elevation, whichever is more restrictive, plus one foot; 
b.  Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade one foot above the depth number specified in feet (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities: either 
a.  Elevated to or above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) or the best available flood hazard data elevation whichever is more restrictive, plus one foot; and 
b.  Require within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade one foot above the depth number specified in feet (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or 
c.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot, or the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, (whichever is more restrictive), the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
d.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and, 
e.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Subsection 17.44.040.C.3.b(2). 
3.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Subsection A.1.b. 
b.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) or the best available flood hazard data elevation, plus one foot (whichever is more restrictive). 
C.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 17.44.030.B. are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Subsection C.1 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements must comply with Section 17.44.050, Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
3.  In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a foot at any point. 
D.  Coastal High Hazard Area. Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.44.030.B. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Location of Structures. 
a.  All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the mean high tide. 
b.  The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. 
2.  Construction Methods. 
a.  Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on piling or columns so that: 
(1)  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM), the best available flood hazard data elevation or as required by the Uniform Construction Code (NJAC 5:23), whichever is more restrictive, and 
(2)  With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided or in Subsection D.2.d. 
b.  Structural Support. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely anchored on piling or columns. 
(2)  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values each of which shall have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval). 
(3)  There shall be no fill used for structural support. 
c.  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for compliance with the provisions of Subsections D.2.a. and D.2.b(1) and (2). 
d.  Space Below the Lowest Floor. 
(1)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as provided for in this section. 
(2)  Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading of twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or State codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions. 
(a)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood, and 
(b)  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-structural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. 
(c)  If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage and not for human habitation. 
(d)  Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be submitted to the construction code official or building sub-code official for approval. 
3.  Sand Dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones VE and V on the community DFIRM which would increase potential flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 4457, § 5, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 4394, § 5, 7-23-2013; Ord. 3832 § 5, 2006) 
17.44.060 - Private storm drain inlet retrofitting. 
A.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the city or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    "Storm drain inlet" means an opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet. 
    "Waters of the state" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction. 
B.  Prohibited Conduct. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either: 
1.  Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable materials; or 
2.  Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection C. prior to the completion of the project. 
C.  Design Standard. Storm drain inlets identified in subsection B. shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection C.3. 
1.  Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate: 
a.  The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or 
b.  A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors. 
2.  Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
3.  This standard does not apply: 
a.  Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards; 
b.  Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following: 
i.  A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or 
ii.  A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches. 
c.  Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or 
d.  Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property. 
D.  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the department of planning and community development, the department of health and human services, department of public works and/or the city police department. 
E.  Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed [insert amount] for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard. 
(Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 4043, §§ I-V, 5-26-2009) 
Chapter 17.48 - SIGNS 
Sections: 

17.48.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Awning" means any structure made of cloth, plastic, metal or other substance, with a frame attached to a building or other structure and projecting over a public or quasi-public right-of-way, when the same is so erected as to permit it to be raised to a position against the building or structure when not in use. 
    "Business sign" means a sign which directs attention to a person, organization, institution, activity, event, place, object, product, commodity, business, entertainment, service or profession which is located, sold, produced, provided, conducted or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
    "Canopy" means any structure, other than an awning or marquee, made of cloth, plastic, metal or other substance and providing a roof-like shelter over a public or quasi-public right-of-way. 
    "Flashing sign" means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use. 
    "Illuminated sign" means a sign having characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric light or luminous tubes as a part of the sign. 
    "Indirectly illuminated sign" means an illuminated, nonflashing sign whose illumination is derived from an external artificial source and is so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from the artificial source into an area where anyone resides or into any public street or public way. 
    "Marquee" means a permanent, roof-like structure extending from part or all of a building or other structure over a public or quasi-public right-of-way and constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass or plastic. 
    "Nameplate sign" means a sign which states the name or address, or both, of the occupant of the premises where the sign is located. 
    "Obstructing railroad overpass" means a railroad overpass which does not provide a minimum clearance from the highest point in the curvature of the road surface to the lowest point on the structure of the overpass of thirteen and one-half (131/2) feet or to such other maximum vehicular height as may be authorized from time to time by N.J.S.A. 39:3-84 or similar provision of law. 
    "Portable sign" means a sign, signboard, lightpost, awning, canopy, marquee, framework, flagpole or other similar object which is not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to a building or other structure. 
    "Professional sign" means a sign listing only the name or profession, or both, of a person practicing a profession on the premises where the sign is located. 
    "Sign" means any name, identification, description, display or illumination which is affixed to or painted on or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or parcel of land, and which directs attention to a person, organization, institution, activity, event, place, object, product, commodity, business, entertainment, service or profession or which conveys any message, notice or greeting. 
    "Sign area" means the entire area within a contiguous perimeter enclosing the limits of a sign and including the frame of the sign, but not including structural elements outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part thereof. For double-faced signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing the total sign area where the sign faces are parallel or where the interior angles formed by the faces are ninety (90) degrees or less. 
    "Structure of the sign" means all frames, glass or other coverings, gooseneck arms, lightbulbs, lights, shields, shades, reflectors, supports, brackets, braces, screws, bolts, fastenings or other items or devices which constitute a part of the support system for any sign, awning, canopy or marquee. 
(Prior code § 40-166) 
17.48.020 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The display of public notices of any governmental unit. 
B.  A temporary sign in connection with a political campaign or a charitable, educational or religious drive or event, provided that such sign shall not be maintained for more than 45 days, shall not exceed 75 square feet, and shall be removed from the premises ten days after the election or event date. 
C.  Temporary real estate signs, other than portable signs or illuminated signs, stating real estate for sale or lease, provided that the same do not exceed four square feet in sign area, and provided further that they are removed within ten days after the premises has been sold or leased. 
D.  Traditional decorations in connection with any holiday, or event of any religious or ethnic group. Traditional decoration in connection with any national, state, county or municipal observation, holiday, anniversary or event. Decorations must be removed 20 days after occasion, holiday or event. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009; prior code § 40-167) 
17.48.030 - Permit application, fee, issuance and fines. 
A.  The city construction office shall supply to any sign/awning applicant the proper application and sign/awning design guidelines. The applicant shall submit: 
1.  City official sign/awning application (original), plus six photocopies. 
2.  Any other information as the construction code official shall require to show full compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and any structural requirements which may be necessary. 
3.  Every applicant before being issued a permit shall pay to the city construction department a fee of $20.00 to construct a sign or awning within the city. 
4.  The applicant for any sign or awning must supply one set of photographs of; the current store front, two store fronts on the left side and two store fronts on the right side of the proposed sign/awning location. 
5.  Any person erecting a non conforming/illegal sign/awning has 20 days to remove said sign/awning after notification. If the non conforming sign/awning is not removed after 20 days fines shall be issued by the city of $100.00 per day, assessed to the owner of the property and the occupant of the business. The city also reserves the right to remove/lien the sign/awning and invoice the property owner for the cost of removal. The city shall not be liable for any damages to the facade as the result of removal being the property owner did not comply with the request of removal. 
6.  Rendering of the proposed sign and how it will be featured on the building. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009; prior code § 40-168) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4078, § 1, adopted October 27, 2009, changed the title of section 17.48.030 from "Permit application, fee and issuance" to "Permit application, fee, issuance and fines." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
17.48.040 - Structural regulations. 
A.  If the building inspector shall determine that any sign, awning, canopy or marquee, or the structure of any sign, now or hereafter erected or maintained, is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in such a manner as to pose a hazard to persons or property, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance, her or she shall give written notice to the permittee, and, if there is no permittee, to the owner of the premises, of the violation. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of the sign within thirty (30) days after such notice, such sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of the sign may be removed or altered by the building inspector at the expense of the permittee or ower of the premises upon which it is located. The building inspector shall thereafter refuse to issue a permit for erection of any sign, awning, canopy or marquee in the city to any permittee or property owner who refuses to pay the costs so assessed. The building inspector may cause any sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of a sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
B.  All signs, awnings, canopies, marquees and structures of the sign attached to the ground or to a building or other structure shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from causing any danger or damage to persons or property. 
C.  All illuminated signs shall comply with the electrical code of the city, in particular, the requirements ofChapter 15.04 of this code. 
D.  No sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of the sign shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct access to any fire escape, window, door, exit or standpipe, or obstruct passage by either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public or quasi-public right-of-way. 
E.  Signs, awnings, canopies, marquees and structures of the sign shall be constructed and erected in such a manner as to allow for the effects of high winds and other natural forces, and the building inspector shall require copies of the stress sheets and calculations showing that the sign, awning, canopy or marquee is adequately designed for dead-load and wind pressure in any direction, in any situation where such information may be helpful in determining whether such sign, awning, canopy or marquee can be safely constructed, erected or maintained. 
(Prior code § 40-169) 
17.48.050 - Maintenance and appearance-Aesthetic considerations. 
A.  All signs, awnings, canopies, marquees and structures of the sign shall be maintained in a clean and neat-appearing condition, and such maintenance, where applicable, shall include regular cleaning; regular painting and removal of any peeled, chipped or blistered paint; the renewal or replacement, in whole or in part, of any sign, awning, canopy or marquee or structure of the sign which has been caused to crack, break, peel or otherwise disintegrate or fall apart. 
B.  Any sign, now or hereafter erected or maintained, which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold, or notice of a current or future event, shall be taken down and removed by the permittee or by the owner of the premises, if there is no permittee, within thirty (30) days after such business ceases, such product ceases to be sold or such event occurs. Upon failure to comply, the building inspector is authorized to cause the removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the permittee or owner of the premises upon which such sign is located. The building inspector shall thereafter refuse to issue a permit for the erection of any sign, awning, canopy or marquee in the city to any permittee or property owner who refuses to pay the costs of such removal. 
C.  No flashing signs shall be permitted in the city except signs displaying the time and/or temperature. 
D.  No sign, awning, canopy or marquee shall contain any name, word, identification, description, display or illustration of an indecent or immoral nature; nor contain any libelous, defamatory or sacrilegious language; nor urge, advocate or glorify any unlawful activity or conduct. 
E.  No advertising sign or business sign shall be permitted in any residential district, nor be placed facing any residential district, except for business signs located in a nonresidential district. 
(Prior code § 40-170) 
17.48.060 - Permitted uses in zoning districts. 
A.  Residential Districts. Only signs meeting the following conditions shall be permitted in any residential district within the city: 
1.  Professional office or home occupation sign; being that the use within the structure meets all city codes. The sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. Such signs shall only bear the name and/or address of the person residing on the premises, and the profession or home occupation being conducted on the premises. These signs shall not be illuminated. 
2.  Non illuminated, temporary signs on new construction sites, not exceeding ten square feet in sign area, and provided that such signs shall be removed within ten days after completion of construction. 
3.  In R-3 and R-4 districts only, a sign shall be permitted for the purpose of identifying a multifamily dwelling project (over nine units) and shall be no greater than 20 square feet in area, whether it be on the lawn or attached to the building. 
4.  Only one sign shall be permitted for any use in a residential zone, except corner lots where two signs shall be permitted. Corner lots shall have only one sign permitted per each street frontage. 
5.  No more than one sign shall be permitted for each use or activity permitted in the residential zone. 
B.  Commercial Districts. 
1.  Only signs meeting the following criteria shall be permitted within all of the city's business districts: 
a.  One business sign for each facade, corner business's are permitted signs on two sides (facades), but only sign per street frontage. 
    Sign cannot protrude 12 inches from the facade, unless placed on an awning. 
    Sign Dimensions-Maximum height 14 feet from ground level measured at building frontage to top of sign, maximum sign width 80 percent of store width, maximum sign box height 24 inches. The dimensions listed above apply to letter size also when said sign consists of fixed letters to the building facade. 
    Only the business name, logo, street number are permitted on the sign. 
    No marquee signs are permitted, unless for use by a motion picture theater, provided that same may not interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and provide a clearance of not less than 15 feet. 
    Second floor businesses are limited to one window sign. Sign height for second floor is permitted to be higher than 14 feet but cannot exceed 22 feet. 
b.  Display windows may have the name of the store, store description, and/or logo of the store inscribed on the glass by any of the following means, and may not exceed 25 percent of the total window area: 
i.  Gilt lettering. 
ii.  Painted lettering. 
iii.  Professionally created decal. 
iv.  Stained or sandblasted glass. 
c.  The only signage that is permitted on the glass of the entry door is the name of the store, store description, and/or logo of the store inscribed on the glass by any of the means described above for display window signs, and a listing of business hours. 
d.  Special signs serving the public convenience, such as "notary public," "public telephone," "rest rooms" or words of direction or other signs of similar import, provided that each such sign does not exceed one square foot in sign area, and provided further that only one sign of each type shall be displayed. 
e.  Signs required by law to be exhibited by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
f.  Nonilluminated, temporary signs advertising the premises for sale or lease, provided that the same do not exceed eight square feet in sign area, and provided further they shall be removed within ten (10) days after the premises are sold or leased. 
g.  One awning may be placed upon the front facade of the building. 
h.  One canopy may be placed over the principal entrance to the building, provided that no awning is placed upon the front facade of the building. 
i.  Stressed fabric canopies may be placed on the facade of a building where limited to a vertical dimension of four feet and a horizontal projection of three feet with signage limited to a vertical height of sixteen (16) inches and containing only the name of the business and/or the street address. 
2.  Reserved. 
C.  Manufacturing Districts. No signs, awnings, canopies or marquees shall be permitted in any manufacturing district except: 
1.  Those signs, awnings, canopies and marquees permitted in the C-3 and C-4 districts. 
2.  Business signs, provided that the aggregate area of all such signs on the lot shall not exceed the sum of six square feet for each linear foot of lot frontage, and provided further that such signs attached to the building shall not exceed in the aggregate twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the front facade of the building. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009; prior code § 40-171) 
17.48.061 - Sign specifications. 
A.  Only signs meeting the following criteria shall be permitted within all of the city's business districts: 
1.  Forms of Signage. The following forms of signage are permitted: 
a.  Channel-letter (standard, reverse/halo, or open neon). 
b.  Carved. 
c.  Neon. 
d.  Two-dimensional board. 
e.  Three-dimensionality is preferred over two-dimensional design. 
f.  All other sign types not listed above are prohibited. 
2.  Permitted Sign Materials. 
a.  Painted or carved wood. 
b.  Carved wooden letters. 
c.  Epoxy letters. 
d.  Galvanized sheet metal. 
e.  Slate, marble or sandstone. 
f.  Gold leaf. 
g.  Clear and colored acrylic. 
h.  Neon, but restricted to ten percent of area inside window. 
i.  Stained glass. 
3.  Sign Graphics. Signs may not be hand-lettered, unless created by a professional sign artist. 
B.  Awning Signs. Signs on awnings are permitted only when they meet the following provisions: 
1.  Lettering no larger than 16 inches in size. 
2.  Sign/lettering width shall be no greater than 60 percent of store width. 
3.  The business name and logo, street number are permitted on the valance section of the awning, and may not cover more than 50 percent of the length of the valance. 
4.  Only the business name and logo are permitted on the upper section of the awning. 
5.  Texture shall be of cloth fabric only. 
6.  Colors are to be coordinated with existing colors of other awnings on the same city block. 
7.  Maximum height to the top of awning shall be 15 feet measured from the grade in front of the building. 
8.  Maximum height of the actual fixed awning shall be three and one-half feet. 
9.  Maximum projection from building facade for a fixed awning shall be three feet. 
10.  Retractable awnings shall have a maximum projection of six feet. 
11.  Awning shall be of a sloping style (angular) beginning flush at the top and sloping outwards as it proceeds downward. 
12.  A clearance height of eight feet must be maintained. 
13.  The framing of a canopy must not provide any opportunity for birds to perch beneath the canopy. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009) 
17.48.070 - Gas stations and shopping centers with off-street parking. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.48.060, any gasoline service station or shopping center providing contiguous off-street parking between the curb of any street on which such shopping center fronts or sides and the facade of the structure or structures located thereon shall be allowed to erect and maintain customary identification and product signs, including emblems and brands, provided that the same do not exceed sixty (60) square feet in sign area, and provided further that the display portion thereof is raised at least fifteen (15) feet above grade level. No such sign shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Only one such sign shall be permitted per gasoline service station site, and only one such sign per two hundred (200) feet of frontage on any street or side street shall be permitted for any such shopping center. Gasoline service stations shall be permitted to post signs on gasoline pumps stating the price per gallon and other information required by law, and, in addition thereto, gasoline service stations shall be permitted to erect price signs, except portable signs, within the property lines, provided that the same do not exceed eight square feet in sign area, and provided further that only one such sign shall be permitted per station, except for those gasoline service stations located on two or more streets which shall be permitted to erect one such sign for each street on which the station is located. 
(Prior code § 40-172) 
17.48.080 - General provisions. 
A.  No ground or wall sign shall have its highest section higher than the height requirement established for buildings in the particular zone and district, or forty (40) feet, whichever is lesser. No wall sign shall project above the wall to which it is attached. 
B.  No roof sign shall project beyond the walls of the building with the exception of its gooseneck arms which hold shades or reflectors; nor shall any roof sign be permitted to extend higher than thirty-five (35) feet above the roof at the point of mounting. 
C.  In the case of two or more business uses occupying the same structure, the front wall area to be used in determining permitted sign area shall only include that portion of the front wall area occupied by the use in question. 
D.  Where a business structure or professional structure is located at the intersection of two (2) public streets, an additional sign may be erected or inscribed upon the side wall on the street side, provided it does not exceed the permitted sign area. 
E.  Where the side or rear of a business or professional structure adjoins a public parking area or a private parking area intended for the use of the structure in question, signs may bt placed or inscribed on said side or rear wall to identify the business use or uses in the structure and access thereto. Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet or two percent of the wall, whichever is the lesser. 
F.  Awnings and canopies shall be so constructed and erected as to provide a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet, and marquees shall be so constructed and erected as to provide a minimum clearance of fifteen (15) feet. 
G.  All illuminated signs and indirectly illuminated signs shall be shielded so as to prevent any glare and no sign shall be illuminated by lighting of intermittent or varying intensity. 
H.  Any sign awning, canopy or marquee, which in the opinion of the building inspector shall pose a threat of personal injury or property damage because of its size, weight, shape, construction, or erection or because of its location in, on, over or adjacent to any public or quasi-public right-of-way, shall not be erected unless and until the applicant for the erection permit shall file with thecity adequate evidence of financial responsibility to pay for any personal injury or property damage which may reasonably be caused thereby. Because of the differing potentials for such loss or damage, the amount of public liability coverage necessary to satisfy this, requirement may be fixed from time to time by the building inspector after consultation vith the business administrator and the director of law. 
(Ord. No. 4373, § 8, 5-14-2013; prior code § 40-173) 
17.48.090 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs shall not be permitted in any zone or district: 
A.  Flashing, fluttering or animated signs, except for time and/or temperature signs which may be erected in any commercial or manufacturing district, and flashing, fluttering or animated signs for hotels with two hundred (200) rooms or more. All signs erected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter must comply with all other county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations; 
B.  Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause radio or television interference; 
C.  Any sign so constructed, erected or maintained as to obstruct or be attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of egress or ingress, or for fire-fighting purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation; 
D.  Any sign which is of such a form, shape or character as to confuse or dangerously distract the attention of an operator of a motor vehicle; 
E.  Any sign or marking on an obstructing railroad overpass, except for authorized traffic signs, markings or devices; 
F.  Any sign which uses a series of two or more signs or units, placed in a line or in parallel, or in similar fashion, all carrying a single message, part of which is contained on each sign; 
G.  Signs which in any way simulate authorized traffic directional or warning signs erected or maintained by any governmental unit or by any railroad, public utility or similar agency concerned with the protection of the public health or safety; 
H.  Portable signs; and 
I.  Revolving, rotating, gyrating, undulating or otherwise vibrating signs. 
J.  Temporary Signs on Glass. Temporary signs may not be affixed to the glass of the display window or of the door. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009; prior code § 40-174) 
17.48.100 - Nonconforming signs, awnings, canopies and marquees. 
A.  No nonconforming sign, awning, canopy or marquee shall be structurally changed or altered except to bring such sign, awning, canopy or marquee into compliance with this chapter. This provision shall not be deemed to relieve any person owning or controlling any existing sign, awning, canopy or marquee from maintaining the same in accordance with the safety and aesthetic standards set forth herein. 
B.  All portable signs shall be removed from the city within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  All signs on obstructing railroad overpasses, except for authorized traffic warning signs, markings or devices, shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
D.  The building inspector shall review his or her sign inventory and shall, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, classify all signs located in the city as follows: 
1.  Signs which are unsafe or insecure or menace the public and cannot reasonably be altered to make them safe, secure and hazard free. As to these signs, the building inspector shall direct their removal within thirty (30) days unless they constitute an immediate peril to persons and property, in which case they shall be removed summarily. 
2.  Signs which are unsafe or insecure or menace the public but can be altered to make them safe, secure and hazard free. As to these signs, the building inspector shall direct their immediate alteration to make them safe, secure and hazard free. 
3.  Signs which require cleaning or painting; removal of peeled, chipped or blistered paint; renewal or replacement, in whole or in part, of the sign or structure of the sign because of any cracking, peeling or breaking, or because the sign or structure of the sign has otherwise been caused to disintegrate. As to these signs, the building inspector shall direct their immediate renewal. 
4.  All Other Signs. 
E.  The building inspector shall have continuing authority to direct the removal, repair, cleaning, painting, and renewal, in whole or in part, of any nonconforming sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of the sign. 
(Prior code § 40-175) 
17.48.110 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  No person, corporation or other business entity which refuses to obey the proper direction of the building inspector to remove, alter, repair or renew any sign, awning, canopy, marquee or structure of the sign or which erects or maintains any prohibited sign shall thereafter be issued a permit for the erection of any sign, awning, canopy or marquee in the city. 
B.  The provisions of Section 1.12.010 shall be applicable to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 40-176) 
17.48.120 - Portable signs prohibited. 
    No portable sign shall be placed, installed, erected, transported or maintained within the city. All existing portable signs shall be removed from the city within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 120-2) 
17.48.130 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any portable sign which is being transported by the manufacturer, installer, owner or agent of the same to a location within or without the city where it is to be permanently erected, providing that such sign shall be safely and securely loaded on or attached to the vehicle transporting the same. 
B.  Any portable sign used by the state of New Jersey, county of Union or city of Elizabeth or by any utility company, telephone company or railroad company, provided such portable sign is intended for the safety and protection of the public. 
C.  Any portable sign placed or located within the interior of any building or structure. 
(Prior code § 120-3) 
17.48.150 - Portable signs-Manufacturing, constructing and storing. 
    This chapter shall not limit the business of manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, forging, shaping or otherwise constructing, processing or storing portable signs within the city, providing the same is done on premises owned or controlled by the operators or managers of such business and reasonable precautions are taken to protect the public from personal injury or property damage caused by such portable signs while the portable signs are on those premises. 
(Prior code § 120-4) 
17.48.160 - Monument signs. 
    Monument signs shall be only permitted for non residential uses in all zones within the city as long as the signs and the site meets the following requirements: 
A.  The site must contain a minimum of six parking spaces. 
B.  The height to the top of the sign must not exceed five feet measured from the surrounding ground. 
C.  The area of the sign cannot exceed 40 square feet. 
D.  The sign must be externally lit. 
E.  One monument sign is permitted for every two driveways at the site. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009) 
17.48.170 - Pole mounted signs. 
    Pole mounted signs shall be permitted for non residential uses granted that the signs and its site meet the following requirements: 
A.  The height of the sign shall not be greater than 20 feet to the top of the sign. 
B.  The square footage of the sign lettering area shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. 
C.  Only one pole mounted sign is permitted per project or property. 
D.  Pole mounted signs shall only be permitted along the following roadway corridors, Route 1 and 9, NJ Turnpike, North Avenue between 1 and 9 and McLester Street. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 10-27-2009) 
Chapter 17.52 - FEES 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Public hearings. 
    Fees for hearings before the planning and zoning boards shall be as follows: 
A.  Where a public notice is required, eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00) to accompany the application; 
B.  Where a public notice is not required, six hundred dollars ($600.00) to accompany the application; 
C.  Where a hearing is adjourned to a subsequent session, eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00) to be paid prior to commencement of the adjourned hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 59, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3764 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-186) 
17.52.020 - Municipal fees for applications for development. 
    Municipal fees for application for development shall be paid upon filing of an application for development. Such fees shall be as follows: 
A.  Direction to issue a building permit pursuant to Section 17.08.100 of this title, four hundred eighty dollars ($480.00); 
B.  Revisions, amendments, resubmissions or other alterations of required documents or exhibits, maps or technical reports, six hundred dollars ($600.00), other documents, two hundred forty dollars ($240.00); 
C.  All other applications as per the table below: 
Item Municipal Application Fees Minor Subdivisions   Residential  Two-lot minor subdivision, lot line adjustment $600.00   Nonresidential, commercial/industrial  Subdivisions include minors Same as major subdivisions Major Subdivisions Preliminary Final Major subdivision, three lots and greater   Residential $900.00 base, plus $65.00 per each additional lot $720.00   Nonresidential, commercial/industrial  Subdivisions include minors $960.00 base, plus $120.00 per each additional lot $720.00 Site Plan Applications   Residential   1 to 6 dwelling units $960.00 $720.00    6 to 20 dwelling units $1,080.00 $840.00   20 to 50 dwelling units $1,440.00 $960.00   over 50 dwelling units $2,400.00 $1,080.00   Nonresidential, commercial/retail/industrial  Lot area shall be calculated by the total lot area of property   0 to 20,000 square feet $960.00 $720.00   20,000 to 50,000 square feet $1,200.00 $840.00   50,000 to 100,000 square feet $1,440.00 $960.00   over 100,000 square feet $2,400.00 $1,080.00   Concept Plan  Residential minor and major subdivision $600.00 (no hearing fee required)  Commercial and all nonresidential site plans $1,200.00 (no hearing fee required)   General Development Plans $960.00   Variances   1. All use "D" variances, bulk "C" variances and conditional use applications under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 not requiring a site plan or subdivision approval shall be nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00).   2. Use "D" variance, "C" variance and conditional use applications when requested along with a site plan or subdivision, an additional six hundred dollars ($600.00).    3. Site plans or subdivisions submitted which require a design waiver, an additional three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00).  
(Ord. No. 4149, § 60, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3764 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-187) 
17.52.030 - Subdivision certificates. 
    Fees for certificates of subdivision shall not be in excess of those provided under N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. 
(Prior code § 40-188) 
17.52.040 - List of adjoining property owners. 
    The fee for a list of property owners to be notified of a public hearing shall be a sum not to exceed twenty-five cents ($0.25) per name, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 4392, § 1, 7-23-2013; Ord. No. 4149, § 61, 8-24-2010; Ord. 3764 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-189) 
17.52.050 - Duplicate recordings of hearings. 
    The fee for a duplicate recording of a hearing shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per session. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 62, 8-24-2010; prior code § 40-190) 
17.52.060 - Fee schedule certificates of occupancy for existing uses. 
A.  The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy for existing uses shall be: 
For residential or commercial uses the fee shall be $60.00 Each additional unit shall be $20.00 per unit Industrial shall be $0.0012 per sq. ft. of floor area, including all floor and basements, the minimum fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), the maximum fee shall be eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00)  
(Ord. No. 4149, § 63, 8-24-2010; prior code § 40-191) 
17.52.065 - Fees for zoning permits. 
A.  Twenty dollar ($20.00) nonrefundable fee for all single and two (2) family homes. 
B.  One hundred dollar ($100.00) nonrefundable fee for all other zoning permits. 
(Ord. No. 4764 , § 2, 10-25-2016) 
17.52.070 - Documents. 
    Fees for all documents shall be established as part of the rules and regulations of the appropriate agency. 
(Prior code § 40-192) 
17.52.080 - Special meeting. 
    When a hearing is conducted at a special meeting session, a fee of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) shall be paid prior to commencement of the special meeting. When two (2) or more hearings are conducted at a special session, the fee shall be prorated among the applicants based on hearing duration. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 64, 8-24-2010; prior code § 40-193) 
17.52.090 - Exemptions. 
A.  The required escrow deposit will be reduced by fifty (50) percent for applications that will serve the public good. Qualifying organizations, holding a tax-exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. Section 501(c) or (d)), are as follows: public organizations and/or agencies, charitable and/or philanthropic organizations, fraternal and/or religious nonprofit organizations. 
B.  Development or improvement of a single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling which does not need a waiver, exemption or variance shall be exempt from escrow deposit. 
C.  Residential fencing, decks, sheds, pools and minor residential building additions of less than five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area shall be exempt from escrow deposit requirements. 
D.  The following uniform standards are to apply to the exemption granted hereunder: 
1.  All applicants for exemption must provide written evidence of tax exemption, as required in this section at the time of making application. 
2.  All applicants must provide written evidence of the organizational structure thereof signed by appropriate individuals and officers of the applicant. In the case of a corporation, the corporate officer authorized to do so on behalf of the corporation shall file the application attested to by the corporate secretary. 
3.  All supporting documentation referred to in subsections (D)(1) and (2) of this section shall be approved as to terms and conditions by the zoning administrator and as to for by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 3764 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-194) 
17.52.100 - Fees for professional services-Deposits with municipality-Escrow-Interest. 
A.  Fees for Professional Services. Prospective developers shall bear the cost of professional services in connection with land development matters under consideration by the planning board, zoning board or the city council. 
1.  The land development matters shall include, but not be limited to, appeals, interpretations, application approvals, amendments to the land development control ordinance, conceptual plan reviews and amendments to the land use element of the master plan. 
2.  The professional services shall be those services which are provided on a contractual basis rather than by city employees and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections, investigations, reviews and attendance at meetings by planners, engineers, architects, landscape architects, attorneys and other personnel and experts deemed necessary with respect to action on such land development matters. 
3.  Payment of the costs shall be based on a schedule adopted by resolution and shall be in addition to other fees established pursuant to the land development control ordinance. 
B.  Deposits. Prospective developers shall supply initial escrow funds to cover the cost of professional services per the table listed in this subsection. These are initial deposits, certain applications because of their complexity may require additional funding. No application shall be deemed complete unless the following fees are submitted: 
1.  Initial Escrow Fees. 
Item Initial Escrow to be Posted Minor Subdivisions Without a site plan review   Residential  Two-lot minor subdivision, lot line adjustment $1,500.00   Nonresidential, Commercial/Industrial  Subdivisions include minors Same as major subdivisions Major Subdivisions Major subdivision, three lots and greater   Residential $2,500.00 base, plus $450.00 per each additional lot   Nonresidential, Commercial/Industrial  Subdivisions include minors $2,500.00 base, plus $900.00 per each additional lot Site Plan Applications   Residential   1 to 3 dwelling units $3,500.00    3 to 20 dwelling units $5,500.00   20 to 50 dwelling units $7,000.00   Over 50 dwelling units $12,000.00   Nonresidential, Commercial/Retail/Industrial  Lot area shall be calculated by the total lot area of property   0 to 20,000 square feet $5,000.00   20,000 to 50,000 square feet $8,000.00   50,000 to 100,000 square feet $12,000.00   Over 100,000 square feet $20,000.00   Concept Plan   Residential minor and major subdivision $1,000.00   Commercial and all nonresidential site plans $2,000.00 General Development Plans $2,000.00   Variances  All variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and conditional use applications not requiring a site plan or subdivision approval shall be one thousand dollars ($2,500.00)  
C.  Escrow. All moneys deposited shall be placed in an escrow account and administered in accordance with procedures established by the municipal chief financial officer. Escrow deposits must be submitted to the administrative officer prior to the application being reviewed for completeness. An application will not be considered to be complete or placed on the agenda for public hearing until the required escrow deposit has been satisfied. 
D.  Appeals. Appeals shall be made to the governing body in accordance with state law and shall be remedied by the commissioner of planning and zoning. 
E.  Nonpayment. Action on land development matters shall be deferred where a prospective developer has not complied with the requirements of this section. Municipal action on the related development matter shall not be delayed as a result of any appeal. Where deposits have not been made or where fees have not been paid in accordance with this section: 
1.  Approving authorities shall not process applications, conduct hearings or take action on an application; 
2.  Signatures of municipal officials shall not be affixed to any subdivision plat or deed, site plan, zoning permits, building permits or certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 4779 , § 1, 11-22-2016; Ord. 3764 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-195) 
Chapter 17.56 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
Sections: 

17.56.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter establishes general regulations and design standards for the location of wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are: 
A.  As a first priority, to locate antennas on existing towers, structures, buildings and additional towers on real property owned by the city of Elizabeth; 
B.  As a second priority, to locate antennas on any freestanding billboard on mounted poles in any zone district; 
C.  As a third priority, to locate antennas and additional towers in the RC regional commercial zone district; 
D.  To prohibit antennas and towers in the R-1 single-family residential zone, the R-2 two-family residential zone, the R-2C two-family residential zone and the OS open space zone; 
E.  To avoid potential adverse effects to adjacent properties from tower failure through proper engineering and careful siting of towers; 
F.  To encourage the co-location of antennas where technically feasible on any tower constructed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-201) 
17.56.020 - Definitions. 
    Whenever this chapter refers to any applicable law, rule, regulation or standard, the most current law, rule, regulation or standard shall govern. 
    "ANSI" means American National Standards Institute. 
    "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, radar signals, telecommunications signals or other communications signals. 
    "Diameter at point of measurement" means the diameter of a tree measured four and one-half feet above the ground level of trees to be surveyed in the field. On sloped terrain, such measurement shall be made on the downhill side. Diameter at point of measurement may appear in this chapter as the abbreviation "D.P.M." 
    "EIA" means Electronics Industries Association. 
    "Environmental impact statement (EIS)" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a report which shall evaluate the existing conditions of the location where the antenna, tower or equipment compound is proposed, the full impact of construction on the existing conditions, terrestrial ecology, environmental setting and cultural resources through the actions of grading, soil disturbance, facility construction, site drainage and other above or below ground disturbances. 
    Equipment Compound. See "Wireless telecommunications equipment compound." 
    "Facility" means the construction, reconstruction, structural alteration or installation proposed by the applicant including, but not limited to, the antennas or equipment mounted thereon. 
    "Personal wireless services (PWS)" mean any FCC licensed operation which provides commercial wireless communications either for hire as a common carrier on a private basis to subscribers and which include, without limitations, personal communication services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR) and paging. 
    "Stealth tower structure" means simulated trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design-mounting structures such as stealth antennas or flush-mounted antennas that camouflage, conceal or minimize the presence of antennas or towers. 
    "TIA" means Telecommunications Industries Association. 
    "Tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar wireless telecommunications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers or monopole towers. The term includes the structure and its foundation, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, cellular telephone towers, common-carrier towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
    "View shed" means a map (1:100,000 scale) depicting areas from which the tower, or portions thereof, may be seen within city limits and any municipality a distance of one mile from the proposed structure in all directions. 
    "Visual environmental assessment form (Visual EAF)" means a comprehensive report which shall access the impacts of the proposed personal wireless services facility on the existing landscape and skyline. 
    "Wireless telecommunications equipment compound" means a fenced-in area which houses any combination of wireless telecommunications structures, buildings, antennas, equipment and/or towers. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-202) 
17.56.030 - Locational and land use priority for towers and antennas. 
A.  The first priority location shall be on an existing tower, building, structure or an additional tower on real, undeveloped property owned by the city of Elizabeth provided that the new installation does not increase the height by more than ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the building or structure, whichever is less. 
B.  The second priority location shall be on any freestanding billboard mounted on poles in zoning district. 
C.  The third priority location shall be on existing structures or buildings or additional towers in the RC regional commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-203) 
17.56.040 - Limitations on antennas and towers in certain zoning districts. 
A.  New towers and rooftop antennas on buildings or structures four stories or greater are permitted uses in the MRC manufacturing, research and commercial zone, M-2 medium industrial zone and the M-3 heavy industrial zone. 
B.  Rooftop antennas on buildings or structures five stories or greater but no new towers are permitted uses in the R-4 elevator apartment zone, the R-3 multifamily residential zone, the R-3A four-family residential zone, C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, C-3 central commercial zone, C-3A central arterial commercial zone, C-4 special commercial zone, C-5 special commercial zone II and the PO professional office zone. 
C.  Antennas and towers are prohibited in the OS open space zone, R-1 single-family residential zone, R-2 two-family residential zone and R-2C two-family residential zone. 
D.  Antennas and towers are conditional uses in all other zoning districts. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-204) 
17.56.050 - Accessory uses and structures. 
A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, antennas are permitted as accessory uses and structures in all zoning districts only if installed on an existing tower, structure or building owned by the city of Elizabeth subject to the following requirements: 
1.  A license or lease authorizing the tower or antenna has been approved by the city council in its sole discretion. 
2.  As a condition of any lease or license under this section in lieu of site plan approval from the approving authority, the provider and city shall seek review under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31. 
3.  The bulk regulations contained in this chapter or elsewhere within the city's land development control ordinance shall not apply to antennas constructed under this section. 
4.  Such lease or license is subject to public bidding under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. 
B.  Prior to the utilization of the structure or building, a site plan pursuant to Section 17.56.080 of this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. 
C.  Accessory uses and structures as permitted in this section shall be subject to compliance with visual compatibility requirements in Section 17.56.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-205) 
17.56.060 - Visual compatibility requirements for the installation of antennas and wireless telecommunications equipment compounds. 
A.  A wireless telecommunications equipment compound may be constructed in support of such antennas or a new tower only consisting with the following requirements: 
1.  A wireless telecommunications equipment compound consisting of no more than nine hundred (900) square feet in area for each PWS carrier shall be enclosed within a solid wooden or mesh fence at least seven feet high and no more than eight feet high as approved by the city engineer which shall include a locking security gate. At the city's discretion, a chain link fence may be installed immediately inside the solid wooden fence for security purposes. Barbed wire is prohibited. The height of the equipment building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
2.  A wireless telecommunications equipment compound shall be situated behind existing structures, buildings or terrain features or constructed on the rooftop of such structure or building in a manner which will shield the equipment compound from public view. 
3.  When a location out of public view is not possible, a landscape buffer of twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided outside the fence around the equipment compound to shield the facility from public view. Landscaping shall include native evergreen and deciduous trees of a minimum of three and one-half inches D.P.M. at least eight feet high at the time of planting. The number of trees shall be based on the equivalent of staggered double rows at least fifteen (15) feet on center. 
B.  Antennas. 
1.  Antenna arrays shall not extend by more than ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the overall height of any such building, structure or tower, whichever is less. 
2.  The installation of rooftop antennas on the side of a building or structure, between floors or on the facade of a building or structure in any zoning district is strictly prohibited. 
3.  Antennas installed according to these provisions shall be suitably finished and/or painted so as to minimize their visual impact on the landscape. Depending on the placement of this equipment, a color shall be selected to be consistent with the color scheme of the building or structure on which they are mounted in order to blend with their surroundings. When this is not possible, color selection shall be designed to minimize the visual impact of the antenna arrays. Applicant shall install flush-mounted antennas, whenever possible. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-206) 
17.56.070 - Supplementary regulations for the location of towers. 
A.  Height and Setbacks. The construction of any new tower shall be only in accordance with all zoning regulations of the zone district in which the proposed tower is to be located and the following additional requirements: 
Minimum setback of tower from any property line 100 feet Distance from:  Any existing residence 500 feet  Another tower 1,500 feet  Minimum setback for equipment compound As required by applicable zoning regulations for accessory uses and structures  Maximum tower height 150 feet  Fencing 10 feet high security mesh fence (no barbed wire)  
B.  Visual Compatibility. The applicant shall comply with the visual compatibility requirements in Section 17.56.060 of this chapter and in addition, stealth designs shall be employed for proposed antenna support structures to conceal their appearance such as bell towers, artificial trees and similar treatments as approved by the city. 
C.  Other Requirements for Towers. 
1.  Where new towers or replacements are proposed, the following shall be submitted: 
a.  A report by a licensed professional engineer which, in the case of a tower, shall include: 
i.  A detailed description of the proposed facility, tower, antennas, equipment compound, structures and associated equipment including height, design, features, access road and power lines, if any, 
ii.  Information which demonstrates compliance with the applicable structural standards of EIA/TIA RS 222, 
iii.  A description of the tower's capacity, including the number and types of antennas it can accommodate. The report shall indicate the power and frequency of all transmissions to be broadcasted from the facility. In the case of an antenna mounted on an existing structure, the report shall indicate: the existing structure's suitability to accept the antenna, and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure; complete details and scaled drawings of all fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of attachment shall be indicated. Where a roof mount extends above the roof, the applicant shall demonstrate every effort has been made to conceal the mount within or behind existing architectural features to limit visibility from public streets and adjoining properties. Side mounts shall blend with the existing architecture and if over five square feet shall be painted or shielded with material consistent with the design features and materials of the building, 
iv.  A map (1:100,000 scale) showing the extent of planned coverage for the PWS within the city and the location and service of applicant-operated facilities, 
v.  Plan and elevation drawings showing the proposed tower, antennas and their associated equipment. The plan shall have a scale no smaller than one inch equals forty (40) feet, 
vi.  A topographic profile showing the proposed tower, antennas, the equipment compound and all associated equipment. The topography shall be drawn with a minimum of two-foot contour intervals; 
b.  The applicant shall submit an environmental impact statement (EIS) which shall address a description of the environmental characteristics of the facility site, archaeological sites and any historically designated areas of the site, any impacts to these and a mitigation plan; 
c.  The applicant shall submit a visual environmental assessment form (Visual EAF) which shall include: 
i.  A sight line representation shall be shown from any public street within one hundred (100) feet and the closest facade of each building (viewpoint) within one hundred (100) feet to the highest point (visible point) of the regulated facility. Each sight line shall be depicted in profile, drawn at one inch equals forty (40) feet. The profiles shall show existing intervening trees and buildings, 
ii.  A plan map of a circle of one mile radius from the facility site on which any visibility of the proposed tower from a public way shall be indicated, 
iii.  An architectural rendering of the view of the tower from adjoining properties and streets, 
iv.  The applicant shall submit photographs of: 
(A)  Existing condition photographs in which each sight line shall be illustrated by an eight-inch by ten (10) inch color photograph of what can currently be seen from any public street within one hundred (100) feet, and at a minimum of eight cardinal radials to the extent that access as needed is granted by property owners, 
(B)  Proposed after-condition photographs in which each existing condition photograph shows the proposed facility superimposed on it to scale, 
v.  Applicant shall provide a view shed analysis also showing these photograph locations; 
d.  A landscape plan addressing the site plan details required by Section 17.56.080(C) of this chapter; 
e.  A Site Selection Report. 
i.  A site selection report shall inventory existing facilities, towers and antenna sites within a reasonable distance (at least one mile in all directions of all wireless telecommunications carriers within and outside the city of Elizabeth) from the proposed site outlining opportunities for shared use as an alternative to the proposed use. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed tower, facility or antenna cannot be accommodated on an existing tower, building or structure as enumerated in Sections 17.56.030 and 17.56.040(A) and (B) of this chapter due to one or more of the following reasons: 
(A)  Written confirmation of the unwillingness of the owner to entertain a facility modification or PWS proposal, 
(B)  The applicant's proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing and approved tower and facilities considering existing and planned uses for the facilities, 
(C)  The proposed equipment would cause radio frequency interference, which cannot be reasonably prevented, with other existing or planned equipment of the facility, 
(D)  Existing or approved towers or facilities do not have space on which applicant's proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably, 
(E)  Other reasons which make it impracticable to place the equipment proposed by the applicant on an existing approved tower or facilities. 
ii.  A statement containing a description of the siting criteria and the process by which other possible sites were considered and eliminated, including but not limited to: real estate search areas, distances and bearings to other system sites, acceptable radio frequency signal strength levels and/or microwave interconnection path requirements. The applicant shall support this statement with the submission of a study comparing all potential host sites within an approximate two-mile radius of the subject site (areas where personal wireless service facilities are prohibited need not be considered). This study should include a description of the surrounding sites, and a discussion of the ability or inability to host a facility. Reasons for excluding a site from consideration may include, without limitation: 
(A)  The written confirmation of the unwillingness of the owner to entertain a facility, 
(B)  Topographic limitations of the site, 
(C)  Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate wireless transmissions, 
(D)  Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction of a facility, and 
(E)  Technical limitations of the proposed wireless system; 
f.  A report on compliance with the latest version of the ANSI standards and analyzed according to the requirements of the FCC Bulletin O.E.T. 65 describing the impact on human health, if any, prepared by a radio frequency engineer. The report shall indicate compliance with all applicable FCC regulations and guidelines; 
g.  A written irrevocable commitment to rent or lease available space for co-location on the tower at fair market prices and terms, without discrimination to other carriers; 
h.  The reviewing agency may require a balloon test which shall be held by the applicant at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing with a notice to the public in a local newspaper of general circulation of the location, time and date. Notice to the public shall be by the applicant at least seven to fourteen (14) days in advance of the first test date and shall list an alternative date and time in case of poor visibility on the initial date. At the test, a three-foot diameter brightly-colored balloon shall be raised to the height of the proposed tower and shall remain in place as long as practical but not less than four consecutive hours sometime between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of the dates chosen. 
2.  Existing Towers and Facilities. Where a new PWS or antenna is proposed to be constructed or located on an existing tower structure or building as described in Section 17.56.030 as first priority and Section 17.56.060 of this chapter, the following shall be submitted and considered in addition to the requirements of Section 17.56.050 of this chapter and any city-applicable site plan requirements: 
a.  A description of the proposed antennas and associated equipment; 
b.  A map (1:100,000 scale) showing the extent of planned coverage for the PWS within the borough and the location and service of applicant-operated facilities; 
c.  Plan and elevation drawings at a scale of one inch equals forty (40) feet showing the proposed antennas and their associated equipment; 
d.  A report on compliance with the latest version of the ANSI standard and analyzed according to the requirements of the FCC Bulletin O.E.T. 65 describing the impact on human health, if any, prepared by a radio frequency engineer. The report shall indicate compliance with all applicable FCC regulations and guidelines; 
e.  A structural analysis of the existing tower with the antennas and associated equipment prepared and signed by a licensed engineer demonstrating compliance with EIS/TIA EIA RS 222; 
f.  If the construction or placement constitutes an expansion of a legally nonconforming facility or tower, identification of other facilities or towers where the equipment or antenna could be located and the reason this location is superior to other locations is required. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-207) 
17.56.080 - Site plan application requirements for the installation of towers and antennas. 
A.  All site plan details required by the city's site plan ordinance shall be provided and in addition shall include the site boundaries; proposed tower location; existing structures, including accessory structures; existing and proposed ground-mounted equipment; vehicular parking and access; uses, structures, and land use designations on the site and abutting parcels; and the setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, adjacent properties and other towers. 
B.  In the case of an antenna mounted on an existing tower, structure or building listed in Section 17.56.040 or Section 17.56.060 of this chapter, the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure or building, complete details and scaffold drawings of all fixtures and couplings and the precise point of all attachments shall be indicated. 
C.  A landscape plan drawn scale generally showing proposed landscaping, including species type, size, spacing, other landscape features and existing vegetation to be retained, removed or replaced. In the case of a tower year-round evergreen screening to effectively screen the tower base and equipment buildings and compound; screening to minimize impact of the tower from nearby residential properties; and screening to minimize impact on scenic views identified in the visual EAF. 
D.  An environmental impact statement shall be supplied. 
E.  A report from a licensed professional engineer containing the following items shall be supplied: 
1.  A description of the tower design and height with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
2.  Documentation to establish that the tower has sufficient structural integrity for the proposed uses at the proposed location with additional co-locators, as may be provided by this chapter and meets the minimum requirements of EIA/TIA RS 222; and 
3.  The general capacity of the tower in terms of the number and type of antennas it is designed to accommodate. 
F.  A letter of commitment by the applicant to lease excess space on the tower to other potential users at prevailing market rates and conditions shall be supplied. The letter of commitment shall be recorded prior to issuance of a building permit. The letter shall commit the tower owner and successors in interest. 
G.  Elevations of the proposed tower and compound accurately depicting all proposed antennas, platforms, finished materials and all other accessory equipment shall be supplied. 
H.  A copy of lease or deed for the property shall be supplied. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-208) 
17.56.090 - Antenna modifications, tower certification and abandonment. 
A.  The owner or operator of a tower shall provide to the city planner a report every two years from a licensed professional engineer certifying the structural integrity of the tower or structure, together with all antennas mounted thereon and whether they remain in use, and that they meet applicable minimum safety requirements. Such report shall also be provided whenever the antenna(s) is modified, and shall include a detailed listing of all antennas and equipment so certified. Vendors shall also be required to notify the city planner when the use of such antennas and equipment is discontinued. 
B.  Towers and antennas which are not in use for wireless telecommunications purposes for a continuous period of six months are deemed to be abandoned and shall be removed by the facility owner at its cost. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of approval. The facility owner shall post a bond to cover the cost of tower removal and site restoration prior to its removal. The amount of the bond shall be calculated to account for cost escalations. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-209) 
17.56.100 - Application fees. 
    The applicant shall pay the site plan application fees set forth in the city's land development control ordinance. 
(Ord. 3678 § 1 (part), 2005: prior code § 40-210) 
Chapter 17.60 - SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

17.60.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be referred to as the "Small Wind Energy System Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 1, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: (1) facilitate the permitting of small wind energy systems; and (2) preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a small wind energy system. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Administrator" shall mean the land use administrator, construction official, zoning officer or planning board or zoning board of adjustment, as applicable. 
    "Board" means the planning board or zoning board of adjustment, as applicable. 
    "Meteorological tower" or "met tower" means a structure designed to support the gathering of wind energy resource data, and includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. 
    "Owner" shall mean the individual or entity that intends to own and operate the small wind energy system in accordance with this chapter. 
    "Rotor diameter" means the cross sectional dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades of a wind-powered energy generator. 
    "Small wind energy system" means a wind energy system, as defined in this section, that: 
A.  Is used to generate electricity; 
B.  Has a nameplate capacity of one hundred (100) kilowatts or less; and 
C.  Is as high as necessary to capture the wind energy resource for residential, industrial, commercial or agricultural use. 
    "Total height" means, in relation to a wind energy system, the vertical distance from the ground to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. 
    "Tower" means a monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind generator. 
    "Wind energy system" means a wind generator and all associated equipment, including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component necessary to fully utilize the wind generator. 
    "Wind generator" means equipment that converts energy from the wind into electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components necessary to generate, store and/or transfer energy. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 3, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.040 - Standards. 
    A small wind energy system shall be a permitted use in all zones subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Setbacks. A wind tower for a small wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal to the city's building set back requirements. No portion of the wind generator shall extend beyond the setback line, nor into the following: 
1.  Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is granted by the government entity with jurisdiction over the road right-of-way; 
2.  Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the utility that owns and/or controls the lines. 
B.  Access. 
1.  All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
2.  The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts, a ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the tower, for a minimum height of eight (8) feet above the ground. 
C.  Lighting. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
D.  Appearance, Color, and Finish. The wind generator and the tower shall remain painted or finished in the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless a different color of finish is approved in the zoning approval. 
E.  Signs. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road posted on a small wind generator system or any associated building, except for the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification. 
F.  Utility Notification and Interconnection. Small wind energy systems that connect to the electric utility shall comply with the New Jersey's Net Metering and Interconnection Standards for Class I Renewable Energy Systems at N.J.A.C. 14:4-9 
G.  Met Towers. A met tower shall be permitted under the same standards, permit requirements, restoration requirements and permit procedures as a small wind energy system. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 4, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.050 - Permit requirements. 
A.  Permit. A zoning permit shall be required for the installation of a small wind energy system. 
B.  Documents. The zoning permit application shall be accompanied by a plot plan which includes the following: 
1.  Property lines and physical dimensions of the property; 
2.  Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property; 
3.  Location of the proposed small wind energy system tower; 
4.  The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property; 
5.  Any overhead utility lines; 
6.  Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding or guyed). 
C.  Fees. The application for a zoning permit for a small wind energy system must be accompanied by the fee required, which shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall be non-refundable. 
D.  Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire if: 
1.  The small wind energy system is not installed and functioning within twenty-four (24) months from the date the permit is issued, or 
2.  The small wind energy system is out of service or otherwise unused for a continuous 18-month period. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 5, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.060 - Abandonment. 
A.  A small wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned. 
B.  The administrator may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of a small wind energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt requested. 
C.  The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within thirty (30) days from notice receipt date. 
D.  If the owner provides information that demonstrates the small wind energy system has not been abandoned, the administrator shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn. 
E.  If the administrator determines that the small wind energy system has been abandoned, the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator from the tower at the owner's sole expense within six (6) months after the owner receives the notice of abandonment. 
F.  If the owner fails to remove the wind generator from the tower in the time allowed under Subsection E. above, the administrator may pursue legal action to have the wind generator removed at the owner's expense. 
    Nothing in this section shall supersede the city's emergency powers to remove, demolish or abate, as set forth in this City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 6, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.070 - Zoning permit procedure. 
A.  An owner shall submit an application to the administrator for a zoning permit for a small wind energy system. 
B.  The administrator shall issue a permit or deny the application within one month as consistent with Municipal Land Use Law of the date on which the application is received. 
C.  If the application is approved, the administrator will return one signed copy of the application with the zoning permit and retain the other copy with the application. 
D.  If the application is rejected, the administrator will notify the applicant in writing and provide a written statement of the reason why the application was rejected. The applicant may appeal the administrator's decision pursuant to the appropriate appeals authority. The applicant may reapply if the deficiencies specified by the administrator are resolved. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 7, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.080 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, except for the provisions at Section 17.60.070 hereinabove regarding abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 8, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.090 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the land use administrator, construction official, zoning officer or planning board or zoning board of adjustment, as applicable. 
B.  The administrator may enter any property for which a permit has been issued under this chapter to conduct an inspection to determine whether the conditions stated in the permit have been met. 
C.  The administrator may issue orders to abate any violation of this chapter. 
D.  The administrator may issue a citation for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 9, 9-14-2010) 
17.60.100 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as stipulated in chapter and section of the appropriate zoning code. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from using any other lawful means to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 10, 9-14-2010) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR NEW JERSEY MUNICIPALITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the Code user to state statutes applicable to New Jersey municipalities. They are current with laws effective through L. 2015, c. 120 and J.R. No. 7. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation 
NJSA ch. 40:43 
Classification of cities 
NJSA ch. 40A:6 
Annexation 
NJSA ch. 40A:7 
General powers 
NJSA ch. 40:48 
Elections 
NJSA ch. 40:45 
Wards 
NJSA ch. 40:44 
Eminent domain for parking authorities 
NJSA § 40:11A-7 
Legal holidays 
NJSA title 36 
Codification of ordinances 
NJSA § 40:49-4 
Penalties for violating ordinances 
NJSA § 40:49-5 
Administration and Personnel 
Governing bodies generally 
NJSA chs. 40:45A, 40:72, 40:75, 40:81, 40:84 
Boroughs generally 
NJSA ch. 40A:60 
Townships generally 
NJSA ch. 40A:63 
Officers and employees 
NJSA chs. 40:46, 40:73, 40:83, 40A:9 and §§ 40:48-1(3)-(5) 
Local government ethics law 
NJSA § 40A:9-22.1 et seq. 
Oaths and affidavits 
NJSA title 41 
Ordinances and resolutions 
NJSA ch. 40:49 
Optional municipal charters 
NJSA ch. 40:69A 
Commission form of government 
NJSA ch. 40:70 et seq. 
Municipalities governed by municipal council and municipal manager 
NJSA ch. 40:79 et seq. 
Special meetings of governing bodies 
NJSA § 40:48-24 
Police and fire departments 
NJSA chs. 15:8, 40:47 and 40A:14 
Municipal investigations 
NJSA § 40:48-25 et seq. 
Vacancies in certain municipal offices 
NJSA ch. 40A:16 
Municipal planning board 
NJSA § 40:55D-23 et seq. 
Municipal courts 
NJSA ch. 2B:12 
Board of recreation commissioners 
NJSA ch. 40:12 
Local historians 
NJSA ch. 40:10A 
Revenue and Finances 
Local Tax Authorization Law 
NJSA ch. 40:48C 
Claims against public agencies 
NJSA title 59 
Sinking funds 
NJSA ch. 40:3 
Public moneys and financial statements 
NJSA Ch. 40:5 
Hotel occupancy tax 
NJSA ch. 40:48E 
Taxation and finance generally 
NJSA §§ 40:48-7 et seq. 
Local improvements 
NJSA ch. 40:56 
Ordinances authorizing indebtedness 
NJSA § 40:49-27 et seq. 
Ordinances for improvements 
NJSA § 40:49-6 et seq. 
Local Bond Law 
NJSA ch. 40A:2 
Municipal Qualified Bond Act 
NJSA ch. 40A:3 
Local Budget Law 
NJSA ch. 40A:4 
Local Fiscal Affairs Law 
NJSA ch. 40A:5 
Local Public Contracts Law 
NJSA ch. 40A:11 
Alcoholic beverages tax 
NJSA § 40:48C-3 et seq. 
Employer payroll tax 
NJSA § 40:48C-14 et seq. 
Sales tax 
NJSA § 40:48-8.15 et seq. 
Hotel room use fees 
NJSA § 40:48-8.46 et seq. 
Parking tax 
NJSA § 40:48C-6 et seq. 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Business licenses 
NJSA ch. 40:52 
Sunday sales 
NJSA ch. 40A:64 
Alcoholic beverage sales 
NJSA § 40:48-2.39 et seq. and NJSA title 33 
Community antenna television systems 
NJSA § 40:48-5.9 et seq. 
Taxicabs, autocabs and jitneys 
NJSA ch. 48:16 
Licensing rooming and boarding houses 
NJSA § 40:52-10 et seq. 
Hucksters 
NJSA § 40:48-1(12) 
Rental property 
NJSA §§ 40:48-2.12n et seq., 40:52-1(d.) 
Vehicle removal and storage 
NJSA § 40:48-2.49 et seq. 
Animals 
Authority to regulate animals 
NJSA § 40:48-1(10.) and (11.) 
Vicious and dangerous dogs 
NJSA § 4:19-16 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
Local boards of health 
NJSA ch. 26:3 
Public health services 
NJSA ch. 40:13 
Garbage disposal 
NJSA ch. 40:66 
Brush, weeds and debris 
NJSA § 40:48-2.13 et seq. 
Fire prevention regulations 
NJSA § 40:48-2.28 et seq. 
Nuisances 
NJSA § 40:48-2.30 et seq. 
Explosives 
NJSA § 40:48-1(17.) 
Uniform Fire Safety Act 
NJSA § 52:27D-192 et seq. 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Generally 
NJSA §§ 40:48-1(6.) and (7.) and 40:48-2 
Firearms 
NJSA § 40:48-1(18.) 
New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice 
NJSA title 2C 
Juvenile curfew and truancy 
NJSA § 40:48-2.52 
Vehicles and Traffic 
State vehicle code 
NJSA title 39 
Powers of municipalities 
NJSA § 39:4-197 et seq. 
Removal of vehicles from public or private property 
NJSA ch. 39:10A and § 40:48-2.49 et seq. 
Use of parking meter revenues 
NJSA § 40:5-2.11 
Abandoned motor vehicles 
NJSA ch. 39:10A 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Parks and playgrounds 
NJSA chs. 40:12, 40:61 
Shade trees 
NJSA ch. 40:64 
Street cleaning 
NJSA ch. 40:66 
Streets, tunnels, bridges and viaducts 
NJSA ch. 40:67 
Sidewalks 
NJSA ch. 40:65 
Parking Authority Law 
NJSA ch. 40:11A 
Port facilities 
NJSA ch. 40:68A 
Snow and ice removal 
NJSA § 40:48-2.47 
Excavations 
NJSA § 40:48-1(21.) 
Ordinances relating to street improvements 
NJSA § 40:49-13 et seq. 
Public Services 
Municipally owned public utilities 
NJSA ch. 40:62 
Airports 
NJSA ch. 40:8 
Libraries 
NJSA chs. 40:9A, 40:54 
Public transportation 
NJSA ch. 40:9C 
Cemeteries 
NJSA ch. 40:10B 
Parking authorities 
NJSA ch. 40:11A 
Sewage authorities 
NJSA ch. 40:14A 
Water and sewage disposal authorities 
NJSA ch. 40:14B 
Local improvements 
NJSA ch. 40:56 
Sewers, drains and disposal plants 
NJSA ch. 40:63 
Contracts for public services 
NJSA § 40:48-3 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
State Uniform Construction Code Act 
NJSA § 52:27D-119 et seq. 
Authority to regulate buildings and structures 
NJSA §§ 40:48-2.12a et seq., 40:48-1(13.) 
Hotels and multiple dwellings 
NJSA ch. 55:13A 
Dangerous buildings 
NJSA §§ 40:48-2.3 et seq., 40:48-1(15.), 40:48-1.1 
Ordinances enacting building codes 
NJSA § 40:49-5.1 et seq. 
Subdivisions 
Subdivision and site plan review and approval 
NJSA § 40:55D-37 et seq. 
Zoning 
Planning and zoning 
NJSA chs. 40:55 and 40:55D 
PRIOR CODE CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the legislative history and the current disposition of the sections in the Code of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
    Thus, prior code Section 2-1 appears in this Code as Section 1.04.010. 
    The legislative history information was derived from the Code of the City of Elizabeth, comprising the general ordinances of the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
Prior Code § Ordinance History Herein 1-1 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-2 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-3 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-4 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-5 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-6 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-7 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-8 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-9 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-10 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-11 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-12 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-13 Ord. 360 Not codified 1-14 Ord. 360 Not codified 2-1 Ord. dated 8-5-48 1.04.010 2-2 Ord. dated 8-5-48 1.04.020 2-4 Ord. dated 8-5-48 1.04.030 2-5 Ord. dated 8-5-48 1.04.040 2-7 Ord. dated 8-5-48; Ord. 1761; Ord. 2806 1.12.010 2-9 Ord. dated 6-27-1866 1.08.010 2-18 Ord. 589 Not codified 2-21 Ord. 684 2.100.010 4-1 Ord. 1 2.04.010 4-2 Ord. 1 2.04.020 4-8 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.08.010 4-9 Ord. 1; Ord. 1327 2.08.020 4-10 Ord. 1 2.08.030 4-11 Ord. 1; Ord. 727; Ord. 1280; Ord. 2428 2.08.040 4-12 Ord. 1 2.08.050 4-13 Ord. 1 2.08.060 4-14 Ord. 1 2.08.070 4-15 Ord. 1 2.08.080 4-16 Ord. 1; Ord; 212; Ord. 2820 2.08.090 4-17 Ord. 1 2.08.100 4-18 Ord. 1 2.08.110 4-22 Ord. 1 2.12.010 4-23 Ord. 1 2.04.030 4-24 Ord. 1 2.04.040 4-25 Ord. 1 2.04.050 4-26 Ord. 1 2.04.060 4-27 Ord. 1 2.12.020 4-28 Ord. 1; Ord. 1248 2.04.070 4-31 Ord. 1 2.28.010 4-32 Ord. 1 2.28.020 4-33 Ord. 1 2.28.030 4-34 Ord. 1 3.04.010 4-35 Ord. 1 3.04.020 4-36 Ord. 976; Ord. 1843; Ord. 2583; Ord. 2695 3.08.010 4-37 Ord. 1 3.08.020 4-38 Ord. 1 3.08.030 4-39 Ord. 1 3.08.040 4-40 Ord. 1; Ord. 1174 3.08.050 4-46 Ord. 1 2.16.010 4-47 Ord. 1 2.16.020 4-48 Ord. 1 2.16.030 4-49 Ords. 586, 829 2.16.040 4-50 Ord. 2381 2.80.010-2.80.060 4-52 Ord. 1 2.40.010 4-53 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.40.020 4-54 Ord. 1; Ord. 1344; Ord. 1361; Ord. 1879 2.40.030 4-55 Ord. 1 2.40.040 4-56 Ord. 1 2.40.050 4-57 Ord. 1 2.40.060 4-58 Ord. 478; Ord. 2971 2.40.070 4-61 Ord. 1; Ord. 2562 2.32.010 4-62 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.32.020 4-63 Ord. 1 2.32.030 4-64 Ord. 1 2.32.040 4-65 Ord. 1 2.32.050 4-66 Ord. 1 2.32.060 4-67 Ord. 1079; Ord. 2302; Ord. 2383 2.32.070 4-68 Ord. 1 2.32.080 4-69 Ord. 1 2.32.090 4-70 Ord. 2248 2.32.100 4-71 Ord. 2562 Repealed by 3195 4-75 Ord. 1 2.52.010 4-76 Ord. 1; Ord. 258 2.52.020 4-77 Ord. 1; Ord. 6; Ord. 794 2.52.030 4-78 Ord. 1 2.52.040 4-79 Ord. 1 2.52.050 4-80 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.52.060 4-81 Ord. 2489; Ord. 2590 12.04.010 4-84 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-85 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-86 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-87 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-88 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-89 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-90 Ord. 1; Ord. 2599 Repealed by 3284 4-94 Ord. 1 2.60.010 4-95 Ord. 1 2.60.020 4-96 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.60.030 4-97 Ord. 145 2.60.040 4-98 Ord. 145 2.60.050 4-99 Ord. 145 2.60.060 4-100 Ords. 145, 151 2.60.070 4-101 Ords. 145, 151 2.60.080 4-107 Ord. 1 2.56.010 4-108 Ord. 1; Ord. 1649; Ord. 2089 2.56.020 4-109 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.56.030 4-110 Ord. 1 2.56.040 4-111 Ord. 75 2.56.050 4-112 Ords. 75, 718, 1179, 2724, 2748, 2858, 3025 2.56.060 4-113 Ord. 75 2.56.070 4-114 Ord. 75 2.56.080 4-115 Ord. 75 2.56.090 4-121 Ord. 1 2.64.010 4-122 Ord. 258 2.64.020 4-123 Ord. 1 2.64.030 4-124 Ord. 1; Ord. 825; Ord. 1715; Ord. 1891; Ord. 2182; Ord. 2689 2.64.040 4-125 Ord. 2576 2.64.050 4-129 Ord. 1 2.72.010 4-130 Ord. 1 2.72.020 4-131 Ord. 1 2.72.030 4-132 Ord. 1 2.72.040 4-133 Ord. 1 2.72.050 4-134 Ord. 1 2.72.060 4-135 Ord. 1 2.72.070 4-136 Ord. 1 2.72.080 4-137 Ord. 1 2.72.090 4-138 Ord. 1 2.72.100 4-139 Ord. 1 2.72.110 4-140 Ord. 1248; Ord. 1499; Ord. 1534 2.76.010-2.76.070 4-141 Ord. 1783 2.88.010-2.88.040 4-143 Ord. 1 2.24.010 4-144 Ord. 1 2.24.020 4-145 Ord. 1 2.24.030 4-146 Ord. 1 2.24.040 4-147 Ord. 1 2.24.050 4-148 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.24.060 4-149 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.24.070 4-150 Ord. 1 2.24.080 4-151 Ord. 1; Ord. 2144 2.24.090 4-152 Ord. 1; Ord. 797 2.24.100 4-153 Ord. 1 2.24.110 4-154 Ord. 1 2.24.120 4-155 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.24.130 4-156 Ord. 1 2.24.140 4-157 Ord. 1; Ord. 6 2.24.150 4-163 Ord. 1 Not codified 4-164 Ord. 1 Not codified 4-165 Ord. 1 Not codified 4-166 Ord. 1 Not codified 4-180 Ord. 1438 3.32.010 4-181 Ord. 1438 3.32.020 4-182 Ord. 1438 3.32.030 4-183 Ord. 1438; Ord. 2558; Ord. 2580 3.32.040 4-184 Ord. 1438 3.32.050 4-185 Ord. 1438 3.32.060 4-186 Ord. 1438 3.32.070 4-187 Ord. 1438 3.32.080 4-191 Ord. 2034 2.20.010 4-192 Ord. 2034 2.20.020 4-193 Ord. 2034; Ord. 2278; Ord. 2309; Ord. 2317; Ord. 3031 2.20.030 4-194 Ord. 2034 2.20.040 4-195 Ord. 2034 2.20.050 4-196 Ord. 2034 2.20.060 4-197 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-198 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-200 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-201 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-202 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-203 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-204 Ord. 2559; Ord. 2621; Ord. 2934 Repealed by 3283 4-209 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-210 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-211 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-212 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-213 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-214 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 4-215 Ord. 2560; Ord. 2622; Ord. 1-28-97 Repealed by 3282 9-1 Ord. 137; Ord. 382; Ord. 389; Ord. 856; Ord. 950; Ord. 2063; Ord. 2112; Ord. 2347; Ord. 2594; Ord. 2841; Ord. 2985 2.60.090 9-2 Ord. 137 2.60.100 9-3 Ord. 137 2.60.110 9-4 Ord. 137 2.60.120 9-5 Ord. 137 2.60.130 9-6 Ords. 137, 956 2.60.140 9-7 Ords. 137, 2140 2.60.150 9-8 Ord. 137 2.60.160 9-16 Ord. 341; Ord. 354; Ord. 1533 2.60.170 9-17 Ord. 341 2.60.180 9-18 Ord. 341; Ord. 535 2.60.190 9-19 Ord. 341 2.60.200 9-20 Ord. 341 2.60.210 9-21 Ord. 341 2.60.220 9-22 Ord. 341 2.60.230 9-23 Ord. 341 2.60.240 9-24 Ord. 341 Not codified 9-32 Ord. 374; Ord. 1956; Ord. 2988 2.60.250 9-37 Ord. 852 2.60.260 9-38 Ord. 852 2.60.270 9-39 Ord. 852 2.60.280 9-40 Ord. 852 Not codified 9-41 Ord. 852 Not codified 9-46 Ord. 997 2.60.290 9-47 Ords. 997, 1533 2.60.300 9-48 Ord. 997 2.60.310 9-49 Ord. 997 2.60.320 11-1 Ord. 634 Not codified 11-2 Ord. 634 Not codified 16-1 Ord. 714 2.68.010 16-2 Ord. 714 2.68.020 16-3 Ord. 714 2.68.030 16-4 Ords. 714, 1187 2.68.040 16-5 Ords. 714, 1187 2.68.050 16-6 Ord. 714 2.68.060 16-7 Ord. 714 2.68.070 16-8 Ords. 714, 1187 2.68.080 16-9 Ords. 714, 1876 2.68.090 16-10 Ords. 714, 2774 2.68.100 18-1 Ord. 758 2.84.010 18-2 Ord. 758 2.84.020 18-3 Ords. 758, 1141 2.84.030 18-4 Ord. 758 2.84.040 18-5 Ord. 641 2.84.050 18-6 Ord. 641 2.84.060 20-1 Ord. 201 2.56.100 20-2 Ord. 201; Ord. 383; Ord. 674; Ord. 685; Ord. 855; Ord. 963; Ord. 2028; Ord. 2061; Ord. 2091; Ord. 2160; Ord. 2346; Ord. 2401; Ord. 2412; Ord. 2453; Ord. 2469; Ord. 2514; Ord. 2528; Ord. 2588; Ord. 2620; Ord. 2667; Ord. 2688; Ord. 2734; Ord. 2840; Ord. 2857; Ord. 2929; Ord. 2984; Ord. 2992; Ord. 3043; Ord. 3047; Ord. 3071; Ord. 3103 2.56.110 20-3 2.56.340 20-8 Ord. 80 2.56.120 20-9 Ord. 80 2.56.130 20-10 Ord. 80 2.56.140 20-16 Ord. 259; Ord. 957; Ord. 1987 2.56.150 20-21 Ord. 340; Ord. 353 2.56.160 20-22 Ord. 340 2.56.170 20-23 Ord. 340; Ord. 534 2.56.180 20-24 Ord. 340 2.56.190 20-25 Ord. 340 2.56.200 20-26 Ord. 340 2.56.210 20-27 Ord. 340 2.56.220 20-28 Ord. 340 2.56.230 20-29 Ord. 340 Not codified 20-35 Ord. 853 2.56.240 20-36 Ord. 853 2.56.250 20-37 Ord. 853 2.56.260 20-38 Ord. 853 Not codified 20-39 Ord. 853 Not codified 20-46 Ord. 998 2.56.270 20-47 Ord. 998 2.56.280 20-48 Ord. 998 2.56.290 20-49 Ords. 1858 2.56.300 20-51 Ord. 1960 2.56.310 20-52 Ord. 1960 2.56.320 20-53 Ord. 1960 2.56.330 26-1 Ord. 932; Ord. 1826 15.04.010 26-2 Ord. 932 15.04.020 26-3 Ord. 932 15.04.030 26-4 Ord. 932; Ord. 1863; Ord. 2062; Ord. 2362; Ord. 2719; Ord. 2881; Ord. 2906; Ord. 2924; Ord. 3068 15.04.040 26-5 Ord. 932; Ord. 1826 15.04.050 26-6 Ord. 932 15.04.060 26-7 Ord. 932 Not codified 26-8 Ord. 932 Not codified 26-9 Ord. 932 Not codified 26-10 Ord. 932 Not codified 27-1 Ord. 2980 8.16.010 27-2 Ord. 2980 8.16.020 27-3 Ord. 2980 8.16.030 27-4 Ord. 2980 8.16.040 27-5 Ord. 2980 8.16.050 28-1 Ord. 345; Ord. 399; Ord. 563; Ord. 790; Ord. 1256; Ord. 1825 15.04.070 28-8 Ord. 399 15.04.080 30-1 Ord. 1839 15.08.010 30-2 Ord. 1839 15.08.020 30-3 Ord. 1839 15.08.030 30-4 Ord. 1839; Ord. 2709 15.08.040 30-6 Ord. 1839 15.08.050 30-7 Ord. 1839 15.08.060 30-8 Ord. 1839 15.08.070 30-9 Ord. 1839; Ord. 2848 15.08.080 32-1 Ord. 43 15.12.010 32-2 Ord. 43 15.12.020 32-3 Ord. 43 15.12.030 32-4 Ord. 43 15.12.040 32-5 Ord. 43 15.12.050 32-6 Ord. 43 15.12.060 32-7 Ord. 43 15.12.070 32-12 Ord. 86; Ord. 517 15.12.080 32-14 Ord. 43; Ord. 517 15.12.090 32-15 Ord. 43; Ord. 517 15.12.100 32-16 Ord. 43 15.12.110 32-17 Ord. 43 15.12.120 32-18 Ord. 43 15.12.130 32-19 Ord. 43 15.12.140 32-20 Ord. 43 15.12.150 32-21 Ord. 43 15.12.160 32-22 Ord. 43 15.12.170 32-23 Ord. 43 15.12.180 32-27 Ord. 43 15.12.190 32-28 Ord. 43 15.12.200 32-29 Ord. 43 15.12.210 32-30 Ord. 43 15.12.220 32-31 Ord. 43 15.12.230 32-32 Ord. 43 15.12.240 32-33 Ord. 43 15.12.250 32-34 Ord. 43 15.12.260 32-35 Ord. 272 15.12.270 32-39 Ord. 43 15.12.280 32-40 Ord. 43 15.12.290 32-41 Ord. 43 15.12.300 32-42 Ord. 43 15.12.310 32-43 Ord. 43 15.12.320 32-44 Ord. 43 15.12.330 32-45 Ord. 43 15.12.340 32-46 Ord. 43 15.12.350 32-50 Ord. 43 15.12.360 32-51 Ord. 43 15.12.370 32-52 Ord. 43 15.12.380 32-53 Ord. 43; Ord. 86 15.12.390 32-54 Ord. 43 15.12.400 32-55 Ord. 43 15.12.410 32-56 Ord. 43 15.12.420 32-60 Ord. 43 15.12.430 32-61 Ord. 43 15.12.440 32-62 Ord. 43 15.12.450 32-63 Ord. 43; Ord. 2360 15.12.460 32-64 Ord. 43 15.12.470 32-65 Ord. 43 15.12.480 32-69 Ord. 43 15.12.490 32-70 Ord. 43; Ord. 86 15.12.500 32-71 Ord. 43 15.12.510 32-72 Ord. 43 15.12.520 32-73 Ord. 272 15.12.530 32-74 Ord. 272 15.12.540 32-78 Ord. 43 15.12.550 32-79 Ord. 43 15.12.560 32-80 Ord. 43; Ord. 86 15.12.570 32-81 Ord. 43 15.12.580 32-82 Ord. 517 15.12.590 32-85 Ord. 43 15.12.600 32-86 Ord. 43 15.12.610 32-87 Ord. 43; Ord. 86 15.12.620 32-88 Ord. 43 15.12.630 32-89 Ord. 43 15.12.640 32-90 Ord. 43 15.12.650 32-91 Ord. 43; Ord. 2885 15.12.660 32-92 Ord. 43 15.12.670 32-93 Ord. 43 15.12.680 32-94 Ord. 1258 15.12.690 32-95 Ord. 43 15.12.700 32-97 Ord. 43 15.12.710 32-98 Ord. 43 15.12.720 32-99 Ord. 43 15.12.730 32-99.1 Ord. 403; Ord. 792; Ord. 1214 15.12.740 32-100 Ord. 43 15.12.750 32-101 Ord. 43 15.12.760 32-102 Ord. 43; Ord. 433 15.12.770 32-103 Ord. 43; Ord. 272; Ord. 433; Ord. 765 15.12.780 32-104 Ord. 43; Ord. 272; Ord. 433 15.12.790 32-105 Ord. 43; Ord. 433 15.12.800 32-106 Ord. 43 15.12.810 32-108 Ord. 43; Ord. 433 15.12.820 32-112 Ord. 43 15.12.830 32-113 Ord. 43 15.12.840 32-114 Ord. 43 15.12.850 32-115 Ord. 43 15.12.860 32-116 Ord. 43 Repealed by 3928 32-120 Ord. 43 15.12.880 32-122 Ord. 43 15.12.890 32-124 Ord. 43 15.12.900 34-1 Ord. 22 8.52.010 34-2 Ord. 22 8.52.020 34-3 Ord. 22 8.52.030 36-1 Ord. 101 Repealed by 3518 36-2 Ord. 101 Repealed by 3518 36-3 Ord. 101 Repealed by 3518 36-4 Ords. 101, 110 Repealed by 3518 36-5 Ords. 101, 110 Repealed by 3518 36-6 Ord. 101 Repealed by 3518 36-7 Ords. 101, 1022 12.08.080 36-14 Ord. 101 12.08.090 36-54 Ord. 101 15.04.090 36-55 Ord. 643 12.08.040 38-1 Ord. 103 7.04.010 38-3 Ord. 103 7.04.020 38-4 Ord. 103 7.04.030 38-5 Ord. 103 7.04.040 36-6 Ord. 103; Ord. 582 7.04.050 38-7 Ord. 103 7.04.060 38-11 Ord. 103; Ord. 664 7.20.010 38-12 Ord. 103 7.20.020 38-13 Ord. 103 7.20.030 38-14 Ord. 103 7.20.040 38-15 Ord. 103 7.20.050 38-16 Ord. 103 7.20.060 38-17 Ord. 103 7.20.070 38-18 Ord. 103 7.20.080 38-19 Ord. 103 7.20.090 38-20 Ord. 103 7.20.100 38-21 Ord. 103 7.20.110 38-22 Ord. 103 7.20.120 38-23 Ord. 103 7.20.130 38-24 Ord. 103 7.20.140 38-25 Ord. 103 7.20.150 38-26 Ord. 103 7.20.160 38-27 Ord. 103 7.20.170 38-28 Ord. 103 7.20.180 38-29 Ord. 103 7.20.190 38-30 Ord. 103 7.20.200 38-31 Ord. 103 7.20.210 38-32 Ord. 103 7.20.220 38-33 Ord. 103 7.20.230 38-34 Ord. 103 7.20.240 38-35 Ord. 664 7.20.250 38-40 Ord. 414 7.52.010 38-41 Ord. 414 7.52.020 38-42 Ord. 414 7.52.030 38-43 Ord. 414 7.52.040 38-44 Ord. 414 7.52.050 38-45 Ord. 414 7.52.060 38-46 Ord. 414 7.52.070 38-47 Ord. 414 7.52.080 38-48 Ord. 414 7.52.090 38-49 Ord. 414 7.52.100 38-50 Ord. 414 7.52.110 38-53 Ord. 413 7.52.120 38-54 Ord. 414; Ord. 2218; Ord. 2713 7.52.130 38-55 Ord. 414 7.52.140 38-56 Ord. 414 7.52.150 38-60 Ord. 103 7.24.010 38-61 Ord. 103 7.24.020 38-62 Ord. 103 7.24.030 38-63 Ord. 103 7.24.040 38-64 Ord. 103; Ord. 2218 7.24.050 38-65 Ord. 103 7.24.060 38-66 Ord. 103 7.24.070 38-67 Ord. 103 7.24.080 38-71 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-72 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-73 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-74 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-75 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-76 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-77 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-78 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-79 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-80 Ord. 103; Ord. 2218 7.40.010 38-81 Ord. 103 7.40.020 38-85 Ord. 103 7.32.010 38-86 Ord. 103 7.32.020 38-87 Ord. 103 7.32.030 38-88 Ord. 103 7.32.040 38-89 Ord. 103 7.32.050 38-90 Ord. 103 7.32.060 38-91 Ord. 103 7.32.070 38-95 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-96 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-97 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-98 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-99 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-100 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-101 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-102 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-106 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-107 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-108 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-109 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-110 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-111 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-112 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-113 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-114 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-115 Ord. 103; Ord. 2218 7.36.010 38-119 Ord. 103 7.36.020 38-120 Ord. 103 7.36.030 38-121 Ord. 103 7.36.040 38-122 Ord. 103 7.36.050 38-123 Ord. 103 7.36.060 38-124 Ord. 103 7.36.070 38-125 Ord. 103 7.36.080 38-126 Ord. 103 7.36.090 38-127 Ord. 103 7.36.100 38-128 Ord. 103 7.36.110 38-129 Ord. 103 7.36.120 38-133 Ord. 103 Repealed by 3518 38-134 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-135 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-136 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-137 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-138 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-139 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-140 Ord. 103 7.56.010 38-141 Ord. 103 7.56.020 38-142 Ord. 103 7.56.030 38-143 Ord. 103 7.56.040 38-144 Ord. 103 7.56.050 38-145 Ord. 103 7060.56. 38-146 Ord. 103 7.56.070 38-147 Ord. 103 7.56.080 38-148 Ord. 103 7.56.090 38-149 Ord. 103 7.56.100 38-150 Ord. 103 7.56.110 38-151 Ord. 103 7.56.120 38-152 Ord. 103 7.56.130 38-158 Ord. 103 7.48.010 38-159 Ord. 103 7.48.020 38-160 Ord. 103 7.48.030 38-161 Ord. 103 7.48.040 38-162 Ord. 103 7.48.050 38-163 Ord. 103 7.48.060 38-164 Ord. 103 7.48.070 38-165 Ord. 103 7.48.080 38-166 Ord. 103 7.48.090 38-167 Ord. 103 7.48.100 38-168 Ord. 103 7.48.110 38-169 Ord. 103 7.48.120 38-170 Ord. 103 7.48.130 38-171 Ord. 103 7.48.140 38-172 Ord. 103 7.48.150 38-173 Ord. 103 7.48.160 38-174 Ord. 103 7.48.170 38-175 Ord. 103 7.48.180 38-176 Ord. 103 7.48.190 38-177 Ord. 103 7.48.200 38-178 Ord. 103 7.48.210 38-179 Ord. 103 7.48.220 38-180 Ord. 103 7.48.230 38-181 Ord. 103 7.48.240 38-182 Ord. 103 7.48.250 38-183 Ord. 103 7.48.260 38-184 Ord. 103 7.48.270 38-185 Ord. 103 7.48.280 38-186 Ord. 103 7.48.290 38-187 Ord. 103 7.48.300 38-188 Ord. 103 7.48.310 38-189 Ord. 103 7.48.320 38-190 Ord. 103 7.48.330 38-191 Ord. 103 7.48.340 38-192 Ord. 103 7.48.350 38-193 Ord. 103 7.48.360 38-194 Ord. 103 7.48.370 38-195 Ord. 103 7.48.380 38-196 Ord. 103 7.48.390 38-202 Ord. 103 7.12.010 38-203 Ord. 103 7.12.020 38-204 Ord. 103 7.12.030 38-205 Ord. 103 7.12.040 38-209 Ord. 103 7.12.050 38-210 Ord. 103 7.12.060 38-211 Ord. 103 7.12.070 38-215 Ord. 103 7.28.010 38-216 Ord. 103 7.28.020 38-217 Ord. 103 7.28.030 38-218 Ord. 103 7.28.040 38-219 Ord. 103 7.28.050 38-223 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-224 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-225 Ord. 103 Not codified 38-229 Ord. 103 7.60.010 38-230 Ord. 103 7.60.020 38-231 Ord. 103 7.60.030 38-232 Ord. 103 7.60.040 38-233 Ord. 103 7.60.050 38-234 Ord. 103 7.60.060 38-235 Ord. 103 7.60.070 38-236 Ord. 103 7.60.080 38-240 Ord. 103 7.16.010 38-241 Ord. 103 7.16.020 38-242 Ord. 103 7.16.030 38-243 Ord. 103 7.16.040 38-247 Ord. 103 7.44.010 38-248 Ord. 304 7.44.020 38-249 Ord. 103 7.44.030 38-250 Ord. 103 7.44.040 38-251 Ord. 103 7.44.050 38-252 Ord. 103 7.44.060 38-253 Ord. 103 7.44.070 38-254 Ord. 103 7.44.080 38-255 Ord. 103 7.44.090 38-256 Ord. 103 7.44.100 38-260 Ord. 103 7.68.010 38-262 Ord. 103 7.64.010 38-263 Ord. 103 7.64.020 38-264 Ord. 103 7.64.030 38-265 Ord. 103 7.64.040 38-266 Ord. 103; Ord. 1947; Ord. 2715 7.64.050 38-269 Ord. 103 7.04.020 38-274 Ord. 103 7.04.080 38-276 Ord. 103 7.04.090 38-277 Ord. 103 7.04.100 38-280 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.010 38-281 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.020 38-282 Ord. 401; Ord. 579; Ord. 2218 7.08.030 38-283 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.040 38-284 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.050 38-285 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.060 38-286 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.070 38-287 Ord. 401; Ord. 579 7.08.080 38-289 Ord. 2882 7.68.020 38-290 Ord. 2882 7.68.020 40-1 Ord. 936 17.04.010 40-2 Ord. 936 17.04.020 40-3 Ord. 936; Ord. 1066; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1213; Ord. 1217; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1612; Ord. 1703; Ord. 1717; Ord. 1822; Ord. 1955; Ord. 2679; Ord. 2702; Ord. 2913; Ord. 2914; Ord. 2915; Ord. 3033 17.04.030 40-4 Ord. 936 17.04.040 40-5 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717 17.04.050 40-6 Ord. 936; Ord. 986 17.04.060 40-7 Ord. 936; Ord. 986; Ord. 1425; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717 17.04.070 40-8 Ord. 936; Ord. 986 17.04.080 40-9 Ord. 936; Ord. 986; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1750 17.04.090 40-10 Ord. 936 17.04.100 40-11 Ord. 936 17.04.110 40-12 Ord. 936 17.04.120 40-13 Ord. 936 17.04.130 40-14 Ord. 936; Ord. 1425; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717; Ord. 1750; Ord. 2172; Ord. 2176 Repealed by 2172 40-15 Ord. 936 17.04.150 40-16 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546 17.04.160 40-17 Ord. 936; Ord. 1822; Ord. 2913 17.04.170 40-18 Ord. 936 17.04.180 40-19 Ord. 936 17.04.190 40-20 Ord. 936 17.04.200 40-21 Ord. 936 17.08.010 40-22 Ord. 936 17.08.020 40-23 Ord. 936 17.08.030 40-24 Ord. 936 17.08.040 40-25 Ord. 936 17.08.050 40-26 Ord. 936 17.08.060 40-27 Ord. 936; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1276 17.08.070 40-28 Ord. 936 17.08.080 40-29 Ord. 936 17.04.210 40-30 Ord. 936 17.04.220 40-36 Ord. 936 17.12.010 40-37 Ord. 936; Ord. 2847 17.12.020 40-38 Ord. 936; Ord. 1196; Ord. 1326; Ord. 1546; Ord. 2847 17.12.030 40-39 Ord. 936 17.12.040 40-40 Ord. 936 17.12.050 40-41 Ord. 936; Ord. 1717 17.12.060 40-42 Ord. 936 17.12.070 40-46 Ord. 1196; Ord. 1326 17.16.010 40-47 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717 17.16.020 40-48 Ord. 936 17.16.030 40-49 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546 17.16.040 40-50 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546 17.16.050 40-51 Ord. 936 17.16.060 40-52 Ord. 936 17.16.070 40-56 Ord. 936; Ord. 1717; Ord. 1546 17.20.010 40-57 Ord. 936 17.20.020 40-61 Ord. 936 17.24.010 40-62 Ord. 936 17.24.020 40-63 Ord. 936 17.24.030 40-68 Ord. 936 17.08.090 40-69 Ord. 936 17.08.100 40-71 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1637; Ord. 1750 17.28.010 40-72 Ord. 1546 17.28.020 40-73 Ord. 1546 17.28.030 40-74 Ord. 1546 17.28.040 40-76 Ord. 936; Ord. 1066; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717; Ord. 1822; Ord. 2699; Ord. 2913 17.28.050 40-77 Ord. 936 17.28.060 40-78 Ord. 936 17.28.070 40-79 Ord. 936; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1546 17.28.080 40-80 Ord. 936; Ord. 1846 17.28.090 40-81 Ord. 936 17.28.100 40-82 Ord. 936 17.28.110 40-83 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1717; Ord. 2915 17.28.120 40-84 Ord. 936; Ord. 1717 17.28.130 40-85 Ord. 936 17.28.140 40-86 Ord. 936 17.28.150 40-87 Ord. 936 17.28.160 40-88 Ord. 936 17.28.170 40-89 Ord. 936; Ord. 1717; Ord. 2680; Ord. 2703 17.28.180 40-90 Ord. 936 17.28.190 40-94 Ord. 936; Ord. 2679; Ord. 2702 17.28.200 40-100 Ord. 936 17.32.010 40-101 Ord. 936 17.32.020 40-102 Ord. 936 17.32.030 40-103 Ord. 936 17.32.040 40-104 Ord. 936 17.32.050 40-105 Ord. 936; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1846 17.32.060 40-106 Ord. 936 17.32.070 40-107 Ord. 936 17.32.080 40-116 Ord. 936; Ord. 1066; Ord. 1175; Ord. 1369; Ord. 1703; Ord. 1794; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1959; Ord. 2390; Ord. 2411; Ord. 2679; Ord. 2680; Ord. 2702; Ord. 2703; Ord. 3189 17.36.010 40-117 Ord. 936; Ord. 2390; Ord. 2914 17.36.020 40-118 Ord. 936; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1217; Ord. 1546; Ord. 1612; Ord. 1717; Ord. 2451; Ord. 2682; Ord. 2914 17.36.030 40-119 Ord. 936; Ord. 1217; Ord. 2914 17.36.040 40-121 Ord. 936 17.36.050 40-122 Ord. 936 17.36.060 40-123 Ord. 936 17.36.070 40-124 Ord. 936; Ord. 1387 17.36.080 40-125 Ord. 936; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1257; Ord. 1703; Ord. 2914; Ord. 2917 17.36.090 40-126 Ord. 936; Ord. 2914 17.36.100 40-127 Ord. 936; Ord. 1217; Ord. 1257; Ord. 1955; Ord. 2395; Ord. 2914; Ord. 3079 17.36.110 40-128 Ord. 936; Ord. 1217; Ord. 2914 17.36.120 40-129 Ord. 936 17.36.130 40-130 Ord. 936; Ord. 2914 17.40.010 40-131 Ord. 936 17.40.020 40-132 Ord. 936 17.40.030 40-133 Ord. 936; Ord. 1675; Ord. 2914 17.40.040 40-134 Ord. 936; Ord. 1217 17.40.050 40-135 Ord. 936; Ord. 1217; Ord. 2680; Ord. 2703 17.36.140 40-136 Ord. 2677; Ord. 2701 17.36.150 Sched. IA Ord. 936; Ord. 1175; Ord. 1369; Ord. 1794 Sched. IA Sched. ID Ord. 2390 Sched. IB Sched. IE Ord. 2680; Ord. 2703 Sched. IC Sched. IF Ord. 2680; Ord. 2703 Sched. ID Sched. II Ord. 936 Sched. II Sched. III Ord. 936; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1387; Ord. 1396; Ord. 1612; Ord. 2426; Ord. 2434; Ord. 2518; Ord. 2607; Ord. 2678; Ord. 2700; Ord. 2914; Ord. 3033 Sched. III 40-146 Ord. 1887 Repealed by 3832 40-147 Ord. 936; Ord. 1971 Repealed by 3832 40-148 Ord. 936 Repealed by 3832 40-149 Ord. 936; Ord. 1971 Repealed by 3832 40-150 Ord. 936; Ord. 1971 Repealed by 3832 40-166 Ord. 1161; Ord. 2678 17.48.010 40-167 Ord. 1161 17.48.020 40-168 Ord. 1161 17.48.030 40-169 Ord. 1161 17.48.040 40-170 Ord. 1161 17.48.050 40-171 Ord. 1161; Ord. 2678; Ord. 2808 17.48.060 40-172 Ord. 936 17.48.070 40-173 Ord. 936 17.48.080 40-174 Ord. 936; Ord. 2323 17.48.090 40-175 Ord. 936 17.48.100 40-176 Ord. 936 17.48.110 40-177 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-178 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-179 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-186 Ord. 936; Ord. 1845; Ord. 2810 17.52.010 40-187 Ord. 936; Ord. 1196; Ord. 1478; Ord. 1845; Ord. 2679; Ord. 2702; Ord. 2810 17.52.020 40-188 Ord. 936 17.52.030 40-189 Ord. 936 17.52.040 40-190 Ord. 936; Ord. 1478 17.52.050 40-191 Ord. 2927 17.52.060 40-192 Ord. 936 17.52.070 40-193 Ord. 1637; Ord. 1845; Ord. 2810 17.52.080 40-194 Ord. 2274; Ord. 2913 17.52.090 40-195 Ord. 2608; Ord. 2766; Ord. 2809 17.52.100 40-196 Ord. 936; Ord. 1045 Not codified 40-197 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-198 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-199 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-200 Ord. 936 Not codified 40-201 17.56.010 40-202 17.56.020 40-203 17.56.030 40-204 17.56.040 40-205 17.56.050 40-206 17.56.060 40-207 17.56.070 40-208 17.56.080 40-209 17.56.090 40-210 17.56.100 43-1 Ord. 774 8.04.010 43-2 Ord. 774 8.04.020 45-1 Ord. Dated 1-18-1895 5.04.010 45-4 Ord. Dated 1-18-1895 5.04.020 45-5 Ord. Dated 1-18-1895 5.04.030 47-1 Ord. 1417 8.08.010 47-2 Ord. 1417 8.08.020 47-3 Ord. 1417 8.08.030 47-4 Ord. 1417 8.08.040 47-5 Ord. 1417 8.08.050 47-6 Ord. 1417 8.08.060 47-7 Ord. 1417 8.08.070 47-8 Ord. 1417 8.08.080 47-9 Ord. 1417 8.08.090 47-10 Ord. 1417 8.08.100 47-11 Ord. 1417 8.08.110 47-12 Ord. 1417 8.08.120 47-13 Ord. 1417 8.08.130 47-14 Ord. 1417 8.08.140 47-15 Ord. 1417 8.08.150 47-16 Ord. 1417 8.08.160 47-17 Ord. 1417; Ord. 1946 8.08.170 47-18 Ord. 1417 8.08.180 47-19 Ord. 1417; Ord. 2890 8.08.190 48-1 Ord. 751; Ord. 854 5.08.010 48-2 Ord. 751; Ord. 854 5.08.020 48-3 Ord. 417; Ord. 625; Ord. 751; Ord. 868; Ord. 1041; Ord. 1231; Ord. 1453; Ord. 2733; Ord. 2742 5.08.030 48-3.1 Ord. 874 5.08.040 48-4 Ord. 751; Ord. 786; Ord. 1078 5.08.050 48-5 Ord. 751 5.08.060 48-6 Ord. 751 5.08.070 48-7 Ord. 276; Ord. 396; Ord. 771; Ord. 1041; Ord. 2733 5.08.080 48-8 Ord. 219; Ord. 751 5.08.090 48-9 Ord. 181; Ord. 552; Ord. 652; Ord. 666; Ord. 751; Ord. 3093 5.08.100 48-10 Ord. 20; Ord. 463; Ord. 751; Ord. 1222; Ord. 1362; Ord. 2251; Ord. 3034; Ord. 3044 5.08.110 48-11 Ord. 751 5.08.120 48-12 Ord. 751 5.08.130 48-13 Ord. 751 5.08.140 48-14 Ord. 751 5.08.150 48-15 Ord. 751 5.08.160 48-16 Ord. 751 5.08.170 48-17 Ord. 751; Ord. 612; Ord. 2739 5.08.180 48-18 Ord. 277 5.08.190 48-19 Ord. 277 5.08.200 48-20 Ord. 2331 5.08.210 48-21 Ord. 751 5.08.220 48-22 Ord. 751 5.08.230 48-23 Ord. 751 5.08.240 48-24 Ord. 751 5.08.250 48-25 Ord. 751; Ord. 1033 5.08.260 48-26 Ord. 751 5.08.270 48-27 Ord. 751 5.08.280 48-28 Ord. 751 5.08.290 48-29 Ord. 751 5.08.300 48-30 Ord. 751 5.08.310 48-31 Ord. 751 5.08.320 48-32 Ord. 751 5.08.330 48-33 Ord. 263 5.08.340 48-34 Ord. 751 5.08.350 48-35 Ord. 751 5.08.360 48-36 Ord. 751 5.08.370 48-37 Ord. 751 5.08.380 48-38 Ord. 751 5.08.390 48-39 Ord. 751 Repealed by 3518 49-1 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.010 49-2 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1630; Ord. 1759 5.12.020 49-3 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.030 49-4 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1712; Ord. 2519 5.12.040 49-5 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1630; Ord. 1919; Ord. 2710 5.12.050 49-6 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.060 49-7 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.070 49-8 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.080 49-9 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.090 49-10 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.100 49-11 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.110 49-12 Ord. 639; Ord. 1611 5.12.120 52-1 Ord. 63 5.16.010 52-2 Ord. 63 5.16.020 52-3 Ords. 63, 122 5.16.030 52-4 Ord. 63 5.16.040 52-5 Ord. 63 5.16.050 52-6 Ord. 122 5.16.060 52-7 Ord. 63 5.16.070 52-8 Ord. 63 5.16.080 52-9 Ord. 122 5.16.090 52-10 Ord. 122 5.16.100 52-11 Ord. 63 5.16.110 52-12 Ord. 122 5.16.120 52-13 Ord. 122 5.16.130 52-14 Ord. 63 5.16.140 52-15 Ord. 63 5.16.150 52-16 Ord. 122 5.16.160 52-17 Ord. 63 5.16.170 52-18 Ord. 63 5.16.180 52-19 Ord. 122 5.16.190 52-20 Ord. 122 5.16.200 52-21 Ord. 63 5.16.210 52-22 Ord. 122 5.16.220 52-23 Ord. 63 Repealed by 3518 52-24 Ord. 63 Repealed by 3518 55-1 Ord. 626; Ord. 745 5.24.010 55-2 Ord. 626; Ord. 745 5.24.020 55-3 Ord. 626; Ord. 745 5.24.030 55-4 Ord. 626 5.24.040 Ch. 56 10.76 57-1 Ord. 915 10.68.010 57-2 Ord. 828; Ord. 915 10.68.020 57-3 Ord. 915 10.68.030 57-4 Ord. 386; Ord. 915; Ord. 930 10.68.040 57-5 Ord. 915 10.68.050 57-6 Ord. 915 10.68.060 57-7 Ord. 915 10.68.070 57-8 Ord. 915 10.68.080 57-9 Ord. 488; Ord. 915; Ord. 2720 10.68.090 57-10 Ord. 915 10.68.100 57-11 Ord. 915 10.68.110 57-12 Ord. 701; Ord. 915 10.68.120 58-1 Ord. 1134 8.28.010 58-2 Ord. 1134 8.28.020 58-3 Ord. 1134 8.28.030 58-9 Ord. 679 8.72.010 58-10 Ord. 679 8.72.020 58-11 Ord. 679 8.72.030 58-12 Ord. 679 8.72.040 58-18 Ord. 1419 8.12.010 58-19 Ord. 1419; Ord. 2097 8.12.020 58-20 Ord. 1419 8.12.030 58-21 Ord. 1419; Ord. 2097 8.12.040 58-22 Ord. 1419 8.12.050 58-23 Ord. 1419 Repealed by 3518 59-1 Ord. dated 1-18-1895; Ord. 1623 15.20.010 59-2 Ord. dated 1-18-1895 15.20.020 59-3 Ord. dated 1-18-1895 15.20.030 59-4 Ord. 1623 15.20.040 60-1 Ord. 18 5.28.010 60-2 Ord. 18; Ord. 70 5.28.020 60-3 Ord. 18; Ord. 870 5.28.030 60-4 Ord. 18 5.28.040 60-5 Ord. 18 5.28.050 60-6 Ord. 18; Ord. 482; Ord. 1442; Ord. 1927; Ord. 2722 5.28.060 60-7 Ord. 18 5.28.070 60-8 Ord. 18 5.28.080 60-9 Ord. 18 5.28.090 60-10 Ord. 18 5.28.100 60-11 Ord. 18; Ord. 865 5.28.110 60-12 Ord. 18; Ord. 865 5.28.120 60-13 Ord. 18; Ord. 3114 5.28.130 Ch. 60A Ch. 5.100 63-1 Ord. 41 2.104.010 63-2 Ord. 41; Ord. 139 2.104.020 63-7 Ord. 775 2.104.030 63-8 Ord. 775 2.104.040 63-9 Ord. 775 2.104.050 63-10 Ord. 775 2.104.060 63-11 Ord. 775 2.104.070 63-16 Ord. dated 2-23-15, Ord. 417; Ord. 977 2.104.080 64-1 Ord. 16 3.36.010 64-2 Ord. 16 3.36.020 64-3 Ord. 16 3.36.030 64-4 Ord. 16 3.36.040 64-5 Ord. 16 3.36.050 64-6 Ord. 16 3.36.060 64-7 Ord. 16 3.36.070 64-8 Ord. 16; Ord. 955 3.36.080 64-9 Ord. 16; Ord. 955 3.36.090 64-10 Ord. 16 3.36.100 64-11 Ord. 16 3.36.110 64-18 Ord. 1226 10.52.010 64-19 Ord. 1226 10.52.020 64-20 Ord. 1226 10.52.030 64-21 Ord. 1226 10.52.040 64-27 Ord. 47 10.52.050 64-31 Ord. 298 10.56.010 64-32 Ord. 298; Ord. 2015 10.56.020 64-33 Ord. 298 10.56.030 64-34 Ord. 298 10.56.040 64-35 Ord. 298 10.56.050 65-1 Ord. 423; Ord. 498; Ord. 1013; Ord. 1803 2.92.010 65-2 Ord. 423 2.92.020 65-3 Ords. 423; Ord. 1803 2.92.030 65-4 Ord. 423 2.92.040 65-5 Ord. 423 2.92.050 65-6 Ord. 423; Ord. 1208; Ord. 2220; Ord. 2391 2.92.060 66-1 Ord. 39 5.64.010 66-2 Ord. 39; Ord. 2762 5.64.020 66-3 Ords. 39, 483, 1483, 2716, 2762 5.64.030 66-4 Ord. 39 5.64.040 66-5 Ord. 39 5.64.050 66-6 Ord. 39 5.64.010 66-7 Ords. 39, 2762 5.64.060 66-8 Ord. 39 5.64.070 66-9 Ord. 39 5.64.080 66-10 Ord. 39 5.64.090 66-11 Ord. 39; Ord. 2762 5.64.100 66-12 Ord. 39; Ord. 2762 5.64.110 66-13 Ord. 39; Ord. 2762 5.64.120 66-15 Ord. 314; Ord. 2762; Ord. 2773 5.104.010 66-16 Ord. 314 5.104.020 66-17 Ord. 314; Ord. 2762; Ord. 2773 5.104.030 66-18 Ord. 314; Ord. 2762 5.104.040 66-19 Ord. 314; Ord. 343; Ord. 2762 5.104.050 66-20 Ord. 314; Ord. 2762 5.104.060 66-21 Ord. 314 5.104.070 66A-1 Ord. 2631 Repealed by 3518 66A-2 Ord. 2631 Repealed by 3518 66A-3 Ord. 2631 Repealed by 3518 66A-4 Ord. 2631 Repealed by 3518 67-1 Ord. dated 1-18-1985 Repealed 68-1 Ord. 741; Ord. 876 6.04.010 68-2 Ord. 876 6.04.020 68-3 Ord. 876 6.04.030 68-4 Ord. 876 6.04.040 68-5 Ord. 238; Ord. 741; Ord. 876; Ord. 1440; Ord. 2712 6.04.050 68-6 Ord. 876; Ord. 2556 6.04.060 68-7 Ord. 876 6.04.070 68-8 Ord. 876 6.04.080 68-9 Ord. 876 6.04.090 68-10 Ord. 876 6.04.100 68-11 Ord. 876 6.04.110 68-12 Ord. 876 6.04.120 68-13 Ord. 876 6.04.130 68-14 Ord. 876; Ord. 1921 6.04.140 68-15 Ord. 876 6.04.150 68-16 Ord. 876 6.04.160 68-17 Ord. 876 6.04.170 68-18 Ord. 876 6.04.180 68-19 Ord. 876 6.04.190 68-20 Ord. 876 6.04.200 68-21 Ord. 876 6.04.210 68-22 Ord. 876; Ord. 1440 6.04.220 68-23 Ord. 876 6.04.230 68-24 Ord. 876 6.04.240 68-25 Ord. 876; Ord. 1501 Repealed by 3758 68-26 Ord. 876 6.04.260 68-27 Ord. 876 6.04.270 68-28 Ord. 876 Not codified 68-29 Ord. 876 6.04.280 68-30 Ord. 876 6.04.290 68-31 Ord. 876 6.04.300 68-32 Ord. 876 6.04.310 68-33 Ord. 876 6.04.320 68-34 Ord. 876 6.04.330 68-35 Ord. 876 6.04.340 68-36 Ord. 876 6.04.350 68-37 Ord. 876 6.04.360 68-38 Ord. 876; Ord. 2165 6.04.370 69-1 Ord. 2123; Ord. 2735 9.04.010 69-2 Ord. 2123; Ord. 2735 9.04.020 69-3 Ord. 2123; Ord. 2735 9.04.030 69-4 Ord. 2123; Ord. 2735 9.04.040 69-5 Ord. 2123; Ord. 2735 9.04.050 71-1 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.010 71-2 Ord. 527; Ord. 689; Ord. 2711 5.36.020 71-3 Ord. 527; Ord. 689; Ord. 2711 5.36.030 71-4 Ord. 527; Ord. 689; Ord. 2711 5.36.040 71-5 Ord. 527; Ord. 689; Ord. 2711 5.36.050 71-6 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.060 71-7 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.070 71-8 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.080 71-9 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.090 71-10 Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.100 71-11 Ord. 15; Ord. 527; Ord. 689 5.36.110 72-1 Ord. 460 2.96.010 72-2 Ord. 460 2.96.020 72-3 Ord. 460 Repealed by 3518 72A-1 Ord. 743; Ord. 752; Ord. 933; Ord. 1587; Ord. 1601; Ord. 2072; Ord. 3116 2.100.020 72A-2 Ord. 743 2.100.020 72A-3 Ord. 743 Not codified 72B-1 Ord. 966 12.56.010 72B-2 Ord. 966 12.56.020 72B-3 Ord. 966; Ord. 2186 12.56.030 72B-4 Ord. 966; Ord. 1484; Ord. 1920; Ord. 2718; Ord. 3393; Ord. 3491 12.56.040 72B-5 Ord. 966 12.56.050 72B-6 Ord. 966 12.56.060 72B-7 Ord. 966 12.56.070 72B-8 Ord. 966 12.56.080 72B-9 Ord. 966 12.56.090 72B-10 Ord. 966; Ord. 2316 12.56.100 72B-11 Ord. 966 12.56.110 72B-12 Ord. 966 12.56.120 72B-13 Ord. 966 12.56.130 72B-14 Ord. 966 Repealed by 3518 72B-15 Ord. 966 Not codified 72B-16 Ord. 966 Not codified 73-1 Ord. 377 9.36.010 73-2 Ord. 2499 9.36.020 75-1 Ord. 694 9.48.010 77-1 Ord. 828 8.68.010 77-2 Ord. 828 8.68.020 77-3 Ord. 828 8.68.030 77-10 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-11 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-12 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-13 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-14 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-15 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-16 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-17 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-18 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-19 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-20 Ord. 541 Repealed by 3518 77-21 Ord. 761 Repealed by 3518 77-27 Ord. 1342 8.20.010 77-28 Ord. 1342 8.20.020 77-29 Ord. 1342 8.20.030 77-30 Ord. 1342 8.20.040 77-31 Ord. 1342 8.20.050 77-32 Ord. 1342 8.20.060 77-33 Ord. 1342 8.20.070 77-34 Ord. 1342 Not codified 77-35 Ord. 1342 Not codified 79-1 Ord. 815 9.08.010 79-2 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.020 79-3 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.030 79-4 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.040 79-4.1 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.050 79-4.2 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.060 79-4.3 Ord. 782; Ord. 815 9.08.070 79-5 Ord. 660 9.08.080 80-1 Ord. 1051 8.24.010 80-2 Ord. 1051 8.24.020 80-3 Ord. 1051 8.24.030 80-4 Ord. 2185; Ord. 2957 8.24.040 80-5 Ord. 2184 8.24.050 80-12 Ord. 613; Ord. 1274 8.24.060 80-13 Ord. 1274 8.24.070 80-14 Ord. 1916 8.24.080 80-15 Ord. 1916 8.24.090 80-16 Ord. 1916 8.24.100 80-17 Ord. 1916 8.24.110 80-18 Ord. 1916 8.24.120 80-19 Ord. 1916 8.24.130 80-20 Ord. 1916 8.24.140 80-21 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2591 8.36.010 80-22 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.020 80-23 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.030 80-24 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.040 80-25 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.050 80-26 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.060 80-27 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.070 80-28 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.080 80-29 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.090 80-30 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.100 80-31 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.110 80-32 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.120 80-33 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 8.36.130 80-34 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 Not codified 80-35 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 Not codified 80-36 Ord. 2191; Ord. 2594 Not codified 82-1 Ord. 754 9.12.010 82-2 Ord. 754 9.12.020 82-3 Ord. 754 9.12.030 82-4 Ord. 754; Ord. 1786 9.12.040 82-5 Ord. 754 Not codified 82-6 Ord. 754 Not codified 82-7 Ord. 2286 9.12.050 82-8 9.12.060 82A-1 Ord. 2777 5.80.010 82A-2 Ord. 2777 5.80.020 82A-3 Ord. 2777 5.80.030 82A-4 Ord. 2777 5.80.040 82A-5 Ord. 2777 5.80.050 82A-6 Ord. 2777 5.80.060 82B-1 Ord. 2821 5.84.010 82B-2 Ord. 2821 5.84.020 82B-3 Ord. 2821 5.84.030 82B-4 Ord. 2821 5.84.040 82C-1 Ord. 2933 9.36.030 82C-2 Ord. 2933 9.36.040 82C-3 Ord. 2933 9.36.050 82D-1 Ord. 2978 9.36.060 82D-2 Ord. 2978 9.36.070 82D-3 Ord. 2978 9.36.080 82D-4 Ord. 2978 9.36.090 82D-5 Ord. 2978 9.36.100 83-1 Ord. 1098 6.08.010 83-2 Ord. 1098 6.08.020 83-3 Ord. 1098 6.08.030 83-4 Ord. 1098 Repealed by 3518 83-5 Ord. 1098 Not codified 83-6 Ord. 1098 Not codified 84-1 Ord. 1264 5.52.010 84-2 Ord. 1264 5.52.020 84-3 Ord. 1264 5.52.030 84-4 Ord. 1264 5.52.040 84-5 Ord. 1264 5.52.050 84-6 Ord. 1264 5.52.060 84-7 Ord. 1264 5.52.070 84-8 Ord. 1264 5.52.080 84-9 Ord. 1264 5.52.090 84-10 Ord. 1264 5.52.100 84-11 Ord. 484; Ord. 1264; Ord. 1443; Ord. 2728 5.52.110 84-12 Ord. 1264 5.52.120 84-13 Ord. 1264 5.52.130 84-14 Ord. 1264 5.52.140 84-15 Ord. 1264 5.52.150 84-16 Ord. 1264 5.52.160 84-17 Ord. 1264 5.52.170 84-18 Ord. 1264 5.52.180 84-19 Ord. 1264 5.52.190 84-20 Ord. 1264 5.52.200 84-21 Ord. 1264 5.52.210 84-22 Ord. 1264 5.52.220 84-23 Ord. 1264 5.52.230 84-24 Ord. 1264 5.52.240 84-25 Ord. 1264 5.52.250 86-1 Ord. 167 9.48.020 86-2 Ord. 167 9.48.030 87-1 Ord. 79 9.48.040 87-2 Ord. 79 9.48.050 87-3 Ord. 79 9.48.060 89-1 Ord. 95 8.32.010 89-2 Ord. 95 8.32.020 89-3 Ord. 95 8.32.030 89-4 Ord. 95 8.32.040 89-5 Ord. 95; Ord. 2019 8.32.050 89-6 Ord. 95 8.32.060 89-7 Ord. 95 8.32.070 89-8 Ord. 307 8.32.080 89-9 Ord. 95 8.32.090 89-10 Ord. 95 8.32.100 89-11 Ord. 95 8.32.110 89-12 Ord. 95 8.32.120 89-13 Ord. 95 8.32.130 89-14 Ord. 95 8.32.140 89-15 Ord. 95 8.32.150 89-16 Ord. 95 8.32.160 89-17 Ord. 95 8.32.170 89-18 Ord. 95 8.32.180 89-19 Ord. 95 8.32.190 89-20 Ord. 95 8.32.200 89-21 Ord. 95 8.32.210 89-22 Ord. 95 8.32.220 89-23 Ord. 1140 8.32.230 89-24 Ord. 1140 8.32.240 89-25 Ord. 1140 8.32.250 89-26 Ord. 1140 8.32.260 89-27 Ord. 1140 8.32.270 89-28 Ord. 1140 8.32.280 89-31 Ord. 1086 8.32.290 89-32 Ord. 1086 8.32.300 89-33 Ord. 1086 8.32.310 89-34 Ord. 1086 8.32.320 90-1 Ord. 731; Ord. 821 Not codified 90-2 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-3 Ord. 496; Ord. 731; Ord. 821; Ord. 1102; Ord. 1445; Ord. 1923; Ord. 2723 Not codified 90-4 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-5 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-6 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-7 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-8 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-9 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-10 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-11 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-12 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-13 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-14 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-15 Ord. 821 Not codified 90-16 Ord. 821 Not codified 91-1 Ord. 537; Ord. 2367 9.20.010 91-2 Ord. 537 9.20.020 91-3 Ord. 537 9.20.030 91-4 Ord. 537 9.20.040 91-5 Ord. 537 9.20.050 91-6 Ord. 537 9.20.060 91-7 Ord. 537 9.20.070 91-8 Ord. 537 Not codified 91-9 Ord. 537 Not codified 91A Ord. 893 Not codified 91A-1 Ord. 893 5.56.010 91A-2 Ord. 893 5.56.020 91A-3 Ord. 893 5.56.030 91A-4 Ord. 893; Ord. 2727 5.56.040 91A-5 Ord. 893 5.56.050 91A-6 Ord. 893 5.56.060 91A-7 Ord. 893 5.56.070 91A-8 Ord. 893 Repealed by 3518 91A-9 Ord. 893 Not codified 91A-10 Ord. 893 Not codified 91A-11 Ord. 893 Not codified 91B-1 Ord. 3045 12.24.010 91B-2 Ord. 3045 12.24.020 91B-3 Ord. 3045 12.24.030 92-1 Ord. 60 8.44.010 92-2 Ord. 60 8.44.020 92-3 Ord. 60 8.44.030 92-4 Ord. 60 8.44.040 92-5 Ord. 60 8.44.050 92-6 Ord. 60; Ord. 492 8.44.060 92-7 Ord. 60 8.44.070 92-8 Ord. 60 8.44.080 94-1 Ord. 696 5.48.010 94-2 Ord. 696 5.48.020 94-3 Ord. 696 5.48.030 94-10 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555 9.32.010 94-11 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555 9.32.020 94-12 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555 9.32.030 94-13 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555; Ord. 3027 9.32.040 94-14 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555 9.32.050 94-15 Ord. 676; Ord. 1678; Ord. 2555 9.32.060 94-19 Ord. 3023 9.16.010 94-20 Ord. 3023 9.16.020 94-21 Ord. 3023 9.16.030 94-22 Ord. 3023 9.16.040 94-23 Ord. 3023 9.16.050 96-1 Ord. 1976 12.64.010 96-2 Ord. 1976 12.64.020 96-3 Ord. 1976 12.64.030 96-4 Ord. 1976 12.64.040 96-5 Ord. 1976 12.64.050 96-6 Ord. 1976 12.64.060 96-7 Ord. 1976 12.64.070 96-8 Ord. 1976 12.64.080 96-9 Ord. 1976; Ord. 2105 12.64.090 96-10 Ord. 1976 12.64.100 96-11 Ord. 1976 12.64.110 97-1 Ord. 972 12.28.010 97-2 Ord. 972; Ord. 1243 12.28.020 97-3 Ord. 972 12.28.030 97-4 Ord. 972 12.28.040 97-11 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-12 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-13 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-14 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-15 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-16 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-17 Ord. 965 Repealed by 3765 97-18 Ord. 965 Not codified 97-19 Ord. 965 Not codified 97-20 Ord. 965 Not codified 97A-1 Ord. 1388 8.48.010 97A-2 Ord. 1388; Ord. 1397 8.48.020 97A-3 Ord. 1388 8.48.030 97A-4 Ord. 1388 8.48.040 97A-5 Ord. 1388 Repealed by 3518 97A-6 Ord. 1388 Not codified 97A-7 Ord. 1388; Ord. 1397 8.48.050 97A-8 Ord. 1388; Ord. 1397; Ord. 1491 8.48.060 97A-9 Ord. 1388 Not codified 97A-10 Ord. 1388 Not codified 97B-1 5.71.010 97B-2 5.71.020 97B-3 5.71.030 98-1 Ord. 892 9.24.010 98-2 Ord. 892 9.24.020 98-3 Ord. 892 9.24.030 98-4 Ord. 892 9.24.040 98-5 Ord. 892 Not codified 98-6 Ord. 892 Not codified 98-7 Ord. 892 Not codified 98-8 Ord. 892; Ord. 2171 9.24.050 98-9 Ord. 892; Ord. 2171 9.24.060 98-11 Ord. 985 9.28.010 98-12 Ord. 985 9.28.020 98-13 Ord. 985 9.28.030 98-14 Ord. 985 9.28.040 98-15 Ord. 985 9.28.050 98-16 Ord. 985 9.28.060 98-17 Ord. 985 Not codified 98-18 Ord. 985 Not codified 98-19 Ord. 985 Not codified 98A-1 Ord. 2297 8.56.010 98A-2 Ord. 2297 8.56.020 98A-3 Ord. 2297 8.56.030 98A-4 Ord. 2297 8.56.040 98A-5 Ord. 2297 8.56.050 98A-6 Ord. 2297 8.56.060 98A-7 Ord. 2297 8.56.070 98A-8 Ord. 2297 8.56.080 98A-8 Ord. 2297 8.56.090 98A-9 Ord. 2297 8.56.100 98A-10 Ord. 2297 8.56.110 98A-11 Ord. 2297 8.56.120 98A-12 Ord. 2297 8.56.130 98A-13 Ord. 2297 Not codified 98A-14 Ord. 2297 Not codified 98A-15 Ord. 2297 Not codified 99-1 Ord. 364 8.40.010 99-2 Ord. 364 8.40.020 99-3 Ord. 364 Repealed by 3518 99-4 Ord. 364 Not codified 100-1 Ord. 514 12.36.010 100-2 Ord. 514 12.36.020 100-3 Ord. 514; Ord. 1967 12.36.030 100-4 Ord. 514; Ord. 2717 12.36.040 100-5 Ord. 514 12.36.050 100-6 Ord. 514; Ord. 698 12.36.060 100-7 Ord. 514 12.36.070 100-8 Ord. 514 12.36.080 100-9 Ord. 514 12.36.090 100-10 Ord. 514 12.36.100 100-11 Ord. 514 12.36.110 100-12 Ord. 514 12.36.120 100-13 Ord. 514 12.36.130 100-14 Ord. 514 12.36.140 100-15 Ord. 514; Ord. 698 12.36.150 100-16 Ord. 514 12.36.160 101-1 Ord. 916 5.60.010 101-2 Ord. 916 5.60.020 101-3 Ord. 916 5.60.030 101-4 Ord. 493; Ord. 916; Ord. 1444; Ord. 1922; Ord. 2725 5.60.040 101-5 Ord. 916 5.60.050 101-6 Ord. 916 5.60.060 101-7 Ord. 916 5.60.070 101-8 Ord. 916 5.60.080 101-9 Ord. 916 5.60.090 101-9 Ord. 916 5.60.100 101-10 Ord. 916 5.60.110 101-11 Ord. 1146 Not codified 101-12 Ord. 916 Not codified 101-13 Ord. 916 Not codified 101-14 Ord. 1146 Not codified 102-1 Ord. 340 12.60.010 102-2 Ord. 340 12.60.020 102-3 Ord. 340 12.60.030 102-4 Ord. 340 12.60.040 102-5 Ord. 340 12.60.050 102-6 Ord. 340 12.60.060 102-7 Ord. 340 12.60.070 102-8 Ord. 340 12.60.080 102-9 Ord. 340 12.60.090 102-10 Ord. 340 12.60.100 102-11 Ord. 340 12.60.110 102-12 Ord. 340; Ord. 1129 Ord. 1370 12.60.120 102-13 Ord. 340 12.60.130 102-14 Ord. 340 12.48.010 102-15 Ord. 340 12.48.020 102-16 Ord. 340 12.48.030 102-17 Ord. 340 12.48.040 102-18 Ord. 340 12.48.050 102-19 Ord. 340 12.48.060 102-20 Ord. 340 12.48.070 102-21 Ord. 340 12.48.080 105-8 Ord. 686 9.48.070 105-9 Ord. 686 9.48.080 107-1 Ord. 1128; Ord. 1316 5.68.010 107-4 Ord. 1128 5.68.020 107-5 Ord. 1128 5.68.030 107-6 Ord. 1128 5.68.040 107-7 Ord. 1128 5.68.050 107-8 Ord. 1316 5.68.060 107-9 Ord. 1128 5.68.070 107-10 Ord. 404; Ord. 668; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1316; Ord. 1408 5.68.080 107-11 Ord. 1128 5.68.090 107-12 Ord. 1128 5.68.100 107-13 Ord. 1128 5.68.110 107-14 Ord. 1128 5.68.120 107-15 Ord. 1128 5.68.130 107-16 Ord. 1128 5.68.140 107-17 Ord. 1128 5.68.150 107-18 Ord. 1128 5.68.160 107-23 Ord. 1262 10.24.010 107-24 Ord. 1262 10.24.020 107-25 Ord. 1262 10.24.030 107-26 Ord. 1262 10.24.040 107-27 Ord. 1262 10.24.050 107-28 Ord. 1262 10.24.060 107-29 Ord. 1262 10.24.070 107-30 Ord. 1262 10.24.080 107-31 Ord. 1262 10.24.090 107-32 Ord. 1262 10.24.100 107-33 Ord. 1706; Ord. 1792 10.24.110 108-1 Ord. 3052 5.88.010 108-2 Ord. 3052 5.88.020 108-3 Ord. 3052 5.88.030 108-4 Ord. 3052 5.88.040 108-5 Ord. 3052 5.88.050 108-6 Ord. 3052 5.88.060 108-7 Ord. 3052 5.88.070 108-8 Ord. 3052 5.88.080 109-1 Ord. 3097 12.40.010 109-2 Ord. 3097 12.40.020 109-3 Ord. 3097 12.40.030 109-4 Ord. 3097 12.40.040 109-5 Ord. 3097; Ord. 3394 12.40.050 109-6 Ord. 3097 12.40.060 109-7 Ord. 3097 12.40.070 109-8 Ord. 3097 12.40.080 109-9 Ord. 3097 12.40.090 109-10 Ord. 3097 12.40.100 109-11 Ord. 3097 12.40.110 110-1 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.010 110-2 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.020 110-3 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.030 110-4 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.040 110-5 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110; Ord. 3112 5.70.050 110-6 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110; Ord. 3112 5.70.060 110-7 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.070 110-8 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110; Ord. 3112 5.70.080 110-9 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.090 110-10 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.100 110-11 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.110 110-12 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.120 110-13 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.130 110-14 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.140 110-15 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.150 110-16 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.160 110-17 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.170 110-18 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.180 110-19 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.190 110-20 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.200 110-21 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.210 110-22 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110; Ord. 3112 5.70.230 110-23 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110; Ord. 3112 5.70.220 110-24 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 Not codified 110-25 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 Not codified 110-26 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 Not codified 110-27 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 Not codified 110-28 Ord. 1763; Ord. 2030; Ord. 2816; Ord. 3110 5.70.240 111-1 Ord. 1036 5.72.010 111-2 Ord. 1036 5.72.020 111-3 Ord. 1036 5.72.030 111-4 Ord. 1036 5.72.040 111-5 Ord. 1036; Ord. 1247; Ord. 1320 5.72.050 111-6 Ord. 1036 5.72.060 111-7 Ord. 1036 5.72.070 111-8 Ord. 1036 5.72.080 111-9 Ord. 1036 Repealed by 3518 111-10 Ord. 1036 Not codified 111-11 Ord. 1036 Not codified 111-12 Ord. 1036 Not codified 111-13 Ord. 1036 Not codified 113-1 Ord. 2707 5.76.010 113-2 Ord. 2707 5.76.020 113-3 Ord. 2707 5.76.030 113-4 Ord. 2707 5.76.040 113-5 Ord. 2707 5.76.050 113-6 Ord. 2707 5.76.060 113-7 Ord. 2707 5.76.070 113-8 Ord. 2707 5.76.080 113-9 Ord. 2707 5.76.090 114-1 Ord. 121; Ord. 285; Ord. 334; Ord. 384 Not codified 114-2 Ord. 121 2.24.160 115-1 Ord. 2868 17.32.090 118-1 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1059; Ord. 1313 13.16.010 118-2 Ord. 1059 13.16.020 118-3 Ord. 1059 13.16.030 118-4 Ord. 1059 13.16.040 118-5 Ord. 1059; Ord. 1313; Ord. 2696 13.16.050 118-6 Ord. 1059 13.16.060 118-7 Ord. 1059 13.16.070 118-8 Ord. 1059 13.16.080 118-9 Ord. 1059 13.16.090 118-10 Ord. 1059 Not codified 118-11 Ord. 1059 Not codified 118-12 Ord. 1059; Ord. 1075 Not codified 118-12.1 Ord. 1313 13.16.100 118-12.2 Ord. 1313 13.16.110 118-13 Ord. 1060; Ord. 1083; Ord. 1120 13.16.120 118-14 Ord. 1060; Ord. 1083; Ord. 1120; Ord. 1266; Ord. 1339; Ord. 1560; Ord. 1909; Ord. 2188; Ord. 2448; Ord. 3122 13.16.130 118-15 Ord. 1060; Ord. 1083; Ord. 1103; Ord. 1120; Ord. 1266; Ord. 1497; Ord. 1560; Ord. 1909 13.16.140 118-16 Ord. 1060 13.16.150 118-17 Ord. 1060 13.16.160 118-18 Ord. 1060; Ord. 1083; Ord. 1120 13.16.170 118-19 Ord. 1060; Ord. 1076 Not codified 118-20 Ord. 1060 Not codified 118-22 Ord. 1900 Not codified 118-23 Ord. 1900 Not codified 118-24 Ord. 1900 Not codified 118-25 Ord. 1900 Not codified 118-26 Ord. 1900 Not codified 118-27 Ord. 1945 Not codified 119-1 Ord. 2879 8.64.010 119-2 Ord. 2879 8.64.020 119-3 Ord. 2879 8.64.030 119-4 Ord. 2879 8.64.040 119-5 Ord. 2879 8.64.050 119-6 Ord. 2879 8.64.060 119-7 Ord. 2879 8.64.070 119-8 Ord. 2879 8.64.080 119-9 Ord. 2879 8.64.090 119-10 Ord. 2879 8.64.100 119-11 Ord. 2879 8.64.110 120-1 Ord. 427 17.48.010 121-2 Ord. 427 17.48.120 120-3 Ord. 427 17.48.130 120-4 Ord. 427 17.48.140 121-1 Ord. 213 12.16.010 121-2 Ord. 213 12.16.020 121-3 Ord. 213 12.16.030 121-4 Ord. 213 12.16.040 121-5 Ord 1058 12.16.050 121-6 Ord. 1058 12.16.060 121-7 Ord. 1058 12.16.070 121-8 Ord. 2738 12.16.080 121-11 Ord. 906 12.16.090 121-12 Ord. 1118; Ord. 2035 10.48.010 121-13 Ord. 1118 10.48.020 121-14 Ord. 1118 10.48.030 121-15 Ord. 1118 10.48.040 122-1 Ord. 1028 12.44.010 122-2 Ord. 1028 12.44.020 122-3 Ord. 1028 12.44.030 122-4 Ord. 1028 12.44.040 122-5 Ord. 1028 12.44.050 122-6 Ord. 1028 12.44.060 123-1 Ord. 596 5.32.010 123-2 Ord. 596; Ord. 1113 5.32.030 123-3 Ord. 596 5.32.040 123-4 Ord. 596 5.32.050 123-7 Ord. 596 5.32.060 123-8 Ord. 596 5.32.070 123-9 Ord. 596 5.32.080 123-10 Ord. 596 5.32.090 123-11 Ord. 596 5.32.100 123-12 Ord. 596 5.32.110 123-13 Ord. 596 5.32.120 123-16 Ord. 596; Ord. 2430 Ord. 2447 5.32.130 123-17 Ord. 596 5.32.140 123-21 Ord. 596 5.32.150 123-22 Ord. 596 5.32.160 123-23 Ord. 596 5.32.170 123-24 Ord. 596 5.32.180 123-25 Ord. 596; Ord. 2430; Ord. 2447 5.32.190 123-26 Ord. 596 Repealed by 3518 123-27 Ord. 596 5.32.200 123-28 Ord. 490; Ord. 596; Ord. 2726 5.32.210 123-31 Ord. 596 5.32.220 123-32 Ord. 596; Ord. 705 5.32.230 123-33 Ord. 596 5.32.240 123-34 Ord. 596 5.32.250 123-35 Ord. 596; Ord. 705 5.32.260 123-36 Ord. 596 5.32.270 123-39 Ord. 596 5.32.280 123-40 Ord. 596 5.32.290 123-41 Ord. 596 5.32.300 123-42 Ord. 596; Ord. 1730 5.44.010 123-42.1 Ord. 1730 5.44.020 123-42.2 Ord. 1730 5.44.030 123-42.3 Ord. 1730 5.44.040 123-42.4 Ord. 1730 Repealed by 3518 123-43 Ord. 596 5.32.310 123-44 Ord. 596 5.32.320 123-45 Ord. 596 Not codified 123-46 Ord. 596 5.32.390 123-49 Ord. 596 5.32.020 123-55 Ord. 491; Ord. 738; Ord. 889; Ord. 1482; Ord. 1928; Ord. 2714 5.32.330 123-56 Ord. 738 5.32.340 123-57 Ord. 738 5.32.350 123-58 Ord. 738 5.32.360 123-59 Ord. 738 5.32.370 123-60 Ord. 738 5.32.380 123-61 Ord. 738; Ord. 1701; Ord. 1806; Ord. 3035 5.92.010-5.92.030 125-1 Ord. 197 12.12.010 125-2 Ord. 197 12.12.020 125-3 Ord. 197 12.12.030 126-1 Ord. 977 12.04.020 126-7 Ord. 243 12.04.030 126-8 Ord. 243 12.04.040 126-9 Ord. 243 12.04.050 126-10 Ord. 243; Ord. 561 12.04.060 126-11 Ord. 243; Ord. 561 12.04.070 126-12 Ord. 243 12.04.080 126-13 Ord. 243 12.04.090 126-14 Ord. 243 12.04.100 126-15 Ord. 2195; Ord. 2265 12.04.110 126-22 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.010 126-23 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.020 126-24 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.030 126-25 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783; Ord. 2786 12.08.040 126-26 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.050 126-27 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.060 126-28 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.070 126-29 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783; Ord. 2786 12.08.100 126-29.1 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.110 126-29.2 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.120 126-29.3 Ord. 97; Ord. 2783 12.08.130 126-30 Ord. 542 15.16.010 126-31 Ord. 542; Ord. 1485 15.16.020 126-32 Ord. 542 15.16.030 126-33 Ord. 542 15.16.040 126-34 Ord. 542 15.16.050 126-35 Ord. 542 15.16.060 126-36 Ord. 542 15.16.070 126-37 Ord. 542 15.16.080 126-39 Ord. 2867 12.04.120 126-46 Ord. 1233 12.08.150 126-47 Ord. 1233 12.08.160 126-48 Ord. 1172; Ord. 1233 12.08.170 126-55 Ord. 1246 12.08.180 126-56 Ord. 1246 12.08.190 126-57 Ord. 1246 12.08.200 126-58 Ord. 1246 12.08.210 126-64 Ord. dated 11-1-1899 12.20.010 126-65 Ord. dated 11-1-1899 12.20.020 126-68 Ord. dated 10-1-1900 12.20.030 126-72 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 12.20.040 126-73 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 12.20.050 126-74 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 12.20.060 126-75 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 12.20.070 126-76 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 Not codified 126-77 Ord. 1050; Ord. 1493 Not codified 129-1 Ord. 1155 16.04.010 129-2 Ord. 1155 16.04.020 129-3 Ord. 1155 16.04.030 129-4 Ord. 1155 16.04.040 129-5 Ord. 31; Ord. 329; Ord. 485; Ord. 500; Ord. 1155 16.04.050 129-6 Ord. 31; Ord. 329; Ord. 485; Ord. 500; Ord. 1155 16.04.060 129-7 Ord. 1155 16.04.070 129-8 Ord. 31; Ord. 1155 16.04.080 129-11 Ord. 1155 16.04.090 129-12 Ord. 1155 16.04.100 129-13 Ord. 1155 16.04.110 129-16 Ord. 1155 16.04.120 129-17 Ord. 1155 16.04.130 129-18 Ord. 1155 16.04.140 129-19 Ord. 31; Ord. 1155 16.04.150 129-22 Ord. 1155 16.04.160 129-23 Ord. 1155 16.04.170 129-24 Ord. 1155 16.04.180 129-25 Ord. 1155 16.04.190 129-26 Ord. 1155 16.04.200 129-27 Ord. 1155 16.04.210 129-30 Ord. 1155 16.04.220 129-31 Ord. 1155 16.04.230 129-32 Ord. 31; Ord. 1155 16.04.240 129-34 Ord. 1155 16.04.250 129-35 Ord. 1155 16.04.260 129-36 Ord. 1155 16.04.270 129-39 Ord. 31; Ord. 1155 16.04.280 131-1 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.010 131-2 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.020 131-3 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.030 131-4 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.040 131-5 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.050 131-6 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.060 131-7 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.070 131-8 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.080 131-9 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.090 131-10 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.100 131-11 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.110 131-12 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.120 131-13 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.130 131-14 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.140 131-15 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.150 131-16 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.160 131-17 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.170 131-18 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.180 131-19 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.190 131-20 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.200 131-21 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.210 131-22 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.220 131-23 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.230 131-24 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.240 131-25 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.250 131-26 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.260 131-27 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.270 131-28 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.280 131-29 Ord. dated 8-17-60 8.60.290 131-39 Ord. 1283 8.60.300 131-41 Ord. 1283 8.60.310 131-42 Ord. 1283 8.60.320 131-43 Ord. 1283 8.60.330 131-44 Ord. 1283 8.60.340 131-45 Ord. 1283 8.60.350 131-46 Ord. 1283 8.60.360 131-47 Ord. 1283 8.60.370 131-48 Ord. 1283 8.60.380 131-49 Ord. 1283 8.60.390 131-50 Ord. 1283 8.60.400 131-51 Ord. 1283 8.60.410 131-52 Ord. 1283 8.60.420 131-53 Ord. 1283 8.60.430 131-54 Ord. 1283 8.60.440 132-1 Ord. 727 3.20.010 132-2 Ord. 727 3.20.020 132-3 Ord. 727 3.20.030 132-4 Ord. 727 3.20.040 132-5 Ord. 727 3.20.050 132-6 Ord. 727 3.20.060 132-7 Ord. 727 3.20.070 132-8 Ord. 727 3.20.080 132-15 Ord. 21 3.16.010 132-16 Ord. 21 3.16.020 132-17 Ord. 21 3.16.030 132-23 Ord. 12 Not codified 132-24 Ord. 12 Not codified 132-25 Ord. 12 Not codified 132-26 Ord. 12 Not codified 132-32 Ord. 1159 3.28.010 132-33 Ord. 1159 3.28.020 132-34 Ord. 1159 3.28.030 132-35 Ord. 1159 3.28.040 132-36 Ord. 1159 3.28.050 132-37 Ord. 1159 3.28.060 132-38 Ord. 1159 3.28.070 132-39 Ord. 1159 Not codified 132-40 Ord. 1159 Not codified 132-44 Ord. 1963 Ch. 3.24 132-45 Ord. 1963 Ch. 3.24 132-46 Ord. 1963 Ch. 3.24 132-47 Ord. 1963 Ch. 3.24 132-48 Ord. 1963 Ch. 3.24 132-49 Ord. 1963 Not codified 132-50 Ord. 2779 3.12.010 132-51 Ord. 2779 3.12.020 132-52 Ord. 2779; Ord. 3059 3.12.030 132-53 Ord. 2779 3.12.040 132-54 Ord. 2779 3.12.050 132-55 Ord. 2779 3.12.060 132-56 Ord. 2779 3.12.070 132-57 Ord. 2779 3.12.080 132-58 Ord. 2779 3.12.090 132-59 Ord. 2779 3.12.100 132-60 Ord. 2779 3.12.110 132-61 Ord. 2779 3.12.120 132-62 3.12.130 132-63 3.12.140 132-64 3.12.150 132-65 3.12.160 132A-1 3.40.010-3.40.050 132A-2 3.40.060 133-1 Ord. 78; Ord. 437; Ord. 700 5.100.010 133-2 Ord. 78; Ord. 437 5.100.020 133-3 Ord. 78 5.100.030 133-4 Ord. 78 5.100.040 133-5 Ord. 78; Ord. 637; Ord. 677; Ord. 683; Ord. 712; Ord. 2379; Ord. 2427; Ord. 2618 5.100.050 133-6 Ord. 78 5.100.060 133-7 Ord. 78; Ord. 497; Ord. 700; Ord. 971; Ord. 1037; Ord. 1480; Ord. 1670; Ord. 2506 5.100.070 133-8 Ord. 78; Ord. 437; Ord. 637; Ord. 683; Ord. 712; Ord. 729; Ord. 971 5.100.080 133-9 Ord. 78; Ord. 437 5.100.090 133-10 Ord. 78 5.100.100 133-11 Ord. 78; Ord. 497; Ord. 642; Ord. 1480; Ord. 2721 5.100.110 133-12 Ord. 78 5.100.120 133-13 Ord. 78 5.100.130 133-14 Ord. 78 5.100.140 133-15 Ord. 78; Ord. 497; Ord. 1037; Ord. 1655 5.100.150 133-16 Ord. 78; Ord. 746 5.100.160 133-17 Ord. 78 5.100.170 133-18 Ord. 78 5.100.180 133-19 Ord. 78; Ord. 886 5.100.190 133-20 Ord. 78; Ord. 1412 5.100.200 133-21 Ord. 78 5.100.210 133-22 Ord. 78; Ord. 437; Ord. 637; Ord. 700; Ord. 719; Ord. 729; Ord. 730; Ord. 886; Ord. 888; Ord. 1206; Ord. 1216; Ord. 1223; Ord. 1581; Ord. 1899; Ord. 2410; Ord. 3101 5.100.220 133-23 Ord. 78 5.100.230 133-24 Ord. 78 5.100.240 133-25 Ord. 78 5.100.250 133-26 Ord. 78 5.100.260 133-27 Ord. 78 5.100.270 133-28 Ord. 78 5.100.280 133-29 Ord. 78 5.100.290 133-30 Ord. 78 5.100.300 133-31 Ord. 78 5.100.310 133-32 Ord. 78 5.100.320 133-33 Ord. 78 5.100.330 133-34 Ord. 78 5.100.340 133-35 Ord. 78 5.100.350 133-36 Ord. 78 5.100.360 133-37 Ord. 78 5.100.370 133-38 Ord. 78 5.100.380 133-39 Ord. 78 Repealed by 3480 133-40 Ord. 78 5.100.390 133-41 Ord. 78 5.100.400 133-42 Ord. 78 5.100.410 133-43 Ord. 78 5.100.420 133-44 Ord. 78 5.100.450 133-45 Ord. 740; Ord. 1037 5.100.430 133-46 5.100.440 134-1 Ord. 898 5.108.010 134-2 Ord. 898 5.108.020 134-3 Ord. 898 5.108.030 134-4 Ord. 898 5.108.040 134-5 Ord. 898 5.108.050 134-6 Ord. 898 5.108.060 134-7 Ord. 898 5.108.070 134-8 Ord. 898 5.108.080 134-9 Ord. 898 5.108.090 134-10 Ord. 898 5.108.100 134-11 Ord. 898 5.108.110 134-12 Ord. 898 5.108.120 134-13 Ord. 898 5.108.130 134-14 Ord. 898 Repealed by 3518 134-15 Ord. 898 5.112.140 134-16 Ord. 898 Not codified 134-17 Ord. 898 Not codified 135-1 Ord. 864 15.28.010 135-2 Ord. 864 15.28.020 135-3 Ord. 864 15.28.030 135-4 Ord. 864 15.28.040 135-5 Ord. 864 15.28.050 135-6 Ord. 864 15.28.060 135-7 Ord. 864 15.28.070 135-8 Ord. 864 15.28.080 135-9 Ord. 864 15.28.090 135-10 Ord. 864 15.28.100 135-11 Ord. 864 15.28.110 135-12 Ord. 864 15.28.120 135-13 Ord. 864 15.28.130 135-14 Ord. 864 15.28.140 135-18 Ord. 864 15.28.150 135-19 Ord. 864 15.28.160 135-20 Ord. 864 15.28.170 135-21 Ord. 864 15.28.180 135-22 Ord. 864 15.28.190 135-23 Ord. 864 15.28.200 135-24 Ord. 864 15.28.210 135-25 Ord. 864 15.28.220 135-29 Ord. 864 15.28.230 135-30 Ord. 864 15.28.240 135-31 Ord. 864 15.28.250 136-1 Ord. 234 5.112.010 136-2 Ord. 234 5.112.020 136-3 Ord. 234 5.112.030 136-4 Ord. 234 5.112.040 136-5 Ord. 234 5.112.050 136-6 Ord. 234 5.112.060 136-7 Ord. 234 5.112.070 136-8 Ord. 234 5.112.080 136-9 Ord. 234 5.112.090 138-1 Ord. 1270 15.24.010 138-2 Ord. 1270 15.24.020 138-3 Ord. 1270 15.24.030 138-4 Ord. 1270 15.24.040 138-5 Ord. 1270 15.24.050 138-6 Ord. 1270 15.24.060 138-7 Ord. 1270 15.24.070 138-8 Ord. 1270 15.24.080 138-9 Ord. 1270 15.24.090 138-10 Ord. 1270 15.24.100 138-11 Ord. 1270 15.24.110 138-12 Ord. 1270 15.24.120 138-13 Ord. 1270 15.24.130 138-14 Ord. 1270 15.24.140 138-15 Ord. 1270 15.24.150 138-16 Ord. 1270 15.24.160 138-17 Ord. 1270 15.24.170 138-18 Ord. 1270 15.24.180 138-19 Ord. 1270 15.24.190 138-20 Ord. 1270 15.24.200 141-1 Ord. 1242-A 10.72.010 141-2 Ord. 1242-A 10.72.020 141-8 Ord. 749 10.72.030 141-13 Ord. 1462 10.32.010 141-14 Ord. 1462 10.32.020 141-15 Ord. 1462 10.32.030 141-16 Ord. 1462 10.32.040 141-17 Ord. 1462 10.32.050 141-18 Ord. 1462, Ord. 1718 10.32.060 141-19 Ord. 1462 10.32.070 141-20 Ord. 1462 10.32.080 141-21 Ord. 1462 10.32.090 141-22 Ord. 1462 10.32.100 141-23 Ord. 1462, Ord. 2130 10.32.110 141-24 Ord. 1462, Ord. 2130 10.32.120 141-25 Ord. 1462 10.32.130 141-26 Ord. 1462 10.32.130 141-27 Ord. 1462 10.32.140 141-28 Ord. 1462, Ord. 2033, Ord. 2478, Ord. 2569, Ord. 2765, Ord. 3010 10.32.150 141-29 Ord. 1462 Not codified 141-30 Ord. 1462 Not codified 141-31 Ord. 1462 Not codified 141-56 Ord. 233 10.36.010 141-57 Ord. 233, Ord. 282, Ord. 301, Ord. 306, Ord. 393, Ord. 669, Ord. 689, Ord. 761, Ord. 802, Ord. 818, Ord. 1272, Ord. 1422, Ord. 1500, Ord. 2138, Ord. 2404, Ord. 2455, Ord. 2471, Ord. 2486, Ord. 2496, Ord. 2497, Ord. 2538, Ord. 2652, Ord. 2770, Ord. 3004 10.36.020 141-58 Ord. 233 10.36.030 141-59 Ord. 233 10.36.040 141-60 Ord. 233 10.36.050 141-61 Ord. 233, Ord. 2032, Ord. 2477, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.36.060 141-69 Ord. 299 10.40.010 141-70 Ord. 299; Ord. 327, Ord. 350, Ord. 501, Ord. 1866, Ord. 2572, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.40.020 141-71 Ord. 299, Ord. 327, Ord. 501 10.40.030 141-72 Ord. 299 10.40.040 141-73 Ord. 299, Ord. 3010 10.40.050 141-74 Ord. 299, Ord. 2691 10.40.060 141-77 Ord. 99, Ord. 2108, Ord. 2629, Ord. 2653, Ord. 2740, Ord. 2743, Ord. 2759 10.40.070 141-78 Ord. 99 10.40.080 141-79 Ord. 2108 10.40.090 141-81 Ord. 88, Ord. dated 12-10-63, Ord. 421, Ord. 614, Ord. 684, Ord. 783, Ord. 801, Ord. 1014, Ord. 1200, Ord. 1245, Ord. 1514, Ord. 1562, Ord. 1602, Ord. 1626, Ord. 1657, Ord. 1820, Ord. 2059, Ord. 2127, Ord. 2136, Ord. 2372, Ord. 2396, Ord. 2480, Ord. 2534, Ord. 2548, Ord. 2579, Ord. 2578, Ord. 2636, Ord. 2637, Ord. 2655, Ord. 2683, Ord. 2753, Ord. 2790, Ord. 2928, Ord. 2932, Ord. 2940, Ord. 2953, Ord. 3005, Ord. 3028, Ord. 3038, Ord. 3060, Ord. 3099, Ord. 3105, Ord. 3109 10.16.010 141-82 Ord. 88, Ord. 2480, Ord. 2578 10.16.020 141-83 Ord. 88, Ord. 2480, Ord. 2578, Ord. 3010 10.16.030 141-84 Ord. 2127, Ord. 2534, Ord. 2939 10.16.040 141-85 Ord. 2822 10.72.040 141-87 Ord. 2432, Ord. 2510, Ord. 2918 10.28.080 141-93 Ord. dated 10-23-62 10.04.010 141-94 Ord. dated 10-23-62 10.04.020 141-98 Ord. 320 10.04.030 141-99 Ord. 320 10.04.040 141-100 Ord. 346, Ord. 372, Ord. 409, Ord. 416, Ord. 430, Ord. 476, Ord. 543, Ord. 709, Ord. 761, Ord. 934, Ord. 972, Ord. 1090, Ord. 1129, Ord. 1225, Ord. 1282, Ord. 1288, Ord. 1337, Ord. 1394, Ord. 1452, Ord. 1488, Ord. 1547, Ord. 1561, Ord. 1620, Ord. 1719, Ord. 2292, Ord. 2358, Ord. 2535, Ord. 2624, Ord. 2671, Ord. 2823, Ord. 2836, Ord. 2967 10.04.050 141-104 Ord. dated 8-25-64 10.28.030 141-105 Ord. dated 8-25-64 10.28.030 141-108 Ord. dated 3-9-65 10.28.030 141-109 Ord. dated 3-9-65 10.28.030 141-110 Ord. dated 3-9-65, Ord. 2573, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.28.030 141-113 Ord. dated 12-26-67 10.28.010 141-114 Ord. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 355, Ord. 2573, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.28.020, 10.28.100 141-115 Ord. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 1565, Ord. 2229, Ord. 3010 10.28.100 141-116 Ord. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 345, Ord. 355, Ord. 366, Ord. 381, Ord. 415, Ord. 443, Ord. 463, Ord. 475, Ord. 507, Ord. 515, Ord. 529, Ord. 539, Ord. 550, Ord. 575, Ord. 596, Ord. 605, Ord. 644, Ord. 761, Ord. 987, Ord. 1090, Ord. 1209, Ord. 1219, Ord. 1228, Ord. 1254, Ord. 1311, Ord. 1348, Ord. 1357, Ord. 1409, Ord. 1548, Ord. 1557, Ord. 1585, Ord. 1620, Ord. 1654, Ord. 1674, Ord. 1680, Ord. 1752, Ord. 1802, Ord. 1834, Ord. 1984, Ord. 1991, Ord. 2023, Ord. 2078, Ord. 2129, Ord. 2143, Ord. 2148, Ord. 2342, Ord. 2454, Ord. 2476, Ord. 2552, Ord. 2566, Ord. 2638, Ord. 2639, Ord. 2648, Ord. 2658, Ord. 2670, Ord. 2684, Ord. 2685, Ord. 2704, Ord. 2732, Ord. 2737, Ord. 2755, Ord. 2761, Ord. 2900, Ord. 2917, Ord. 2919, Ord. 2964, Ord. 2965, Ord. 3000 10.28.030 141-116.1 Ord. 2574, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.28.100 141-117 Res. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 355, Ord. 366, Ord. 367, Ord. 381, Ord. 420, Ord. 447, Ord. 544, Ord. 553, Ord. 575, Ord. 580, Ord. 595, Ord. 596, Ord. 605, Ord. 872, Ord. 895, Ord. 938, Ord. 1010, Ord. 1029, Ord. 1048, Ord. 1068, Ord. 1090, Ord. 1135, Ord. 1146, Ord. 1170, Ord. 1176, Ord. 1219, Ord. 1232, Ord. 1265, Ord. 1310, Ord. 13021, Ord. 1325, Ord. 1349, Ord. 1357, Ord. 1364, Ord. 1398, Ord. 1543, Ord. 1556, Ord. 1586, Ord. 1635, Ord. 1636, Ord. 1680, Ord. 1727, Ord. 1729, Ord. 1787, Ord. 1815, Ord. 1837, Ord. 1884, Ord. 1851, Ord. 1993, Ord. 2102, Ord. 2122, Ord. 2147, Ord. 2472, Ord. 2551, Ord. 2575, Ord. 2584, Ord. 2633, Ord. 2674, Ord. 2686, Ord. 2736, Ord. 2803, Ord. 2831, Ord. 2883, Ord. 2903, Ord. 2962, Ord. 2966, Ord. 3010, Ord. 3030, Ord. 3053, Ord. 3076, Ord. 3077, Ord. 3084 10.28.040 141-118 Res. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 256, Ord. 355, Ord. 366, Ord. 368, Ord. 395, Ord. 398, Ord. 556, Ord. 559, Ord. 605, Ord. 611, Ord. 734, Ord. 761, Ord. 849, Ord. 1010, Ord. 1127, Ord. 1232, Ord. 1374, Ord. 1837, Ord. 2031, Ord. 2170, Ord. 2175, Ord. 2262, Ord. 2422, Ord. 2456, Ord. 2540, Ord. 2571, Ord. 2584, Ord. 2619, Ord. 2628, Ord. 2630, Ord. 2643, Ord. 2666, Ord. 2749, Ord. 2833, Ord. 3010, Ord. 3085, Ord. 3098, Ord. 3121 10.28.050 141-118.1 Ord. 1119 10.28.090 141-118.2 Ord. 1119 10.28.090 141-118.3 Ord. 1119 10.28.090 141-118.4 Ord. 1119, Ord. 3010 10.28.090 141-118.5 Ord. 1119 10.28.090 141-118.6 Ord. 1119 Not codified 141-118.7 Ord. 1119 Not codified 141-118.8 Ord. 1119 Not codified 141-119 Ord. dated 12-26-67 10.12.010 141-120 Ord. dated 12-26-67 10.28.020 141-121 Ord. dated 12-26-67 Not codified 141-122 Res. dated 12-26-67 10.12.020 141-123 Res. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 3010 10.12.030, 10.28.030 141-124 Res. dated 12-26-67, Ord. 912 10.28.030 141-125 Ord. dated 12-26-67 Not codified 141-126 Ord. dated 12-26-67 Not codified 141-128 Ord. 1246, Ord. 1281, Ord. 1306, Ord. 1308, Ord. 1317, Ord. 1328, Ord. 1341, Ord. 1356, Ord. 1386, Ord. 1393, Ord. 1423, Ord. 1634, Ord. 1880, Ord. 1883, Ord. 1931, Res. dated 4-14-98 10.44.020 141-128A Ord. 2884 10.44.010 141-128.1 Ord. 2405 10.28.060 141-129 Ord. 324 10.12.010 141-130 Ord. 324 10.12.020 141-131 Ord. 324, Ord. 3010 10.12.030 141-132 Ord. 324, Ord. 356, Ord. 520, Ord. 530, Ord. 837, Ord. 896, Ord. 1324, Ord. 2226, Ord. 2359, Ord. 2421 10.12.040 141-133 Ord. 931, Ord. 1019, Ord. 1057, Ord. 1323, Ord. 1358, Ord. 1430, Ord. 1610, Ord. 1720, Ord. 1892, Ord. 2128 10.12.050 141-134 Ord. 931, Ord. 3010 10.12.060 141-134.1 Ord. 897 10.12.070 141-134.2 Ord. 897 Not codified 141-134.3 Ord. 897 Not codified 141-135 Ord. 557 10.20.010 141-135.1 Ord. 989, Ord. 1609 10.20.020 141-136 Ord. 557 10.20.030 141-137 Ord. 557, Ord. 3010 10.20.040 141-138 Ord. 557 10.20.050 141-139 Ord. 557 Not codified 141-140 Ord. 761, Ord. 1254, Ord. 1348, Ord. 1403, Ord. 1550, Ord. 1620 10.28.070 141-144 Ord. 775, Ord. 2539, Ord. 2930, Ord. 2941, Ord. 3120 10.08.010 141-144.1 Ord. 2509, Ord. 2537, Ord. 2543, Ord. 2544, Ord. 2545, Ord. 2925, Ord. 2968, Ord. 3003 10.08.020 141-145 Ord. 861, Ord. 958, Ord. 1005, Ord. 1145, Ord. 1658, Ord. 2142, Ord. 2268, Ord. 2279, Ord. 2305, Ord. 2553 10.08.030 141-146 Ord. 775 10.08.040 141-147 Ord. 775 Not codified 141-148 Ord. 775 Not codified 141-148A Ord. 2849, Ord. 3010 10.72.050 141A-1 10.80.010 143-1 Res. dated 8-11-64, Res. dated 5-11-65, Res. dated 1-13-70, Res. dated 12-14-71, Res. dated 12-28-76, Res. dated 4-11-78, Res. dated 4-8-80, Res. dated 3-10-81, Res. dated 6-9-82, Res. dated 4-22-86, Res. dated 9-9-86, Res. dated 1-13-87, Res. dated 7-14-87, Res. dated 10-27-87, Res. dated 10-27-87, Res. dated 7-23-91, Res. dated 11-10-92, Res. dated 11-22-94, Res. dated 7-25-95, Res. dated 4-22-97, Res. dated 5-26-98, Res. dated 10-13-98, Res. dated 11-24-98 10.64.010 143-2 Res. dated 8-11-64 10.64.020 143-3 Res. dated 8-11-64, Res. dated 5-9-72 10.64.030 143-5 Res. dated 1-28-69 10.60.010 143-6 Res. dated 1-28-69 10.60.020 143-7 Res. dated 1-28-69, Res. dated 1-23-73, Res. dated 5-14-74, Res. dated 11-12-74, Res. dated 3-25-75, Res. dated 12-23-75, Res. dated 5-9-78, Res. dated 5-10-83, Res. dated 6-15-83, Res. dated 10-27-87, Res. dated 3-9-82, Res. dated 2-11-86, Res. dated 11-9-88, Res. dated 5-14-91, Res. dated 11-10-92, Res. dated 4-13-93, Res. dated 7-25-95, Res. dated 10-22-96 10.60.030 143-8 Res. dated 2-10-70 10.08.050 143-9 Res. dated 2-10-70 10.08.060 143-10 Res. dated 2-10-70 10.08.070 143-11 Res. dated 2-10-70, Res. dated 8-14-73, Ord. 1359, Ord. 1399 10.08.080 143-12 Res. dated 2-10-70, Res. dated 3-14-72, Res. dated 7-25-72, Res. dated 8-14-73, Res. dated 9-24-74, Res. dated 9-11-79, Ord. 1283, Ord. 1340, Ord. 1359, Ord. 1529, Res. dated 9-28-82, Res. dated 5-13-86, Res. dated 10-27-87, Res. dated 3-22-88, Res. dated 1-26-92, Ord. 2647 10.08.090 143-13 Res. dated 4-22-80 10.08.100 143-14 Res. dated 10-24-79, Res. dated 7-13-82, Res. dated 8-10-82, Res. dated 12-14-82, Res. dated 12-28-82, Res. dated 2-22-83, Res. dated 9-13-83, Res. dated 10-11-83, Res. dated 11-9-83, Res. dated 11-22-83, Res. dated 12-13-83, Res. dated 12-27-83, Res. dated 4-24-84, Res. dated 5-8-84, Res. dated 6-26-84, Res. dated 7-24-84, Res. dated 10-9-84, Res. dated 10-23-84, Res. dated 12-11-84, Res. dated 12-26-84, Res. dated 2-13-85, Res. dated 2-26-85, Res. dated 3-26-85, Res. dated 4-23-85, Res. dated 5-14-85, Res. dated 5-28-85, Res. dated 6-12-85, Res. dated 8-13-85, Res. dated 11-12-85, Res. dated 1-14-86, Res. dated 3-25-86, Res. dated 4-8-86, Res. dated 5-13-86, Res. dated 7-8-86, Res. dated 8-26-86, Res. dated 9-9-86, Res. dated 10-14-86, Res. dated 10-28-86, Res. dated 11-25-86, Res. dated 12-9-86, Res. dated 1-27-87, Res. dated 3-10-87, Res. dated 3-22-87, Res. dated 3-24-87, Res. dated 4-14-87, Res. dated 4-28-87, Res. dated 5-12-87, Res. dated 5-26-87, Res. dated 7-14-87, Res. dated 8-11-87, Res. dated 8-25-87, Res. dated 9-8-87, Res. dated 10-27-87, Res. dated 12-22-87, Res. dated 1-12-88, Res. dated 1-22-88, Res. dated 3-22-88, Res. dated 4-12-88, Res. dated 4-26-88, Res. dated 5-24-88, Res. dated 7-26-88, Res. dated 8-9-88, Res. dated 8-23-88, Res. dated 9-13-88, Res. dated 12-13-88, Res. dated 12-27-88, Res. dated 2-14-89, Res. dated 2-24-89, Res. dated 6-14-89, Res. dated 8-22-89, Res. dated 9-26-89, Res. dated 11-14-89, Res. dated 11-16-89, Res. dated 11-28-89, Res. dated 12-12-89, Res. dated 1-23-90, Res. dated 2-13-90, Res. dated 3-13-90, Res. dated 3-27-90, Res. dated 5-8-90, Res. dated 6-13-90, Res. dated 8-21-90, Res. dated 11-13-90, Res. dated 11-27-90, Res. dated 11-30-90, Res. dated 12-11-90, Res. dated 1-22-91, Res. dated 2-26-91, Res. dated 3-26-91, Res. dated 4-23-91, Res. dated 5-28-91, Res. dated 6-12-91, Res. dated 9-24-91, Res. dated 10-8-91, Res. dated 12-10-91, Res. dated 12-23-91, Res. dated 1-14-92, Res. dated 2-11-92, Res. dated 2-25-92, Res. dated 3-4-92, Res. dated 3-24-92, Res. dated 4-14-92, Res. dated 4-28-92, Res. dated 5-12-92, Res. dated 5-26-92, Res. dated 6-10-92, Res. dated 6-23-92, Res. dated 7-28-92, Res. dated 9-8-92, Res. dated 9-22-92, Res. dated 10-13-92, Res. dated 11-24-92, Res. dated 2-23-93, Res. dated 3-9-93, Res. dated 4-13-93, Res. dated 4-27-93, Res. dated 5-11-93, Res. dated 5-26-93, Res. dated 7-27-93, Res. dated 8-9-93, Res. dated 8-24-93, Res. dated 9-14-93, Res. dated 10-12-93, Res. dated 10-26-93, Res. dated 11-9-93, Res. dated 11-23-93, Res. dated 12-14-93, Res. dated 12-17-93, Res. dated 12-28-93, Res. dated 1-25-94, Res. dated 2-14-94, Res. dated 4-26-94, Res. dated 5-10-94, Res. dated 5-24-94, Res. dated 6-15-94, Res. dated 7-26-94, Res. dated 9-13-94, Res. dated 10-11-94, Res. dated 11-9-94, Res. dated 11-12-94, Res. dated 12-27-94, Res. dated 1-24-95, Res. dated 2-11-95, Res. dated 2-14-95, Res. dated 2-28-95, Res. dated 3-28-95, Res. dated 4-11-95, Res. dated 4-25-95, Res. dated 5-23-95, Res. dated 6-10-95, Res. dated 6-14-95, Res. dated 6-27-95, Res. dated 7-25-95, Res. dated 8-22-95, Res. dated 9-12-95, Res. dated 11-28-95, Res. dated 12-26-95, Res. dated 1-9-96, Res. dated 2-13-96, Res. dated 3-12-96, Res. dated 3-26-96, Res. dated 4-23-96, Res. dated 6-12-96, Res. dated 6-25-96, Res. dated 8-27-96, Res. dated 9-10-96, Res. dated 10-8-96, Res. dated 11-23-96, Res. dated 11-26-96, Res. dated 12-23-96, Res. dated 1-14-97, Res. dated 1-28-97, Res. dated 2-11-97, Res. dated 2-25-97, Res. dated 4-8-97, Res. dated 4-22-97, Res. dated 5-13-97, Res. dated 5-24-97, Res. dated 5-27-97, Res. dated 6-24-97, Res. dated 8-27-97, Res. dated 11-12-97, Res. dated 11-25-97, Res. dated 11-26-97, Res. dated 12-9-97, Res. dated 12-23-97, Res. dated 2-10-98, Res. dated 3-10-98, Res. dated 3-24-98, Res. dated 4-14-98, Res. dated 4-28-98, Res. dated 5-12-98, Res. dated 5-26-98, Res. dated 6-10-98, Res. dated 6-23-98, Res. dated 8-25-98, Res. dated 9-8-98, Res. dated 10-13-98, Res. dated 10-27-98, Res. dated 11-24-98, Res. dated 12-8-98, Res. dated 12-22-98, Res. dated 12-22-98 10.44.020 143-14A Ord. 2308, Ord. 2584, Ord. 3010 10.44.030 143-15 Res. dated 7-13-82 10.12.040 143-16 Res. dated 2-10-87 10.08.110 143-17 Res. dated 2-10-87 10.08.120 143-18 Res. dated 1-23-96 10.20.060 146-1 Ord. 1847 5.116.010 146-2 Ord. 1847 5.116.020 146-3 Ord. 1847 5.116.030 146-4 Ord. 1847 5.116.040 146-5 Ord. 1847 5.116.050 146-6 Ord. 1847 5.116.060 146-7 Ord. 1847 5.116.070 146-8 Ord. 1847; Ord. 2219; Ord. 2729 5.116.080 146-9 Ord. 1847; Ord. 2164 5.116.090 146-10 Ord. 1847; Ord. 1992 5.116.100 146-11 Ord. 1847; Ord. 2024; Ord. 2398; Ord. 2877; Ord. 3115 5.116.110 147-1 Ord. 2880 5.40.010 147-2 Ord. 2880 5.40.020 147-3 Ord. 2880 5.40.030 147-4 Ord. 2880 5.40.040 147-5 Ord. 2880 5.40.050 147-6 Ord. 2880 5.40.060 147-7 Ord. 2880 5.40.070 148-1 Ord. 730 13.08.010 148-2 Ord. 730 13.08.020 148-3 Ord. 730 13.08.030 148-4 Ord. 730 13.08.040 148-5 Ord. 730 13.08.050 148-6 Ord. 730 13.08.060 149-1 Ord. 655; Ord. 991; Ord. 1022; Ord. 1354; Ord. 1451; Ord. 1496; Ord. 1933; Ord. 2187 13.04.010 149A-1 Ord. 2247 13.12.010 149A-2 Ord. 2247 13.12.020 149A-3 Ord. 2247 13.12.030 149A-4 Ord. 2247 13.12.040 149A-5 Ord. 2247 13.12.050 150-1 Ord. 1463 12.68.010 150-2 Ord. 1463 12.68.020 150-3 Ord. 1463 12.68.030 150-4 Ord. 1463 12.68.040 150-5 Ord. 1463 12.68.050 150-6 Ord. 1463 12.68.060 150-7 Ord. 1463 12.68.070 150-8 Ord. 1463 12.68.080 150-9 Ord. 1463 12.68.090 150-10 Ord. 1463 12.68.100 150-11 Ord. 1463 12.68.110 150-12 Ord. 1463 12.68.120 150-13 Ord. 1463 12.68.130 150-14 Ord. 1463 12.68.140 150-15 Ord. 1463 Not codified 150-16 Ord. 1463 Not codified 150-17 Ord. 1463 Not codified 151-1 Ord. dated 11-16-08 12.72.010 151-2 Ord. dated 11-16-08 12.72.020 151-3 Ord. dated 11-16-08 12.72.030 152-1 Ord. 687 5.120.010 152-2 Ord. 687 5.120.020 152-3 Ord. 687; Ord. 760 5.120.030 Appendix Part 1 Ord. 7; Ord. 728; Ord. 3029 2.08.120-2.08.320 Part 2 Ord. 1579 Not codified Part 3 Ord. 2140 2.60.330-2.60.590  
    As of Supplement No. 10, this table will no longer be updated. 
LIST OF RESOLUTIONS 
  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
  
Resolution 
Date 7-26-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 8-23-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 9-13-2005 Amends § 10.64.010, loading zones and taxi stands (10.64) 9-27-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-11-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-25-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-09-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-22-2005 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.64.010, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones (10.44, 10.64) 12-13-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 12-27-2005 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 1-24-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-14-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-28-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-14-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-14-2006 Amends § 10.64.010, loading zones and taxi stands (10.64) 3-28-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-11-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-11-2006 Amends § 10.08.030, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 4-25-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-25-2006 Amends § 10.60.030, bus stops (10.60) 5-09-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-09-2006 Amends § 10.60.030, bus stops (10.60) 5-09-2006 Amends § 10.64.010, loading zones and taxi stands (10.64) 5-23-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-23-2006 Amends § 10.64.010, loading zones and taxi stands (10.64) 6-13-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-27-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 1-14-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 1-28-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-11-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-25-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-11-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-25-2003 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.64.010, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones (10.44, 10.64) 4-08-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-13-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-27-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-10-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-24-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 8-26-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 9-09-2003 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.64.010, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones (10.44, 10.64) 9-23-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-14-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-12-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-25-2003 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 12-23-2003 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.60.030, handicapped parking spaces and bus stops (10.44, 10.60) 1-23-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 7-25-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 9-12-2006 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.60.030, handicapped parking spaces and bus stops (10.44, 10.60) 9-27-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-10-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-24-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-14-2006 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.64.010, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones (10.44, 10.64) 11-28-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 12-12-2006 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-13-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-27-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-13-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-27-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-10-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-24-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-8-2007 Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.64.010, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones (10.44, 10.64) 6-12-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-19-2007 Amends § 10.60.030, bus stops (10.60) 6-26-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 8-28-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 9-25-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 10-23-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 11-27-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 12-11-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 12-26-2007 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 1-22-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-13-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 2-26-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3-25-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 4-22-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 5-13-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-10-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 6-24-2008 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44)  
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance Number 3121 Repeals Ord. 3098, stopping, standing and parking (10.28) 3122 Amends Ch. 118-14(B)(2) of prior code, sewer rates (13.16) 3123-3124 (Not available) 3125 Amends Ch. 141-145 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.08) 3126 Amends Ch. 141-117 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3127 Amends zoning map and § 40-116 of prior code, zoning (Special) 3128 Amends § 1 of Ord. 3090, Elizabethport II redevelopment plan (Special) 3129-3132 (Not available) 3133 Amends Ch. 141-133 of Art. II of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.12) 3134 Amends Ch. 141-145 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.08) 3135-3138 (Not available) 3139 Amends Ch. 141-57 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.36) 3140 Amends Ch. 141-116, Schedule I of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3141-3144 (Not available) 3145 Adds Ch. 102A to prior code, adopt a park or lot program (12.52) 3146-3147 (Not available) 3148 Amends Art. I, Ch. 141, § 81 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.16) 3149-3150 (Not available) 3151 Adds Ch. 82D to prior code, laser pointers (9.40) 3152 Adds Ch. 82E to prior code, stink bombs (9.44) 3153 Amends Ch. 89-28 of prior code, violations and penalties (8.32) 3154 Amends Ch. 141-62(A) of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.36) 3155 Amends Chs. 48-9-E and 48-9F of prior code, alcoholic beverage licenses (5.08) 3156 Repeals and replaces Ch. 90 of prior code, autocabs and limousine services (5.20) 3157 Amends Ch. 141-83, violations and penalties (10.16) 3158 (Not available) 3159 Amends Ch. 20, § 2 of prior code, police department (2.56) 3160 Amends Ch. 48-9 of prior code, requires notice of license transfers (5.08) 3161-3163 (Not available) 3164 Amends Ch. 48-9F of prior code, license transfers (5.08) 3165 Amends Ch. 20, § 2 of prior code, police department (2.56) 3166 (Not available) 3167 Amends Ch. 141-117, Schedule II of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3168-3171 (Not available) 3172 Amends Ch. 141-117 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3173 Amends Ch. 141-117 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3174 Amends Ch. 141-117 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.28) 3175-3176 (Not available) 3177 Adds subsection G to § 9 of Ord. 3110; amends subsection E of § 9 of Ord. 3110, real property tax rebates (Not codified) 3178 Amends Ch. 141-57 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.36) 3179-3180 (Not available) 3181 Amends Chs. 80-13 and 80-20 of prior code, garbage collection (8.24) 3182 Adds subsection I to § 9 of Ch. 146 of prior code, vendors and peddlers (5.116) 3183 Amends Ch. 20, § 2 of prior code, police department (2.56) 3184-3187 (Not available) 3188 Amends Chs. 133-1 and 133-2 of prior code, taxicab regulations (5.100) 3189 Amends zoning map and § 40-116 of prior code, zoning (Special) 3190-3193 (Not available) 3194 Repeals § 4-61D of prior code (2.32) 3195 Repeals Ch. 4-71 of prior code (Repealer) 3196 (Not available) 3197 Amends Art. I, Ch. 141, § 81 of prior code, vehicles and traffic (10.16) 3198-3200 (Not available) 3201 Amends Chs. 141-57, 141-70, 141-114, 141-116, 141-117, 141-118, 143-14, surcharge for the New Jersey Spinal Cord Research Fund (10.28, 10.36, 10.40, 10.44) 3202 Amends Ord. 2779 to extend expiration date to 6-14-05 (3.12) 3203 Handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3270 Adds Ch. 56 to prior code, scooters (10.76) 3282 Repeals and replaces Art. XXII, Ch. 4 of prior code, department of planning and community development (2.48) 3283 Repeals and replaces Art. XXI, Ch. 4 of prior code, department of neighborhood services (2.44) 3284 Repeals and replaces Art. IX, Ch. 4 of prior code, department of health and human services (2.36) 3302 Adds Ch. 60A to prior code, solicitation of contributions from motorists on roadways (5.96) 3311 Amends Ch. 126, § 29 of prior code, street excavations (12.08) 3325 Amends Ch. 65 of prior code, city contracts (2.92) 3343 Amends Ch. 133, §§ 9, 14, and 17 of prior code, taxicabs (5.100) 3348 Adds Art. XXII, Ch. 4, § 13; amends Art. XXII, Ch. 4, § 1 of prior code, bureau of cultural and heritage affairs (2.48) 3355 Adds Ch. 133, §§ 19(F), 46; amends Ch. 133, §§ 15(B), 35, 37 of prior code, taxicabs (5.100) 3356 Adds Ch. 90, § 9(L) to prior code, limousine equipment and maintenance (5.20) 3379 Amends Ch. 20, § 2 of prior code, police department (2.56) 3383 Adds Ch. 90, § 17 to prior code, autocabs and limousine services (5.20) 3390 Amends Ch. 60, § 6(A) of prior code, canvassing and soliciting (5.28) 3391 Amends Ch. 66, § 3 of prior code, public dance halls (5.64) 3392 Amends Ch. 68, § 14 of prior code, kennel and pet shop fees (6.04) 3393 Amends Ch. 72B, § 4 of prior code, festivals (12.56) 3394 Amends Ch. 109, § 5 of prior code, public telephones (12.40) 3395 Amends Ch. 123, § 28 of prior code, special sales and occupations (5.32) 3396 Amends Ch. 146, § 8 of prior code, vendors and peddlers (5.116) 3410 Amends Ch. 48, § 3 of prior code, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 3467 Adds Ch. 141A to prior code, pedestrians crossing (10.80) 3480 Repeals Ch. 133, § 39 of prior code (Repealer) 3485 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3486 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3487 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3488 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3489 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3490 Adds Ch. 133, § 5(E)-(K) to prior code, taxicabs (5.100) 3491 Amends Ch. 72B, § 4(A)(2) of prior code, festivals (12.56) 3492 Amends Art. III, Ch. 2, § 7 of prior code, general penalty (1.12) 3493 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3494 Amends Ch. 48, § 3 of prior code, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 3495 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3496 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3497 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3498 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3907) 3499 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3500 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3501 Amends prior code § 141-117 (10.28.040), parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3502 Amends Ch. 133, § 19(A) of prior code, taxicabs (5.100) 3503 Amends Ch. 90, § 9(G) of prior code, autocabs and limousine services (5.20) 3504 Amends Ch. 133, § 3(C) of prior code, taxicabs (5.100) 3505 Adds Art. I, Ch. 20, § 3 to prior code, police department (2.56) 3506 Amends Ch. 4, § 36(G) of prior code, purchasing (3.08) 3507 Accepts real property from Apple Tree Village, LLC (Special) 3508 Bonds (Special) 3509 Bonds (Special) 3510 Amends Ord. 3467, pedestrians crossing (10.80) 3511 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3512 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3513 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3514 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3515 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3516 Amends Ord. 1747, annual compensation for classified and unclassified positions (Special) 3517 Amends Ord. 3486, acquisition of real property (Special) 3518 Repeals Ch. 36, §§ 1-6, Ch. 38, §§ 95-114, 129-133, Ch. 48, § 39, Ch. 52, §§ 23, 24, Ch. 58, § 23, Ch. 66A, §§ 1-4, Ch. 72, § 3, Ch. 72B, § 14, Ch. 77, §§ 10-21, Ch. 83, § 4, Ch. 91A, § 8, Ch. 97A, § 5, Ch. 99, § 3, Ch. 111, § 9, Ch. 123, §§ 26, 42.4, Ch. 134, § 14 of prior code (Repealer) 3519 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3520 Adopts South Front Street redevelopment plan (Special) 3521 Amends Ch. 102A of prior code (Ch. 12.52), adopt a park, lot and street program (12.52) 3522 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3523 Authorizes right-of-entry agreement (Special) 3524 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3525 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3526 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3527 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3528 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3529 Adds Ch. 82, § 8 to prior code, graffiti (9.12) 3530 Adds Ch. 97B of prior code, regulation of the hours of operation of certain retail establishments (5.71) 3531 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3532 Grants permit to Broadway Builders, LLC to install sanitary sewer line (Special) 3533 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3534 Amends Ord. 3441, acquisition of temporary and permanent easement (Special) 3535 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3536 2004 budget (Special) 3537 Adds Ch. 132A to prior code (Ch. 3.40), hotel and motel room occupancy tax (3.40) 3538 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3539 Amends Ord. 1747, annual compensation for classified and unclassified positions (Special) 3540 Amends prior code § 38-266 (7.64.050), vital statistics (8.76) 3541 Amends prior code § 141-144 (10.08.010), stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3542 Establishes moratorium on the enforcement of Ord. 3530, regulation of the hours of the operation of certain retail establishments (5.71) 3543 Amends Ord. 3450, renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3544 Accepts dedication of portion of land (Special) 3545 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3546 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3547 Amends prior code § 141-114 (10.28.030), parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3548 Amends Ord. 3435, acquisition of temporary and permanent easement (Special) 3549 Amends Chs. 141 and 143 of prior code (§§ 10.12.030, 10.12.060, 10.16.030, 10.20.040, 10.28.020, 10.28.040, 10.28.050, 10.28.090, 10.28.100, 10.32.160, 10.36.020, 10.36.060, 10.40.020, 10.40.050, 10.44.020, 10.44.030 and 10.72.050), vehicles and traffic (10.12, 10.16, 10.20, 10.28, 10.32, 10.36, 10.40, 10.44, 10.72) 3550 Amends prior code § 143-14A (10.44.030), handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3551 Amends prior code § 141-144 (10.08.010), stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3552 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3553 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3926) 3554 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3555 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3556 Amends prior code § 141-100 (10.04.050), one way streets (10.04) 3557 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3558 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3559 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3560 Bonds (Special) 3561 Bonds (Special) 3562 (Void-Purchaser not present) 3563 (Void-Purchaser not present) 3564 (Removed) 3565 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3566 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3567 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3568 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3569 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3570 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3571 (Tabled) 3572 Authorizes private sale of city-owned property (Special) 3573 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3574 Amends prior code § 141-145 (10.08.030), stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3575 Amends prior code § 141-100 (10.04.050), one way streets (10.04) 3576 Amends prior code § 141-144 (10.08.010), stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3577 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3578 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3579 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3580 Appropriations (Special) 3581 Amends prior code § 141-117 (10.28.040), parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3582 Amends prior code § 141-117 (10.28.040), parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3583 Grants permit to Clark Place Associates, LLC to extend the existing sanitary sewer line (Special) 3584 Grants permit to Mr. Norman Field to extend the existing sanitary sewer line (Special) 3585 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3586 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3587 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3588 Amends § 2.60.090, fire department (2.90) 3589 Sale of certain real property (Repealed by 3856) 3590 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3591 Amends prior code § 141-100 (10.04.050), one way streets (10.04) 3592 Grants encroachment access permit (Special) 3593 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3594 Amends Ord. 1747, annual compensation for classified and unclassified positions (Special) 3595 Authorizes sublease agreement (Special) 3596 Amends prior code § 141-117 (10.28.040), no parking zones (10.28) 3597 Amends prior code § 141-118 (10.28.050), no stopping zones (10.28) 3598 Grants encroachment access permit (Special) 3599 Regulates statutory authority of Verizon New Jersey, Inc. (Special) 3600 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3601 Amends Kapkowski Road redevelopment plan (Special) 3602 Amends prior code § 141-145 (10.08.030), intersections (10.08) 3603 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3604 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3605 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3606 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3607 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3608 Amends prior code Chapters 141 and 143, parking and moving violations (10.12, 10.16, 10.20, 10.28, 10.32, 10.36, 10.40, 10.44, 10.72) 3609 Amends prior code § 38-266 (7.64.050), entitled fees (7.64) 3610 Amends prior code § 141-117 (10.28.040), no parking zones (10.28) 3611 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3612 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3613 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3614 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3615 Demolition and construction permit (Special) 3616 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3617 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3618 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3619 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3620 Appropriations (Special) 3621 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3622 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3623 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking (10.44) 3624 Amends § 114-117 (10.28.040), no parking zones (10.28) 3625 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3626 Taking of real property (Special) 3627 Grants encroachment access permit (Special) 3628 Permission to perform delineation of groundwater contamination (Special) 3629 Refunding bond ordinance (Special) 3630 Refunding bond ordinance (Special) 3631 Adopts 2005 budget (Special) 3632 Grants an easement to North Avenue East (Special) 3633 Appropriations (Special) 3634 Appropriations (Special) 3635 Appropriations (Special) 3636 Appropriations (Special) 3637 Appropriations (Special) 3638 Grants permit to Manbar Developers, LLC to extend the existing sanitary sewer line (Special) 3639 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3640 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3641 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3642 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3643 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3644 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3908) 3645 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3646 Amends Elizabethport Waterfront Redevelopment Plan (Special) 3647 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3648 Amends § 5.56.070, massage parlors (5.56) 3649 Amends § 7.64.050, vital statistics (7.64) 3650 Amends §§ 15.08.020 and 15.08.040, fire prevention code (15.08) 3651 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3652 Appropriations (Special) 3653 Appropriations (Special) 3654 Appropriations (Special) 3655 Authorizes renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3656 Grants permit to construct storm sewer (Special) 3657 Amends § 5.64.050, public dance halls (5.64) 3658 Adds Ch. 10.77, motor scooters (10.77) 3659 Designates name of streets (Special) 3660 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3661 Appropriations (Special) 3662 Appropriations (Special) 3663 Authorizes sale of certain property (Special) 3664 Accepts dedication of portion of land (Special) 3665 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3666 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3667 Appropriations (Special) 3668 Amends § 5.70.250, rent control and stabilization (5.70) 3669 Amends Ord. 3198, authorizes acquisition of property (Special) 3670 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3671 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3672 Appropriations (Special) 3673 Authorizes purchase of property (Special) 3674 Street vacation (Special) 3675 Salaries (Special) 3676 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3677 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3678 Adds Art. XIV, Ch. 40, §§ 201-210 to prior code, wireless telecommunications towers and antennas (17.56) 3679 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3680 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3681 (Number not used) 3682 Amends § 17.16.010, zoning board of adjustment (17.16) 3683 Authorizes transfer of city-owned land (Special) 3684 Amends Art. VI, Ch. 4, § 48 of prior code, department of law (2.40) 3685 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3686 Amends § 10.28.070, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3687 Amends § 10.28.030, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3688 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3689 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3690 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3691 Authorizes relocation of sewer line (Special) 3692 Authorizes increase of fee on real property and certain construction easement (Special) 3693 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3694 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3695 Authorizes purchase of property (Special) 3696 Authorizes acceptance and transfer of property (Special) 3697 Acquisition and installation of equipment (Special) 3698 Amends prior code § 20-3 (2.56.040), police department (2.56) 3699 Amends § 10.28.030, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3700 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3701 Refunding bond ordinance (Special) 3702 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3703 Authorizes acquisition of property (Special) 3704 Authorizes acquisition of property (Special) 3705 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3706 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3707 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions, generally (10.28) 3708 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3709 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3710 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3711 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3712 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3713 (Tabled) 3714 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3715 Amends § 10.44.010, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3716 (Vetoed) 3717 Amends Art. XXII, Ch. 4 of prior code, department of planning and community development (2.48) 3718 Amends Ord. 3696, authorizes conveyance of property and lease agreement (Special) 3719 Authorizes the grant of the construction and maintenance easement (Special) 3720 Appropriations (Special) 3721 Amends § 8.48.020, noise control (8.48) 3722 Adds § 15.04.100, uniform construction codes (15.04) 3723 Amends Ord. 3589, authorizes transfer of certain real properties (Special) 3724 Amends §§ 3.12.120 and 3.12.160, tax abatement for certain residential properties (3.12) 3725 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3726 Amends §§ 7.08.030, 7.24.050, 7.36.010, 7.40.010 and 7.52.130, permit and license fees (7.08, 7.24, 7.36, 7.52) 3727 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3728 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3729 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3730 Amends Ord. 3158 to extend expiration date to 8-31-2010 (Special) 3731 Amends South Front Street redevelopment plan (Special) 3732 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3733 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3734 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3735 Salaries (Special) 3736 Authorizes renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3737 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3738 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3739 Municipal budget Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) (Special) 3740 Amends Ords. 1747 and 1748, annual compensation for classified and unclassified positions (Special) 3741 Amends § 2.60.090, fire department (2.60) 3742 Amends § 2.56.110, police department (2.56) 3743 Establishes procedures for the placement, replacement or removal of public utilities poles and underground facilities (Special) 3744 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3745 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3746 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3747 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3748 Appropriations (Special) 3749 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3750 Approves and adopts Durant development plan (Special) 3751 Amends § 2.68.100, municipal court (2.68) 3752 Amends Ord. 3616, authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3753 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3754 Adds § 3.12.031; amends § 3.12.020, tax abatement for certain residential properties (3.12) 3755 Grants permit to Sunesys, Inc., to install fiber optic cable and underground conduits (Special) 3756 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3757 Appropriations (Special) 3758 Adds Ch. 13.20; repeals § 6.04.250 stormwater regulations (13.20) 3759 Amends § 8.32.020, litter control (8.32) 3760 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3761 Amends § 10.16.010, weight limits (10.16) 3762 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3763 Authorizes sale of city-owned properties (Special) 3764 Amends §§ 17.52.010, 17.52.020, 17.52.040, 17.52.090 and 17.52.100, fees (17.52) 3765 Repeals and replaces Ch. 12.32, newspaper vending machines (12.32) 3766 Grants permit to CLN investors to construct sanitary sewer main (Special) 3767 Amends § 10.28.070, parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3768 Amends Ord. 3655, renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3769 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3770 (Defeated) 3771 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3772 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3773 Grants municipal consent for the operation of a cable system (Special) 3774 Authorizes sale of city-owned property (Repealed by 3801) 3775 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3776 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3825) 3777 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3805) 3778 Appropriations (Special) 3779 Appropriations (Special) 3780 Authorizes sale of property (Special) 3781 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3782 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3783 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3784 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3785 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3786 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3787 Amends Ord. 3753, acquisition of real property (Special) 3788 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3826) 3789 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3790 Adds § 17.36.160, zoning (17.36) 3791 Adopts proposed amendment to Elizabethport II redevelopment plan (Special) 3792 Bonds (Special) 3793 Appropriations (Special) 3794 Appropriations (Special) 3795 Appropriations (Special) 3796 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3797 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3798 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3799 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3800 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3801 Repeals Ord. 3774, sale of city-owned property (Special) 3802 Accepts dedication of portion of land (Special) 3803 Accepts dedication of portion of land (Special) 3804 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions (10.28) 3805 Repeals Ord. 3777, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3806 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3807 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3808 Authorizes execution of deed notice (Special) 3809 Amends § 17.40.010, zoning (17.40) 3810 Adds [amends] § 17.36.150, zoning (17.36) 3811 Accepts real properties from Elizabeth Development Company (Special) 3812 Amends Ord. 3285, approves and adopts Trumbull Street redevelopment plan (Special) 3813 Amends Ord. 3069, special assessment for portion of Kapkowski Road redevelopment area (Special) 3814 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3815 (No action taken) 3816 Amends Ord. 3720, appropriations (Special) 3817 Repeals Ord. 3466, East Grand Street redevelopment area (Special) 3818 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3819 (No action taken) 3820 Amends § 10.08.080, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3821 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3822 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3823 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3824 (On hold) 3825 Repeals Ord. 3776, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3826 Repeals Ord. 3788, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3827 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3828 Amends Ord. 3239, bonds (Special) 3829 Amends Ord. 3460, appropriations and bonds (Special) 3830 Reappropriations (Special) 3831 Amends Elizabethport II redevelopment plan (Special) 3832 Repeals and replaces § 17.44.010 [Ch. 17.44], zoning (17.44) 3833 Amends § 13.16.130, sewer service system (13.16) 3834 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3835 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3836 (Tabled-No further consideration) 3837 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3838 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3839 Bonds (Special) 3840 Municipal budget Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) (Special) 3841 Amends Kapkowski Road redevelopment plan (Special) 3842 Amends Elizabethport Phase II redevelopment plan (Special) 3843 Amends Midtown Elizabeth redevelopment plan (Special) 3844 Stormwater management (13.24) 3845 Adds Ch. 17.38, affordable housing regulations (Repealed by 3966) 3846 (Pulled) 3847 Bonds (Special) 3848 Reappropriations (Special) 3849 Municipal budget Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) (Special) 3850 Amends Ord. 3749, acquisition of real property (Special) 3851 Authorizes license agreement (Special) 3852 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3853 Street vacation (Special) 3854 Appropriations (Special) 3855 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3856 Authorizes transfer of certain real properties; repeals Ord. 3589 (Special) 3857 Amends Ord. 3780, sale of real property (Special) 3858 Amends Ord. 3853, street vacation (Special) 3859 Bonds (Special) 3860 Amends Ord. 3844, stormwater management (13.24) 3861 Bonds (Special) 3862 Amends § 5.100.260, taxicabs (5.100) 3863 Amends Ord. 2660, towing of vehicles from private property (Not codified) 3864 Amends Ord. 3768, renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3865 Authorizes renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3866 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3867 Accepts dedication of portion of land (Special) 3868 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3869 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3870 Amends § 5.70.250, rent control and stabilization (5.70) 3871 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3872 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3873 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3874 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (Repealed by 3881) 3875 Accepts temporary and permanent water main easements (Special) 3876 Authorizes acceptance, conveyance and dedication of portion of land (Special) 3877 Amends § 5.08.110, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 3878 Appropriations and bonds (Special) 3879 Adds § 15.04.045, uniform construction codes (15.04) 3880 Amends Ord. 3651, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3881 Repeals Ord. 3874, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3882 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3883 Repeals Ord. 3369, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3884 Amends §§ 10.28.030, 10.28.040 and 10.28.070, parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3885 Street vacation (Special) 3886 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3887 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3888 Amends Ord. 3526, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3889 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3890 Amends § 9.12.040, graffiti (9.12) 3891 (Defeated) 3892 Adds § 17.08.015, zoning (17.08) 3893 Adds § 15.24.210, abatement of dangerous buildings (15.24) 3894 Amends Ord. 3734, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3895 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3896 (Tabled) 3897 (Tabled) 3898 Amends § 10.28.040, parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3899 Amends Ch. 3.40 [adds Ch. 3.41], hotel use and occupancy tax (3.41) 3900 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3901 Amends § 10.08.010, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3902 Grants permit to 14-22 High Street Associates, LLC to construct sanitary sewer main (Special) 3903 Grants permit to BMG Contractors to construct sanitary sewer extension main (Special) 3904 Amends § 10.28.030, parking restrictions generally (10.28) 3905 Amends § 17.28.010, zoning (17.28) 3906 Amends § 17.36.110, zoning (17.36) 3907 Repeals Ord. 3498, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3908 Repeals Ord. 3644, handicapped parking spaces (Repealer) 3909 Adds § 17.32.100, zoning (17.32) 3910 Adds [amends] § 17.36.160, zoning (17.36) 3911 (Tabled) 3912 Municipal budget Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) (Special) 3913 Authorizes acquisition of real property (Special) 3914 Appropriations and bonds (Special) 3915 Appropriations and bonds (Special) 3916 Appropriations and bonds (Special) 3917 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3918 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3919 Adds § 2.48.041, department of planning and community development (2.48) 3920 Adds § 2.48.042, department of planning and community development (2.48) 3921 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3922 Amends Ord. 3752, renewal of lease agreement (Special) 3923 Grants sewer connection permit to Bohler Engineering, PC (Special) 3924 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3925 Appropriations and bonds (Special) 3926 Amends § 10.44.020; repeals Ord. 3553 (10.44) 3927 Amends Ord. 3250, lease agreement (Special) 3928 Repeals § 15.12.870 (Repealer) 3929 Appropriations (Special) 3930 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3931 Grants sewer connection permit to Aveiton Builders, Inc. (Special) 3932 Amends § 2.64.040, recreation department (2.64) 3933 Adds Ch. 12.42, clothing storage bins and receptacles (12.42) 3934 Accepts wide exclusive water line easement and wide nonexclusive construction easement in connection with water main extension at 670-706 Dowd Avenue, from Portview Properties, LLC (Special) 3935 Amends § 5.100.220, taxicabs (5.100) 3936 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3937 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3938 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3939 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3940 Appropriations (Special) 3941 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3942 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3943 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3944 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3945 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3946 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3947 Grants encroachment permit (Special) 3948 Appropriations (Special) 3949 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3950 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking spaces (10.44) 3951 Amends Ord. 3766, permit CLN Investors, LLC to construct sanitary sewer main (Special) 3952 Amends Ord. 3465, lease agreement (Special) 3953 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3954 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3955 (Pulled) 3956 Amends Ch. 3.24, tax on fees for parking (3.24) 3957 Amends § 10.08.030, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3958 Amends § 10.08.020, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3959 Amends § 10.08.010, stop intersections, yield intersections, through streets and no passing zones (10.08) 3960 Amends § 5.100.220, taxicabs (5.100) 3961 Amends § 6.04.140, kennels (6.04) 3962 Amends Ord. 3865, lease agreement (Special) 3963 Amends Ord. 3864, lease agreement (Special) 3964 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3965 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3966 Repeals Ord. 3845, affordable housing regulations (Repealer) 3967 Authorizes lease agreement (Special) 3968 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3969 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3970 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3971 Amends § 5.70.250, rent control and stabilization (5.70) 3972 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3973 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44) 3974 Amends § 8.64.060, shopping carts (8.64) 3975 Adds §§ 5.80.070 and 5.80.080; amends §§ 5.80.010-5.80.030, 5.80.050 and 5.80.060, sale of spray paint and ink markers (5.80) 3976 Amends § 10.44.020, handicapped parking space (10.44)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of Elizabeth, New Jersey beginning with Supplement No. 10, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section this Code 2660  4-12-1994 Towing of vehicles from private property 1-10       Added Ch. 5.51, §§ 5.51.010-5.51.100 3264 10-10-2000 Barbershops and beauty shops/salons 1-3       Rpld Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010-5.24.040 1-3       Added Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010-5.24.030 3273 12-12-2000 Conditional uses Ch. 17.32, Sch. III 3291  2-13-2001 Amusement games permitted       Added 5.12.130 3863 11-28-2006 Storage facilities for towers 1 5.51.020 A. Res. of  7-22-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 3978  8-26-2008 Lease agreement Not codified 3979  8-26-2008 Reappropriation Not codified 3980  8-26-2008 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 3981  8-26-2008 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 3982  8-26-2008 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of  8-26-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  9- 9-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 3983 10-28-2008 Sanitary sewer extension permit Not codified 3984 10-28-2008 Encroachment permit Not codified 3985 10-28-2008 Encroachment permit Not codified 3986 10-28-2008 Easement agreement Not codified 3987  9-23-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3988  9-23-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3989  9-23-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-23-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 3990 10-14-2008 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 3991 10-14-2008 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of 10-14-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 3992 10-28-2008 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 3993 10-28-2008 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 3994 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3995 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3996 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3997 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3998 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 3999 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4000 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4001 10-28-2008 Licenses-Applications-Fees-Term 1       Added 7.52.130 C. Res. of 10-28-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4002 11-12-2008 Vacant and foreclosing residential properties 1-7       Added Tit. 8, Ch. 8.80, §§ 8.80.010-8.80.070 4003 10-28-2008 Deed notice Not codified 4004 10-28-2008 Lease agreement Not codified 4005 11-25-2008 Appropriations Not codified 4006 11-12-2008 Encroachment permit Not codified 4007 11-12-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4008 11-25-2008 Lease agreement Not codified 4009 11-25-2008 Lease agreement Not codified 4010 11-25-2008 State health benefits plan Not codified 4011  1-13-2009 Sidewalk and road opening permit Not codified Res. of 12- 9-2008 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4012  1-13-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4013  1-13-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4014 12-23-2008 Approval to install curb indentation Not codified 4015  1-27-2009 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4016  1-27-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4017  1-27-2009 License transfers-Proximity to existing licensed premises-Exceptions 1 5.08.100 F. 4018  2-10-2009 Bonds Not codified 4019  2-10-2009 Computation of charges 1 13.16.130 B.2. 2, 3 13.16.130 B.2.a., b. 4 13.16.130 H. 4020  2-10-2009 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4021  2-24-2009 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 J. 4022  2-24-2009 Zoning map Not codified Res. of  2-24-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4023  3-10-2009 Zoning map Not codified 4024  2-24-2009 Zoning map Not codified 4025  2-24-2009 Zoning map Not codified 4026  3-10-2009 Sanitary sewer main Not codified 4027  3-10-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified 4028  3-10-2009 Tax abatement for certain residential properties 1 3.12.020 2 3.12.030 F. 3 3.12.120 4029  3-10-2009 Donation clothing bins 2-4       Added Tit. 5, Ch. 5.97, §§ 5.97.010-5.97.030 4030  3-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  3-24-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4031  5-12-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified 4032  3-24-2009 Sale of property Not codified 4033  3-24-2009 Lease agreement Not codified 4034  3-24-2009 Lease agreement Not codified 4035  4-14-2009 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4036  4-14-2009 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4037  4-14-2009 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4038  4-14-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4039  4-28-2009 Annual license fees 1 5.08.030 A. 4040  4-28-2009 Street dedication Not codified 4041  4-28-2009 PILOT financial agreement Not codified Res. of  5-12-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4042  5-26-2009 Containers to be covered at all times; leaking/discharging prohibited I-V       Added 8.16.060 4043  5-26-2009 Private storm drain inlet retrofitting I-V       Added 17.44.060 4044  5- 6-2009 Fertilizer application I-V       Added 15.12.181 4045  5- 6-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  5-12-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4046  6- 9-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  6- 9-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4047  6- 9-2009 Transfer of properties Not codified 4048  6-23-2009 Street vacation Not codified 4049  6-23-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4050  6-23-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4051  6-23-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4052  6-23-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4053  6- 9-2009 Handicapped parking spaces Tabled Ord. of  7-22-2009 Cost of living allowance Not codified 4054  7-28-2009 Lease agreement Not codified 4055  7-28-2009 Lease agreement Not codified 4056  7-28-2009 Police department services-Fees 1 2.56.060 G. 4057  7-28-2009 Administration and personnel 1 2.56.110 4058  7-28-2009 Organization and personnel 1 2.60.090 4059  7-28-2009 Salary and compensation Not codified Res. of  7-28-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4060  8-25-2009 Street dedication Not codified 4061  8-25-2009 Designation of meter zones and hours of parking 1 10.36.020 A. 4062  8-25-2009 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4063  8-25-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified 4064  8-25-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified 4065  8-25-2009 Cost of living allowance Not codified Res. of  8-25-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4066  9- 8-2009 Local motor vehicle rental tax 1-8       Added Ch. 3.50, §§ 3.50.010-3.50.080 4067  9- 8-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4068  9- 8-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4069  9- 8-2009 PILOT financial agreement Not codified Res. of  9- 8-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4070  9-15-2009 Amendment to Midtown redevelopment/rehabilitation plan Not codified 4071 10- 6-2009 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4072  9-22-2009 Design standards for facades within all commercial zones       Added 17.36.145 Res. of  9-22-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4073 10-13-2009 Lease agreement Not codified 4074 10-13-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4075 10-13-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-13-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4076 10-27-2009 License agreement Not codified 4077 10-27-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified 4078 10-27-2009 Sign regulations 1 17.48.020, 17.48.030 17.48.060 A., B.       Added 17.48.061       Added 17.48.090 J.       Added 17.48.160, 17.48.170 Res. of 10-27-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4079 11-10-2009 Sale of motor vehicles on public rights-of-way prohibited; exceptions 1       Added 10.72.060 4080 11-10-2009 Handicapped parking space 1 10.44.020 4081 11-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4082 11-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4083 11-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4084 11-10-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4085 11-24-2009 Computation of charges 1-4 13.16.130 B.2., 3., H. 4086 11-24-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-24-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4087 12- 8-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4088 12-22-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4089 12-22-2009 Acquisition of property Not codified 4090 12-22-2009 Acquisition of property Not codified 4091 12-22-2009 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of 12-22-2009 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4092  1-12-2010 Acquisition of property Not codified 4093  1-12-2010 Acquisition of property Not codified 4094  1-12-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  1-12-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4095  1-26-2010 Lease agreement Not codified 4096  1-26-2010 PILOT financial agreement Not codified 4097  1-26-2010 Sidewalk cafes 1-11       Added Tit. 7, Ch. 7.54, §§ 7.54.010-7.54.110 Res. of  1-26-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4098  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Tabled 4099  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Not codified 4100  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Tabled 4101  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Not codified 4102  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Tabled 4103  2- 9-2010 Zoning map Not codified 4104  2- 9-2010 Municipal consent for operation of cable television 
system Not codified 4105  2- 9-2010 Autobuses 1-3 5.16.010-5.16.030 4-8       Added 5.16.035-5.16.039 9       Added 5.16.041 10       Added 5.16.051 11       Added 5.16.053 12, 13       Added 5.16.075, 5.16.076 14       Added 5.16.230 4106  2- 9-2010 Emergency medical services 1       Rpld 2.56.020 H. 2       Added 2.60.415 4107  2- 9-2010 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 M. 4108  2- 9-2010 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 N. 4109  2- 9-2010 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 K. Res. of  2- 9-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4110  2-23-2010 Annual compensation for classified and unclassified 
positions Not codified 4111  2-23-2010 Administration and personnel 1, 2 2.56.110 4112  2-23-2010 Organization and personnel 1, 2 2.60.090 4113  2-23-2010 Placement for collection-Hours 1 8.24.070 4114  2-23-2010 Approving application for state incentive grant Not codified Res. of  2-23-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4115  3- 9-2010 Tire repair shops 1-16       Added Tit. 5, Ch. 5.54, §§ 5.54.010-5.54.160 4116  3- 9-2010 Lease agreement Not codified 4117  3- 9-2010 Temporary easement agreement Not codified 4118  3- 9-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4119  3- 9-2010 Easement agreement Not codified Res. of  3- 9-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4120  3-23-2010 Easement agreement Not codified 4121  3-23-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  3-23-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4122  4-13-2010 Acquisition of property Not codified 4123  4-13-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4124  4-13-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4125  4-13-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4126  4-13-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4127  4-13-2010 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 O. 4128  4-13-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4129  4-13-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  4-13-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4130  4-27-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4131  4-27-2010 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 Res. of  4-27-2010 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 FF. Res. of  4-27-2010 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 GG. Res. of  5-11-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4132  5-25-2010 Elizabeth Avenue special improvement district Not codified 4133  5-25-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4134  5-25-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4135  5-25-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4136  5-25-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  5-25-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4137  6- 9-2010 Appropriations Not codified 4138  6-22-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4139  6-22-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  7-27-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4141 Fees and fines charged for city services Tabled 4142  7-27-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Ord. of  7-27-2010 Cost of living allowance Not codified 4144  8-24-2010 Residence in city required-Exception 1 2.104.030 4145  8-24-2010 Salary and compensation Not codified 4146  9-14-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4147  8-24-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4148  8-24-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4149  8-24-2010 Fees and fines charged for city services 1 2.32.070 E., F. 2 2.56.060 A.-K., M. 3 2.64.040 E.1., 2., F.1., 2., 6., 7., G.-N.       Added 2.64.040 O., P. 4 2.100.020 5 5.12.020 D.8. 6 5.12.050 A., B. 7 5.16.037 B. 8 5.20.030 B. 9 5.20.040 10       Added 5.24.050 11 5.28.060 A. 12 5.32.210 A.1.-5. 13 5.40.040 14 5.44.020 B. 15 5.52.110 16 5.56.040 17 5.60.040 18 5.64.030 19 5.72.070 20 5.76.040 A. 21 5.80.040 A. 22 5.88.020 B. 23 5.92.030 A. 24 5.96.030 C. 25 5.100.070 26 5.100.110 B. 27 5.100.150 B. 28 5.100.370 C. 29 5.104.020 30 5.108.070 A. 31 5.112.010 D. 32 5.116.080 A.-C. 33 7.24.050 A. 34 7.40.010 B. 35 7.48.010 36 7.52.130 A. 37 7.64.050 A.-C., F. 38 6.04.220 39 8.16.050 40 8.60.440 41 12.04.110 B. 42 12.08.070 43 12.08.080 44 12.36.040 D. 45       Added 12.44.025 46 12.56.040 A.1., 2. 47 10.32.160 A., C. 48 10.12.030 49 10.16.030 50 10.20.040 A. 51 10.28.100 52 10.36.060 53 10.40.020 54 10.40.050 55 10.48.040 56 10.56.040 57 16.04.060 A. 58 15.08.040 59 17.52.010 60 17.52.020 61-63 17.52.040-17.52.060 64 17.52.080 65 12.04.110 B. Res. of  8-24-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4150  9-14-2010 Small wind energy systems 1-10       Added Ch. 17.60, §§ 17.60.010-17.60.100 4151 Removed 4152 Removed 4153 Removed 4154  9-14-2010 Moratorium for issuance of summons and enforcement 1       Added 10.28.040 (note)       Added 10.28.050 (note) 4155  9-14-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-14-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4156  9-28-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4157  9-28-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4158  9-28-2010 When effective, expiration date 1 5.70.250 4159  9-28-2010 Lease agreement Not codified 4160  9-28-2010 Lease agreement Not codified Res. of  9-28-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 10-12-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 10-12-2010 Loading zone       Added 10.64.010 HH. Res. of 10-26-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4161 11- 9-2010 Bonds Not codified 4162 10-12-2010 Capacity of taxicabs 1 5.100.190 B. 4163 11- 9-2010 Lease agreement Not codified 4164 11- 9-2010 Street vacation Not codified 4165 11- 9-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4166 11- 9-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4167 11- 9-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4168 11- 9-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4169 11-23-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4170 11-23-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4171 11- 9-2010 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 L. Res. of 11- 9-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 11- 9-2010 Bus stops       Added 10.60.030 A.35.f. 4172 11-23-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4173 12-14-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4174 12-14-2010 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4175  1-25-2011 Vacant and foreclosing residential properties 1 8.80.030 2 8.80.020 4176 12-14-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4177 12-14-2010 Encroachment permit Not codified 4178 12-14-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-14-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4179 12-21-2010 York Street redevelopment plan Not codified 4180 12-28-2010 Riparian zones Not codified 4181 12-28-2010 Steep slopes Not codified 4182 12-28-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-28-2010 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4183  1- 11-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4184  1-25-2011 Approving application and financial agreement Not codified 4185  1-25-2011 Acquisition of property Not codified Res. of  1-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4186  2- 8-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4187  2- 8-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4188  2-22-2011 Barbershops and beauty shops/salons hours of operation 1 5.24.020 4189  2-22-2011 Mandatory recycling program 1 8.36.020 2       Added 8.36.055 3 8.36.080 4, 5       Added 8.36.085, 8.36.086 6 8.36.100 D. 4190  2-22-2011 Emergency appropriation Not codified 4191  2-22-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4192  2-22-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  2-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4193  3- 8-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4194  3- 8-2011 License requirement-Application and application fee-Bond requirements-Expiration date 1 5.88.020 B. Res. of  3- 8-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4195  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4196  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4197  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4198  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4199  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4200  3-22-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4201  3-22-2011 Constables 1       Added Ch. 2.56, Art. X, §§ 2.56.410-2.56.500 4202  3-22-2011 Cooking facilities required 1 15.12.420 Building security facilities 2 15.12.690 B. 4203  3-22-2011 Lease agreement Not codified 4204  3-22-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4205  3-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4206  3-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4207  3-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4208  3-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4209  4-26-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4210  4-12-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4211  4-12-2011 York Street redevelopment plan Not codified Res. of  4-12-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  4-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4212  5-10-2011 Lease agreement Not codified 4213  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4214  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4215  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4216  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4217  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  5-10-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4218  5-24-2011 Parking meter zones established-Designation of lots 1 10.32.160 Parking meters-Violations and penalties 2 10.36.060 4219  5-24-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4220  5-24-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-14-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4221  6-28-2011 Parking enforcement officer-Appointment 1 2.20.030 4222  6-28-2011 Oakwood Plaza redevelopment plan Not codified Res. of  6-28-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4223  7-26-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4224  7-26-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4225  7-26-2011 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4226  7-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4227  7-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4228  7-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4229  7-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  7-26-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4230  8-23-2011 Cost of living allowance Not codified 4231  8- 2-2011 Westminster Heights Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4232  8- 2-2011 Oaks at Westminster Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4233  8-23-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4234  8- 3-2011 Renaissance Apartments Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified Res. of  8-23-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4235  9-13-2011 Fees for municipal records, pamphlets and codes 1 2.100.020 Police department services-Fees established 2 2.56.060 4236  9-13-2011 Endorsement and filing of drug free zone maps Not codified 4237  9-13-2011 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 Forty-five-degree angle parking 2 10.28.070 4238  9-13-2011 Lease agreement Not codified 4239  9-13-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4240  9-13-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4241  9-13-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4242  9-13-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4243  9-13-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4244  9-13-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4245  9-13-2011 Tax abatement for certain residential properties-Expiration 1 3.12.160 4246  9-27-2011 Encroachment permit Not codified 4247  9-27-2011 Rescinding authorization to execute lease agreement Not codified 4248  9-27-2011 Lease agreement Not codified Res. of  9-27-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4249 10-11-2011 PILOT financial agreement Not codified 4250 10-11-2011 Festivals-Fees 1 12.56.040 4251 10-11-2011 Acquisition of vehicles Not codified 4252 10-11-2011 Appropriations Not codified Res. of 10-11-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 10-11-2011 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 II. 4253 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4254 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4255 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4256 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4257 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4259 11- 9-2011 Administration and personnel 1 2.56.110 B. 4260 11- 9-2011 Organization and personnel 1 2.60.090 B. 4261 11- 9-2011 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 Forty-five-degree angle parking 2 10.28.070 4262 11-22-2011 Appropriations Not codified 4263 11-22-2011 Office of relocation 1       Rpld 2.36.070 4264 11-22-2011 Office of relocation 1       Added 2.48.043 4265 11-22-2011 Street vacation Not codified Res. of 11-22-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 11-22-2011 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 JJ. 4266 12-13-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-13-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4267 12-27-2011 Easement agreement Not codified 4268 12-27-2011 Amendment to lease agreement Not codified 4269 12-27-2011 Renewal of lease agreement Not codified Res. of 12-27-2011 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4270  1-10-2012 Sale of property Not codified 4271  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4272  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4273  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4274  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4275  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4276  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4277  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4278  1-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4279  1-24-2012 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 M. Res. of  1-24-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4280  2-14-2012 Amends ordinance permitting Sunesys, LLC to install fiber optic cable Not codified 4281  2-14-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4282  2-14-2012 Bonds Not codified Res. of  2-14-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4283  2-28-2012 Kapkowski redevelopment plan Not codified 4284  2-28-2012 Trumbull Street redevelopment plan Not codified 4285  2-28-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4286  2-28-2012 Amendment of execution agreement Not codified 4287  2-28-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4288  2-28-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4289  2-28-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4290  3-13-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4291  3-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4292  3-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4293  3-27-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4294  3-27-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4295  3-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  3-27-2012 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 KK. 4296  4-10-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4297  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4298  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4299  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4300  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4301  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  4-10-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  4-24-2012 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 LL. 4302  5- 8-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4303  5- 8-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4304  5- 8-2012 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 Res. of  5- 8-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4305  5-22-2012 Appropriations Not codified 4306  5-22-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4307  5-22-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4308  5-22-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4309  5-22-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  5-22-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4310  6-12-2012 North Avenue East redevelopment plan Not codified 4311  6-12-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4312  6-12-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  6-12-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4313  6-26-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4314  6-26-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4315  6-26-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-26-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4316  7-24-2012 Lease agreement Not codified 4317  7-24-2012 Street vacation Not codified 4318  7-24-2012 Cost of living allowance Not codified 4319  7-24-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4320  7-24-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4321  7-24-2012 Approving application and financial agreement Not codified Res. of  7-24-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4322  8-28-2012 Vacant and foreclosing residential properties 1 8.80.030 4323  8-28-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of  8-28-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4324  9-11-2012 Cost of living allowance Not codified 4325  9-11-2012 When effective, expiration date 1 5.70.250 4326  8-28-2012 Durant redevelopment plan Tabled 4327  9-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4328  9-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4329  9-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4330  9-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4331  9-25-2012 Autobuses-Conditions for consent-Application for license-Qualifications 1       Added 5.16.030 A.13, 14. Res. of  9-25-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4332 10- 9-2012 PILOT financial agreement Not codified 4333 10-23-2012 Lease agreement Not codified Res. of 10-23-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4334 Durant redevelopment plan Not codified 4335 11-13-2012 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4336 11-13-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified 4337 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4338 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4339 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4340 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4341 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4342 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1, 2 10.44.020 4343 11-13-2012 License transfers-Proximity to existing licensed premises-Exceptions 1, 2 5.08.100 F., G. 4344 11-27-2012 Appropriations Not codified 4345 11-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4346 11-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4347 11-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-27-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 11-28-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4348 12-11-2012 State health benefits plan Not codified 4349 12-11-2012 Lease agreement Not codified 4350 12-11-2012 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of 12-11-2012 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4351 12-26-2012 Contracted off-duty employment 2.56.340 4352 12-26-2012 Durant redevelopment plan Not codified 4353 12-26-2012 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 Res. of  1- 8-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  1-22-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4354  2-13-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4355  2-13-2013 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 P. 4356  2-13-2013 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 N. 4357  2-13-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4358  2-13-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2-13-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4359  2-26-2013 Do not block intersections 1, 2       Added 10.08.111 Res. of  2-26-2013 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 MM. 4360  3-12-2013 Designation of meter zones and hours of parking 1 10.36.020 A. 4361  3-12-2013 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 Res. of  3-12-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4362  3-26-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4363  3-26-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4364  3-26-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4365  3-26-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-26-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  3-26-2013 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 NN. 4366  4- 9-2013 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040(note) 4367  4- 9-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4- 9-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4368  4-23-2013 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 Q. 4369  4-23-2013 Designation of meter zones and hours of parking 1 10.36.020 A. Res. of  4-23-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4370  5-14-2013 Annual compensation for classified and unclassified 
positions Not codified 4371  5-14-2013 Organization and personnel 1 2.60.090 B. 4372  5-14-2013 Administration and personnel 1 2.56.110 4373  5-14-2013 Zoning districts generally 1       Rpld 17.36.030 C. 2 17.36.030 B. 3 17.36.090 A. 4 17.36.100 5 17.36.110 A. 17.36.110 C.5., D.       Added 17.36.110 E.-G. 6       Rpld 17.36.160 C.       Added 17.36.125 7       Rpld Ch. 17.36, Sch. III(Q) General sign provisions 8 17.48.080 D., F. Res. of  5-14-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4374  5-28-2013 Regulations governing rates of fare 1 5.100.220 4375  5-28-2013 Travelling shows and kiddy rides-Exemptions 1       Added 5.112.100 4376  5-28-2013 Licenses-Applications-Fees-Term 1 7.52.130 Sanitation definitions 2 7.04.010 4377  5-28-2013 Pennave Urban Renewal, L.L.C. financial agreement Not codified 4378  5-28-2013 Parkers Walk Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4379  5-28-2013 Westminster Urban Renewal, L.L.C. financial agreement Not codified 4380  5-28-2013 Temporary easement and access agreement Not codified 4381  5-28-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified 4382  5-28-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4383  5-28-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  5-28-2013 Establishment of pick-up/drop off sign Not codified 4384  6-11-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4385  6-11-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4386  6-11-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-11-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  6-11-2013 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 OO. 4389  6-25-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4390  6-25-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4391  7-23-2013 Agreement for purchase of real estate Not codified 4392  7-23-2013 List of adjoining property owners 1 17.52.040 4393  7-23-2013 Renewal of lease agreement Not codified 4394  7-23-2013 Flood damage prevention 1-5 17.44.010-17.44.050 4395  7-23-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified 4396  7-23-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified 4397  7-23-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  7-23-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4398  8-27-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4399  8-27-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4400  8-27-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4401  8-27-2013 PILOT financial agreement Not codified 4402  8-27-2013 PILOT financial agreement Not codified Res. of  8-27-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  8-27-2013 Loading zones established       Added 10.64.010 PP. 4403  9-10-2013 Amendment to lease agreement Not codified 4404  9-10-2013 Access use agreement Not codified 4405  9-10-2013 Budget appropriation limits Not codified 4406  9-10-2013 Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing properties 1 8.80.030 Enforcement and penalties 2 8.80.060 4407  9-10-2013 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 R. 4408  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4409  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4410  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4411  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4412  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4413  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4414 Handicapped parking space Tabled 4415  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4416  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4417  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4418  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4419  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-10-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4420  9-24-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4421  9-24-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4422 Bonds Tabled 4423  9-24-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4424  9-24-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4425  9-24-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified 4426  9-24-2013 Construction, installation, and maintenance of solar energy stations 1-9       Added Ch. 12.76, §§ 12.76.010-12.76.090 4427  9-24-2013 Renewal of lease agreement Not codified 4428  9-24-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4429  9-24-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4430  9-24-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4431  9-24-2013 Approving plan of approaches for Goethals Bridge replacement project Not codified 4432 10-22-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4433 10-22-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4434 10-22-2013 Department of neighborhood services 1       Rpld Ch. 2.44, §§ 2.44.010-2.44.060 5.64.030 5.96.070 B. 5.104.040 A., C. 8.80.010 8.80.030 15.04.045 C.15. 17.04.030 C. 17.44.060 E. Department of administration 2       Added 2.28.040-2.28.060 Department of health and human services 3 2.36.010       Added 2.36.080 Department of planning and community development 4 2.48.010       Added 2.48.130 Land development control 5 17.04.030 Res. of 10-22-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4435 11-12-2013 Encroachment permit Not codified 4436 11-12-2013 No parking on school days 1       Added 10.40.100 4437 11-12-2013 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10-28.030 4438 Moratorium for issuance of summons and enforcement Tabled 4439 11-12-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4440 11-12-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4441 11-12-2013 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of 11-12-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4442 11-26-2013 Salary and compensation Not codified 4443 12-10-2013 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 O. 4444 12-23-2013 No parking on school days 1 10.44.100 Res. of 12-23-2013 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4445  1-14-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4446  1-14-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  1-14-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4447  1-28-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 S. 4448  2-11-2014 Encroachment permit Not codified 4449  2-11-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4450  2-11-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4451  3-11-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4452  3-11-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4453  3-11-2014 Encroachment permit Not codified 4454  3-11-2014 Authorization to execute purchase agreement Not codified 4455  3-25-2014 Smoking 1-4       Added Ch. 8.66, §§ 8.66.010-8.66.040 Res. of  3-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4456  4- 8-2014 Encroachment permit Not codified 4457  4- 8-2014 Flood damage prevention 1-5 17.44.010-17.44.050 4458  4- 8-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4- 8-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4459  4-22-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4460  4-22-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4461  4-22-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 T. 4462  4-22-2014 Special emergency appropriation Not codified Res. of  4-22-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  5-13-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4463  5-27-2014 Guaranty securing payment Not codified Res. of  5-27-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4464  6-10-2014 Execution of site access agreement Not codified Res. of  6-10-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4465  5-27-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4466  6-24-2014 Sewer service system 1-6 13.16.120-13.16.170 4467  6-24-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4468  6-24-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4469  7-22-2014 Administration and personnel 1 2.56.110 B. 4470  7-22-2014 Organization and personnel 1 2.60.090 B. 4471  7-22-2014 Annual compensation for classified and unclassified 
positions Not codified 4472  7-22-2014 Budget appropriation limits Not codified Res. of  7-22-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4474  8-26-2014 Reappropriations Not codified 4475  8-26-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4476  8-26-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of  8-26-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4477  9- 9-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4478  9- 9-2014 Department of planning and community development 1, 2       Added 2.48.010 Res. of  9- 9-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4479  9-23-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4480 11-12-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4481  9-23-2014 Fracking waste 1-3       Added Ch. 7.26, §§ 7.26.010-7.26.030 4482  9-23-2014 Rent control and stabilization-When effective 1 5.70.250 4483  9-23-2014 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 Stop intersections designated 2       Added 10.08.020 S. 4484  9-23-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Rpld 10.08.010 H. Stop intersections designated 2       Added 10.08.020 P. 4485  9-23-2014 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4486  9-23-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 U. 4487  9-23-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 V. 4488  9-23-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 W. 4489  9-23-2014 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 X. 4490  9-23-2014 Mid-block crossings 1 10.80.010 4491  9-23-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4492  9-23-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4493  9-23-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-23-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4494 10-14-2014 Appropriations Not codified 4495 10-14-2014 Execution of site access agreement Not codified 4496 10-14-2014 Appropriations Not codified Res. of 10-14-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4497 10-28-2014 Prohibited turns on red signal 1 10.12.050 4498 Removed 4499 10-28-2014 Street vacation Not codified 4500 10-28-2014 Encroachment permit Not codified 4501 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4502 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4503 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4504 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4505 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4506 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4507 11-12-2014 Appropriations Not codified 4508 11-12-2014 Appropriations Not codified 4509 11-12-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4510 11-12-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4511 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4512 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4513 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4514 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4515 11-25-2014 Vacant and foreclosing residential properties 1-3 8.80.020-8.80.040 4 8.80.060 4516 11-25-2014 Construction permit fee schedule 1(Sch. A) 15.04.040 B.-E.       Added 15.04.040 M. 4517 11-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4518 11-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4519 11-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4520 11-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4521 11-25-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-25-2014 Loading zones established       Rpld 10.64.010 PP. Res. of 11-26-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4522  4-14-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4523 12- 9-2014 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1, 2 10.28.040 4524 12- 9-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4525 12- 9-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12- 9-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4526 12-23-2014 Appropriations Not codified 4527 12-23-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4528 12-23-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4529 12-23-2014 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of 12-23-2014 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  1-13-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4530  1-27-2015 Mid-block crossings 1 10.80.010 4531  1-27-2015 Parkers Walk Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4532  1-27-2015 Parkers View Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4533  1-27-2015 Rescinds ordinance authorizing transfer of certain real properties Not codified 4534  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4535  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4536  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4537  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4538  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4539  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4540  1-27-2015 Construction permit fee schedule 1(Sch. A) 15.04.040 M. 4541  1-27-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified Res. of  1-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4542  2-10-2015 Appropriations Not codified 4543  2-10-2015 Appropriations Not codified 4544  1-27-2015 Henry Street development plan Not codified 4545  2-10-2015 Amendment to lease agreement Not codified 4546  2-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4547  2-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4548  2-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4549  2-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4550  2-24-2015 Street vacation Not codified 4551  2-24-2015 Rooming houses 1 5.76.020 2       Rpld 5.76.030 3 5.76.040 A. 5       Rpld 5.76.040 D. 6       Added 5.76.050 E.-G.       Rpld 5.76.060 7 5.76.070 4552  2-24-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4553  2-24-2015 Prohibited turns on red signal 1 10.12.050 4554  3-10-2015 Appropriations Not codified 4555  3-10-2015 Lease agreement Not codified 4556  3-10-2015 Towing of vehicles from private property 1, 2 5.51.060 D., E. 3 5.51.090 4557  3-24-2015 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4558  3-24-2015 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4559  3-24-2015 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 Res. of  3-24-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4560 Removed 4561  4-14-2015 Dogs and other animals 1-4       Added 6.04.380-6.04.410 4562  4-15-2015 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4563  4-14-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-14-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4564  4-28-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4565  4-28-2015 East Grand Associates Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4566  4-28-2015 Fees for municipal records 1 2.100.020 4567  4-28-2015 Sidewalks cafes-Fees 1, 2 7.54.070 4568  4-28-2015 Street vacation Not codified 4569  4-28-2015 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4570  4-28-2015 Prohibition of parking, standing, loading and unloading of trucks, tractor trailers, or vans on certain streets 1       Added 10.64.040 4571  4-28-2015 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 Q. 4572  4-28-2015 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 R. 4573  4-28-2015 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4574  4-28-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-28-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4575  5-12-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4576  5-12-2015 FRG Elizabeth Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified Res. of  5-12-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4577  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4578  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4579  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4580  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4581  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4582  5-26-2015 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4583  5-26-2015 Appropriations Not codified 4584  5-12-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4585  5-26-2015 Easement agreement Not codified 4586  5-26-2015 Street vacation Not codified 4587  5-26-2015 Street vacation Not codified 4588  5-26-2015 Street vacation and sale Not codified 4589  5-26-2015 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4590  5-26-2015 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 2 10.28.040 4591  5-26-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4592  5-26-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4593  5-26-2015 Computation of charges 2 13.16.130 Res. of  5-26-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4594  6- 9-2015 Acquisition of property Not codified 4595  6- 9-2015 Tax abatement for certain residential properties-Expiration 1 3.12.160 4596  6- 9-2015 Elizabeth Avenue special improvement district Not codified Res. of  6- 9-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4597  6-23-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4598  6-23-2015 Acquisition of property Not codified 4599  6-23-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4600  6-23-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4601  7- 7-2015 Acquisition of property Not codified Res. of  7- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4602  7-28-2015 City deficiency agreement Not codified 4603  7-28-2015 City owned parcels Not codified 4604  7-28-2015 Municipal budget appropriation limits Not codified 4605  7-28-2015 Appropriating funds for site work Not codified 4606  7-28-2015 Appropriating funds for site work Not codified Res. of  7-28-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4607  8-25-2015 Fees established for municipal records or other documents 1 2.100.020 4608  8-25-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4609  8-25-2015 Stop intersections designated 1 10.08.020 4610  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4611  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4612  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4613  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4614  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4615  8-25-2015 Temporary usage of open air parking stations and lots for special events 1 5.60.020 2 5.60.040 4616  8-25-2015 Appropriating funds for acquisition of a bus Not codified Res. of  8-25-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  9- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 10-13-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4617 11- 3-2015(Elec. of) Paid sick leave policy for private workers 1       Added 8.65.010-8.65.140 4618  9- 8-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4619  9- 8-2015 Four way stop intersections 1 10.08.010 4620  9- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4621  9-22-2015 Acquisition of equipment for public works department Not codified 4622  9-22-2015 Stop intersections designated 1 10.08.020 4623  9-22-2015 Schedule-No left turns 1 10.12.040 J. 4624  9-22-2015 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 4625 10-13-2015 Acquisition of fire department equipment Not codified 4626 10-13-2015 Acquisition of fire department equipment Not codified 4627 10-13-2015 Acquisition of fire department equipment Not codified 4628 10-13-2015 Acquisition of fire department trucks Not codified 4629 10-13-2015 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4630 10-13-2015 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4631 10-13-2015 Stop intersections 1 10.08.090 4632 10-13-2015 No parking all times-Certain streets 1 10.28.030 4633 10-27-2015 Site access agreement Not codified 4634 10-27-2015 License agreement Not codified 4635 10-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4636 10-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4637 10-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4638 10-27-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4639 11-10-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4640 11-24-2015 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4641 11-24-2015 No parking all times-Certain streets 1 10.28.030 4642 11-24-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4643 11-24-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4644 11-24-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4645 11-24-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4646 11-24-2015 Yard dimensions 1 17.36.110 D. 4647 11-24-2015 Number of parking and loading spaces required 1 17.40.040 A. Res. of 11-24-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4648 12- 8-2015 Financial agreement with Westminster Heights urban renewal Not codified 4649 12- 8-2015 Lease agreement Not codified 4650 12- 8-2015 Encroachment permit Not codified 4651 12- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4652 12- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4653 12- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12- 8-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of 12- 8-2015 Traffic Regulation Order(TRO)-Bus stop locations 10.60.030 Res. of 12- 8-2015 Loading zone 10.64.010 4654 12-22-2015 80,000 pound overweight vehicle zone limit-Streets affected 1       Added 10.16.050 4655 12-22-2015 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 4656 12-22-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-22-2015 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4657  1-12-2016 Autocabs prohibited to operate as taxicabs 1       Added 5.20.070 G. 4658  1-12-2016 Taxicabs 1, 2 5.100.010, 5.100.020 3 5.100.220 D. 4659  1-12-2016 Abandoned properties 1-8       Added Ch. 8.85, §§ 8.85.010-8.85.080 4660  1-26-2016 Encroachment permit Not codified 4661  1-26-2016 Temporary construction easement and permanent utility easement Not codified 4662  1-26-2016 Violations and penalties-Collection 1 1.12.010 A. Res. of  1-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4663  2-23-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4664  2-23-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4665  2-23-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4666  2- 9-2016 Rent control and stabilization 1 5.70.230 4667  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4668  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4669  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4670  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4671  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4672  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4673  2-23-2016 Lease agreement Not codified 4674  3- 8-2016 Lease agreement Not codified 4675  2-23-2016 Vacant and/or foreclosing properties 1 8.80.030 4676  2-23-2016 Approving application and financial agreement Not codified 4677  2-23-2016 No parking of certain vehicles 1, 2 10.40.020 4678  2-23-2016 Parking restrictions on trucks, buses and commercial vehicles 1       Added 10.40.110 4679  2-23-2016 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 V.-X. Res. of  2-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4680  3- 8-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4681  3- 8-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4682  3- 8-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4683  2-23-2016 Approving application and financial agreement Not codified 4684  3- 8-2016 Annual compensation for classified and unclassified 
positions Not codified 4685  3- 8-2016 Traffic-control signals 1, 2       Added 10.24.110 3., 4. 4686  3- 8-2016 No off-street parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones 1       Added 10.40.045 4687  3- 8-2016 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4688  3- 8-2016 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 4689  3- 8-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4690  3- 8-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4691  3- 8-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4692  3- 8-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3- 8-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4693  3-22-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified Res. of  3-22-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4694  4-12-2016 Policy prohibiting discrimination and harassment in the workplace 1(Att.) 
      Added Ch. 2.28, Art. 2, §§ 2.28.070-2.28.120 4695  4-12-2016 Zoning districts generally 1 17.36.010 17.36.160 (title)       Added 17.36.170-17.36.200 Ch. 17.36, Sch. IC 4696  4-12-2016 Waterfront redevelopment plan amendment Not codified 4697  4-12-2016 Midtown Elizabeth redevelopment/rehabilitation plan amendment Not codified 4698  4-12-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4699  4-12-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-12-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4700  4-26-2016 Dogs and other animals 1 6.04.010 2, 3       Added 6.04.420, 6.04.430 4701  5-10-2016 Transportation network companies 1-28       Added Ch. 5.150, §§ 5.150.010-5.150.280 4702  4-26-2016 Encroachment permit Not codified 4703  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4704  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4705  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4706  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4707  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4708  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces Tabled 4709  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4710  5-10-2016 Sale of property Not codified 4711  5-10-2016 Licensing of pit bull dogs 1       Rpld 6.04.370 4712  5-10-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  5-10-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4713  5-24-2016 Site access agreement Not codified 4714  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4715  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4716  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4717  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4718  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4719  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4720  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4721  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4722  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4723  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4724  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4725  6-14-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4726  5-24-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4727  6-14-2016 Autocabs prohibited to operate as taxicabs 1 5.20.070 G. 4728  6-14-2016 Fines and penalties for handicapped parking spaces 1       Added 10.44.040 Res. of  6-14-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of   6-14-2016 Loading zones established 10.64.010 OO. 4729  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4730  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4731  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4732  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4733  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4734  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4735  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4736  6-28-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4737  7-26-2016 Contracted off-duty employment 1 2.56.340 B.1. 4738  7-26-2016 Municipal budget appropriation limits and establishment of cap bank Not codified Res. of  7-26-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4739  8-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4740  8-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4741  8-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4742  8-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  8-23-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4743  9-13-2016 Traffic control signals 1 10.24.110 5. 4744  9-13-2016 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4745  9-13-2016 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4746  9-13-2016 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4747  9-13-2016 Encroachment permit Not codified 4748  9-13-2016 Encroachment permit Not codified 4749  9-13-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4750  9-13-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-13-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4751  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4752  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4753  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4754  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4755  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4756  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4757  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4758 10-11-2016 Authorization to negotiate and execute all documents associated with acquisition of certain easement Not codified Res. of  9-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4759 10-11-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4760 10-11-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4761 10-11-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-11-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4762 10-25-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4763 10-25-2016 Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing properties 1 8.80.030 4764 10-25-2016 Zoning permits 1       Added 17.08.065 2       Added 17.52.065 4765 11- 9-2016 Rent control 1 5.70.250 4766 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4767 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4768 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4769 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4770 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-25-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4771 11- 9-2016 Appropriations Not codified 4772 11- 9-2016 Appropriations Not codified 4773 11- 9-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4774 11- 9-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4775 11- 9-2016 Easement agreement Not codified 4776 11- 9-2016 Municipal identification card program 2-10       Added Ch. 8.81, §§ 8.81.010-8.81.090 4777 11-22-2016 Appropriations Not codified 4778 11- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11- 9-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4779 11-22-2016 Deposits with municipality-Escrow-Interest 1 17.52.100 B.1. 4780 11-22-2016 Taxicab permits and certificates 1 5.100.020 D. 4781 12-13-2016 Barbershops, beauty salons/shops, and nail salons/parlors 1-7       Rpld Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010-5.24.050       Added Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010-5.24.070 4782 11-22-2016 Encroachment permit Not codified 4783 11-22-2016 Execution of redevelopment agreement Not codified Res. of 12-13-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4784 11-22-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4785 12-13-2016 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4786 12-27-2016 Amendment to state health benefits plan Not codified 4787 12-27-2016 No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4788 12-27-2016 Use of firearms range by retired law enforcement officers 1       Added Ch. 2.56, Art. XI, § 2.56.510 4789 12-27-2016 Extension of lease agreement Not codified 4790 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4791 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4792 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4793 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4794 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4795 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4796 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-27-2016 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 Res. of  1-10-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4797  1-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4798  1-24-2017 No parking of trucks 1 10.40.070 Four-way stop intersections 2       Added 10.08.010 Z., AA. Stop intersections designated 3       Added 10.08.020 Y. Res. of  1-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4799  2-14-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4800  2-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4801  2-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4802  2-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4803  2-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4804  2-28-2017 City contracts-Exceptions 1 2.92.060 A. 4805  2-28-2017 No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4806  2-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4807  2-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4808  2-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4809  2-28-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 Res. of  2-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4810  3-14-2017 Encroachment permit Not codified 4811  3-14-2017 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4812  3-14-2017 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4813  3-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4814  3-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4815  3-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4816  3-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4817  3-14-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4818  3-28-2017 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4819  4-11-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4820  3-28-2017 Easement agreement Not codified 4821  4-11-2017 Tax abatement and PILOT agreement Not codified 4822  4-11-2017 Encroachment permit Not codified 4823  4-11-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4824  4-11-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-11-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4825  4-25-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4826  4-25-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4827  4-25-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4828  5- 9-2017 Authorization to execute deeds associated with amendment of water and sewer easements Not codified 4829  5- 9-2017 Amendment to Kapkowski redevelopment plan Not codified 4830  4-25-2017 Former Elizabeth General Hospital redevelopment plan Not codified 4831  4-25-2017 Transfer of encroachment permit Not codified 4832  4-25-2017 Tax abatement and PILOT agreement Not codified 4833  4-25-2017 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 Z. 4834  4-25-2017 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4835  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4836  5- 9-2017 Autocab equipment and maintenance-Inspections 1       Rpld 5.20.100 J. 4837  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4838  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4839  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4840  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4841  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4842  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4843  4-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4844  5- 9-2017 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4845  5-23-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4846  5-23-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4847  5- 9-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4848  5- 9-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4849 Removed 4850  5-23-2017 Authorizing purchase of properties Not codified 4851 Speed limits On hold Res. of  5-23-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4852 10-24-2017 Sabra Port Urban Renewal redevelopment agreement Not codified 4853  6-13-2017 Classified and unclassified positions Not codified 4854  6-13-2017 Administration and personnel 1 2.56.110 B. 4855  6-13-2017 Organization and personnel 1 2.60.090 4856  6-13-2017 Acquisition of property Not codified 4857  6-13-2017 Accepts donation of property Not codified 4858  6-13-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4859  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4860  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4861  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4862  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4863  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4864  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4865 Removed 4866  7-25-2017 Elizabethport Phase II redevelopment plan Not codified 4867 Tabled 4868  6-27-2017 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4869  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4870  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4871  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4872  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4873  7-25-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4874  6-27-2017 East Broad Street redevelopment plan Not codified 4875  6-27-2017 Magnolia Avenue redevelopment plan Not codified 4876  6-27-2017 Festivals 1 12.56.050 A. 2       Rpld 12.56.050 B. 3 12.56.010 4877  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4878  7-25-2017 Encroachment permit Not codified 4879  7-25-2017 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 AA. 4880  7-25-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4881  7-25-2017 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 4882  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4883  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4884  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4885 Tabled 4886  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4887  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4888  7-25-2017 Budget appropriation limits and establishment of cap bank Not codified Res. of  7-25-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4889  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4890  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4891  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4892  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4893  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4894  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4895  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4896  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  8-22-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4897  9-12-2017 Barbershops, beauty salons/shops, and nail salons/parlors 1, 2 5.24.010 D., H. 3-6 5.24.020 A., D., J., K. 7 5.24.040 B. 4898  9-26-2017 Midtown Elizabeth redevelopment plan amendment Not codified 4899  9-12-2017 Elizabeth General Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4900  9-12-2017 The Grand at Murray Street Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4901  9-12-2017 Tri-Port Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4902  9-12-2017 Festivals-Exemption from fees 1 12.56.050 A. 4903  9-12-2017 Schedule II-No parking certain hours 1 10.28.040 4904  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4905  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4906  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4907  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4908  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4909  9-12-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4910  9-12-2017 Guaranty securing payment Not codified Res. of  9-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4911  9-26-2017 Acquisition of property Not codified 4912  9-26-2017 Site access agreement Not codified 4913  9-26-2017 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 BB. 4914  9-26-2017 Schedule I, through streets 1       Rpld 10.08.080 B.48.b. 4915  9-26-2017 No trailer, pole trailer, recreational vehicle, camper or boat parking on any street 1       Added 10.40.075 4916  9-26-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4917  9-26-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4918  9-26-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4919 10-10-2017 Lease agreement Not codified 4920 10-10-2017 Zoning districts generally 1       Added 17.36.098 2-4 17.36.100 A., C., D. 5       Added 17.36.099 6-8 17.36.110 A., D. 9 17.36.120 A.1. 4921 10-10-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4922 10-10-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-10-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4923 10-24-2017 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 4924 10-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4925 10-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4926 10-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4927 10-24-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4928 10-24-2017 Application fee for permits for handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.010 4929 11-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4930 11-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4931 11-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4932 11-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4933 11-13-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4934 11-13-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4935 11-13-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4936 11-13-2017 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4937 11-13-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4938 11-13-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4939 11-13-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4940 11-13-2017 Appropriations Not codified 4941 11-13-2017 Appropriations Not codified Res. of 11-13-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4942 11-28-2017 One-way streets, Sch. I 1 10.04.050 4943 11-28-2017 Schedule II, stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.090 PP., QQ. 4944 11-28-2017 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 BB. 4945 11-28-2017 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4946 11-28-2017 South Second Street redevelopment plan Not codified 4947 11-28-2017 Site access agreement Not codified 4948 11-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4949 11-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4950 11-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4951 11-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-28-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4952 12-12-2017 Landlord responsibility for disorderly tenants 1       Added Ch. 8.86, §§ 8.86.010-8.86.060 4954 12-12-2017 Schedule III-No stopping or standing 1 10.28.050 4955 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4956 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4957 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4958 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4959 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-12-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4960 12-27-2017 C&L 1107-1115 Chestnut Realty Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4961 12-27-2017 Jersey Walk E. Jersey Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4962 12-27-2017 Jersey Walk Garage Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4963 12-27-2017 Jersey Walk Lafayette Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified 4964 12-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4965 12-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-27-2017 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4966  1- 9-2018 Sale of property Not codified 4967  1- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4968  1- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4969  1-23-2018 Designation of meter zones and hours of parking 1 10.36.020 A. Res. of  1-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4970  2-13-2018 Rescinds site access agreement Not codified 4971  2-13-2018 Site access agreement Not codified 4972  2-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4973  2-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4974  2-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4975  3-13-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4976  3-13-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 4977  2-27-2018 Transfer of property Not codified 4978  2-27-2018 Sale of property Not codified 4979  2-27-2018 Midtown Elizabeth redevelopment plan amendment Not codified 4980  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4981  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4982  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4983  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4984  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  2-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4985  3-13-2018 Newpark Estates redevelopment agreement Not codified 4986  3-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4987  3-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4988  3-27-2018 FAROS-MAS redevelopment agreement amendment Not codified 4989 Tabled 4990  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4991  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4992  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4993  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4994  3-27-2018 One-way streets, Sch. I 1 10.04.050 4995  3-27-2018 Stop intersections designated 1       Added 10.08.020 CC. 4996  3-27-2018 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 4997  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 4998  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  3-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 4999  4-24-2018 Appropriations Not codified 5000  4-24-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 5001  4-10-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5002  4-10-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5003  4-10-2018 Taxi stands established 1       Rpld 10.64.030 A.1., B.1. 2       Added 10.64.030 A.1., B.1., C., D. 5004  4-10-2018 190 Union Redevelopment Urban Renewal financial agreement Not codified Res. of  4-10-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5005  4-24-2018 Acquisition of property Not codified 5006  4-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5007  4-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5008  4-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5009  4-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5010 Tabled Res. of  4-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5011  5- 8-2018 Salary and compensation Not codified 5012  5- 8-2018 Permit to operate a construction crane 1-9       Added Ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010-15.32.090 5013  5- 8-2018 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 5014  5- 8-2018 1029-1061 Newark Avenue redevelopment plan Not codified Res. of  5- 8-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5015  5-22-2018 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 5016  5-22-2018 Regulating statutory authority of Verizon New Jersey Not codified 5017  5-22-2018 Transfer of financial agreement Not codified Res. of  5-22-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5018  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5019  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5020  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5021  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5022  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5023  6-12-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5024  7-24-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 5025  6-26-2018 Sewer service system 1-6 13.16.120-13.16.170 5026  6-26-2018 Definitions-Notices-Applications 1 5.70.010 A. 5027  6-26-2018 Encroachment permit Not codified 5028  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5029  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5030  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5031  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5032  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5033  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5034  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5035  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  6-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5036  7-24-2018 Transfer of property Not codified 5037  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5038  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5039  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5040  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5041  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5042  7-24-2018 Budget appropriation limits Not codified 5043  7-24-2018 Guaranteed revenue refunding bonds Not codified Res. of  7-24-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5044  8-28-2018 Site access agreement Not codified 5045  8-28-2018 Fleet 1029 Newark Avenue Urban Renewal LLC financial agreement Not codified 5046  8-28-2018 Schedule I-No parking all times on certain streets 1 10.28.030 5047  8-28-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5048  8-28-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  8-28-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5049  9-11-2018 Hotel and motel room occupancy tax 1       Added 3.40.011 2 3.40.020 Hotel use and occupancy tax 3       Added 3.41.011 4 3.41.020 5       Added 3.41.021 5050  9-11-2018 Encroachment permit Not codified 5051  9-11-2018 Schedule I, through streets 1 10.08.080 B.39. 5052  9-11-2018 Schedule II, stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.090 RR.-TT. 5053  9-11-2018 One-way streets, Sch. I 1 10.04.050 5054  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5055  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5056  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5057  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5058  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5059  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5060  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5061  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5062  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5063  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5064  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5065  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5066  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5067  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5068  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5069  9-11-2018 Rescinds ordinance authorizing sale of property Not codified Res. of  9-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5070  9-25-2018 Four-way stop intersections 1       Added 10.08.010 CC. 5071  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5072  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5073  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5074  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5075  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5076  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of  9-25-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5077 10- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5078 10- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5079 10- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10- 9-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5080 10-23-2018 Appropriations Not codified 5081 10-23-2018 Appropriations Not codified 5082 10-23-2018 Appropriations Not codified 5083 10-23-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 5084 10-23-2018 Appropriations and bonds Not codified 5085 10-23-2018 Sick leave for private employees 1       Rpld Ch. 8.65, §§ 8.65.010-8.65.120 5086 10-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5087 10-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5088 10-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5089 10-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 10-23-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5090 11-13-2018 Amends statutory authority of Verizon New Jersey Not codified 5091 11-13-2018 Rent control and stabilization-When effective, expiration date 1 5.70.250 5092 11-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-13-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5093 11-27-2018 PILOT financial agreement Not codified 5094 11-27-2018 Elizabethport Phase II redevelopment plan amendment Not codified 5095 11-27-2018 No parking of trucks-Portion affected 1 10.40.070 5096 11-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5097 11-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5098 11-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 11-27-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5099 12-11-2018 Sale of property Not codified 5100 12-11-2018 Loading zones established 1       Added 10.64.010 RR. 5101 12-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5102 12-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5103 12-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-11-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5104 12-26-2018 Appropriations Not codified 5105 12-26-2018 Extension of lease agreement Not codified 5106 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5107 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5108 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5109 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 Res. of 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 10.44.020 5111 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5112 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5113 12-26-2018 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5114  1-22-2019 Encroachment permit Not codified 5115  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5116  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5117  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5118  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5119  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5120  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5121  1-22-2019 Four-ton weight limit-Streets affected 1 10.16.010 5122  1-22-2019 Handicapped parking spaces 1 10.44.020 5123  1-22-2019 1180 Associates Urban Renewal LLC financial agreement Not codified  
