Part I : Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-13-78 as Ord. No. 78-302]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of East
Brunswick of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Council as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 230, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the
Township of East Brunswick, hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code of file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of East Brunswick by impressing thereon the seal of the township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Clerk of the township, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of East Brunswick, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with the availability of
copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Township
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-8. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-14A and prior to the effective date of this ordinance
given in § 1-3 are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation
shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are
included.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to filed by his office effective date of this codification which shall
be adopted specifically as part of the Code for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
East Brunswick to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 1-12
1:4
§ 1-12. Severability.
§ 1-13. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code, and every
part of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and
the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
B. Severability of ordinance provision. Each section of this ordinance is an
independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to
be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to Ordinance No. 77-227-B, adopted
August 22, 1977.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action of proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture, which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:5
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-22-85 by Ord. No.
85-682; 5-23-88 by Ord. No. 88-929; 4-24-06 by Ord. No. 06-16]
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking.
L. Any ordinance pertaining to the salaries or compensation of township
officers and employees.
M. Any ordinance granting a franchise for a cable antenna television
system, specifically Ordinance No. 66-62, adopted August 22, 1962, and
all amendments thereto.
N. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance making any change or revision in
the Zoning Map.
O. Any ordinance establishing personnel policies, including but not limited
to that legislation contained in the Revised General Ordinances as
Chapter 3, as originally adopted July 14, 1964, and all amendments
thereto.
P. Any ordinance establishing election districts within the township,
specifically Ordinance No. 73-168, adopted February 26, 1973, and all
amendments thereto.
Q. Any ordinance regulating noise and prohibiting loud and disturbing
noises, specifically Ordinance No. 67-94, adopted October 23, 1967,
and all amendments thereto.
A. Unless specifically noted elsewhere within a chapter of the Code, any
person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions contained in
any chapter of this Code shall, upon conviction, be punished by one or
more of the following: a fine of not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000), by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or by a period of community service not exceeding
ninety (90) days, and each violation of any of the provisions contained
within this Code and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense. If the community service
has not been rendered by the defendant in accordance with the
sentence of the Court, the defendant may be brought before the Court
for an alternative sentence consisting of imprisonment in the county jail
or a monetary fine.
§ 1-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 1-15
1:6
If the Township of East Brunswick chooses to impose a fine in an
amount greater than $1,250.00 upon an owner for violations of housing
or zoning code regulations herein the Township of East Brunswick
shall provide a 30-day period in which the owner shall be afforded
an opportunity to cure or abate the condition and owner shall be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Municipal Court for an
independent determination concerning the violation within said 30-day
period. Subsequent to the expiration of the 30-day period, a fine greater
than $1,250 may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or,
upon reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement
has not been substantially completed.
B. Wherever in the former Revised General Ordinances there was a
reference to Section 4.4, which was the general penalty provision for
said Revised General Ordinances, said reference has been changed in
the Code adopted by this ordinance to refer to Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, thus imposing the penalty provided for in
Subsection A above for violations, the provisions of Section 4.4 of the
former Revised General Ordinance and Subsection A above being
substantively the same.
C. Statute of limitation. No person shall be prosecuted, tried or punished
for violation of any traffic or parking ordinance of the Township of East
Brunswick unless the complaint therefor shall be filed within thirty (30)
days from the commission or discovery of the offense. No person shall
be prosecuted, tried or punished for violation of any ordinance of the
Township of East Brunswick, other than traffic or parking, unless the
complaint therefor shall be filed within one (1) year from the
commission or discovery of the offense. The failure to enforce a
violation of the Zoning Ordinance1 shall in no instance constitute
evidence of a permitted nonconforming use. [Added 6-26-78 by Ord.
No. 78-35]
D. Liability for Conduct of Another by Aiding and Abetting Violation of
Ordinances. In accordance with N.J.S. 2C:2-6, a person shall be deemed
to be guilty of an offense if it is committed by the conduct of another
person for which he is legally accountable. A person is legally
accountable for the conduct of another person when:
(1) Acting with the kind of culpability that is sufficient for the
commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible
person to engage in such conduct;
(2) He is an accomplice of such other person in the commission of an
offense or
(3) He is engaged in a conspiracy with such other person.
A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission of
an offense if:
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Zoning.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
(1) With the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
commission of the offense; he
(a) Solicits such other person to commit it;
(b) Aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other person in
planning or committing it; or
(c) Having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the
offense, fails to make proper efforts so to do. [Added
11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-200]
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.
Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following Code sections were
amended or added. A complete description of these revisions is on file
in the office of the Township Clerk, §§ 3-49B; 3-54B; 3-56D; 3-56G;
3-57D; 3-95; 3-113C; 42-9A; 45-10A; 49-8: 72-24; 83-31; 88-1; 93-5;
101-1; 101-12A; 124-2; 124-4; 124-6A; 124-6B; 124-7B; 130-25A; 142-4;
Ch. 150, Art. I; 158-12; 212-8; Ch. 223, Art. II; 228-217.
§ 1-15 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9

ARTICLE I
Title and Definitions
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code"
and is herein referred to as the "code."
§ 3-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except as the context may otherwise require, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator appointed pursuant to the
Charter and Code, or any assistant or acting administrator serving in place
of the Business Administrator pursuant to the Charter or ordinance.
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan E of Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws of
1950 (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, and any
and all statutory provisions of the State of New Jersey applicable to the
municipality.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the municipal government
established or designated by this chapter as a "department" and any agency
or instrumentality of the government not allocated or assigned to such an
organizational unit.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of East Brunswick in the County of
Middlesex, State of New Jersey.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:11

ARTICLE II
Township Council: Powers and Procedures
§ 3-3. Council designated to exercise legislative powers.
The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Council.
§ 3-4. Regular meetings. [Amended 2-23-65 by Ord. No. 65-1-A;
12-28-70 by Ord. No. 70-1-N; 5-29-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-V; 11-26-73
by Ord. No 73-1-V; 3-22-76 by Ord. No. 76-1-OO; 9-14-81 by Ord. No.
81-393; 9-28-87 by Ord. No. 87-868; 3-24-14 by Ord. No. 14-02;
amended 1-27-2020 by Ord. No. 20-02]
A biannual meeting of the Council shall be held on a date set by resolution,
said meeting to be during the first week in January, and the date shall be
published at least three days prior to the meeting following each municipal
election. In addition to consideration of all appropriate reorganizational
matters, the annual meeting shall in all other respects be deemed to be
a public action/agenda meeting of the Council. This meeting shall be in
addition to further public action/agenda meetings provided by this
subsection. Public action/agenda meetings of the Council shall be held on
the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:30 p.m. at the place of
meeting provided in § 3-6, provided that when any such day falls upon a
legal holiday, or the Township Clerk is unavailable to attend such meeting
the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding Monday that is not a legal
holiday. Should the Council determine that it is impractical or inconvenient
to hold the meeting on the next succeeding Monday that is not a legal
holiday, the Council may provide by resolution that the meeting may be held
at the same whatsoever day is deemed reasonable and convenient by the
Council.
§ 3-5. Special meetings. [Amended 12-8-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-GG;
3-27-95 by Ord. No. 95-11; 4-22-96 by Ord. No. 96-9]
A. The Mayor or the President of the Council may, and upon written
request of the majority of the members of the Council shall, call a
special meeting of the Council. The request and call for such special
meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting, and no other business
shall be transacted at the meeting. The call for a special meeting shall
be filed with the Township Clerk at least 48 hours before the time for
which the meeting is called, and the Clerk shall forthwith give notice
thereof by telephone or telegraph to each Councilman at such place as
the latter shall have previously designated for that purpose, and, failing
to reach the Councilman by such method, the Clerk shall serve or cause
to be served a written copy of the call upon each Councilman by giving
a copy to him personally or by leaving a copy at his usual place of
abode. The Clerk shall also forthwith release copies of the call to at
least two newspapers, one of which shall be the officially designated
newspaper or newspapers, and post at least one copy of the call in a
prominent place in the Municipal Building. Upon the affirmative vote of
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:13
at least four members of the Council, the Council may hold a meeting,
notwithstanding the failure to provide adequate notice, if:
(1) Such meeting is required in order to deal with matters of such
urgency and importance that a delay for the purpose of providing
adequate notice would be likely to result in substantial harm to the
public interest.
(2) The meeting is limited to discussion of and acting with respect to
such matters of urgency and importance.
(3) Notice of such meeting is provided as soon as possible following the
calling of such meeting by posting written notice of the same in the
public place described herein and also by notifying the two
newspapers referred to herein.
(4) Either the Council could not reasonably have foreseen the need for
such meeting at a time when adequate notice could have been
provided; or, although the Council could reasonably have foreseen
the need for such meeting at a time when adequate notice could
have been provided, it nevertheless failed to do so.
(5) This hereby creates a Quality Circle Advisory Committee whose
purpose is to work toward increased productivity and improved
budget efficiencies by having meetings with official representatives
of the collective bargaining groups, administration and at least two
members of the Municipal Council.
B. At the commencement of every meeting of the Council, the presiding
officer shall announce publicly, and shall cause to be entered in the
minutes of the meeting, an accurate statement to the effect that:
(1) Adequate notice of the meeting has been provided, specifying the
time, place and manner in which such notice was provided; or
(2) Adequate notice was not provided, in which case such
announcement shall state:
(a) The nature of the urgency and importance referred to herein
and the nature of the substantial harm to the public interest
likely to result from a delay in the holding of the meeting.
(b) That the meeting will be limited to discussion of and acting
with respect to such matters of urgency and importance.
(c) The time, place and manner in which notice of the meeting was
provided.
(d) Either the need for such meeting could not reasonably have
been foreseen at a time when adequate notice could have been
provided, in which event such announcement shall specify the
reason why such need could not reasonably have been
foreseen; or that such need could reasonably have been
§ 3-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-5
1:14
§ 3-6. Place of meetings. [Amended 2-23-65 by Ord. No. 65-1-A;
4-25-66 by Ord. No. 66-1-A; 6-27-66 by Ord. No. 66-1-C; 6-28-71 by
Ord. No. 71-1-P; 9-27-76 by Ord. No. 76-1-TT; 2-14-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-WW; 5-23-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-FFF]
All public meetings of the Council, both agenda meetings and action
meetings, shall be held at the East Brunswick Municipal Building, 1 Jean
Walling Civic Center, East Brunswick, New Jersey, except that for special
reasons or in case of an emergency making it impractical to conduct the
business of the Council at the Municipal Building, the Council, upon such
reasonable public notice as the circumstances permit, may meet in or
adjourn a meeting to any other public building.
§ 3-7. Meetings open to the public; exceptions. [Amended 3-25-74
by Ord. No. 74-1-DD; 12-8-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-FF]
foreseen at a time when adequate notice could have been
provided, but such notice was not provided, in which event the
announcement shall specify the reason why adequate notice
was not provided.
A. Public meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
The Council may, however, exclude the public from that portion of a
meeting at which it discusses:
(1) Any matter which by express provisions of federal law or state
statute or rule of court shall be rendered confidential.
(2) Any matter in which the release of information would impair a right
to receive funds from the United States.
(3) Any material the disclosure of which constitutes an unwarranted
invasion of individual privacy as defined in the Open Public
Meetings Act.
Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 10:4-6 et seq.
(4) Any collective-bargaining agreement, including the negotiation of
the terms and conditions thereof, with employees or
representatives of employees of the Township of East Brunswick.
(5) Any matter involving the purchase, lease or acquisition of real
property with public funds, the setting of banking rates or
investment of public funds, where it could adversely affect the
public interest if discussion of such matters were disclosed.
(6) Any tactics and techniques utilized in protecting the safety and
property of the public, provided that their disclosure could impair
such protection and any investigations of violations or possible
violations of the law.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:15
(7) Any pending or anticipated litigation or contract negotiation in
which the Township may become a party and any matters falling
within the attorney-client privilege to the extent that confidentiality
is required in order for the attorney to exercise his or her ethical
duties as a lawyer.
(8) Any matter involving employment, evaluation of the performance
of, promotion or disciplining of any current or prospective public
employee or officer, unless all the individual employees or
appointees whose rights could be adversely affected request in
writing that such matter or matters be discussed at a public
meeting.
(9) Any deliberation after a public hearing that may result in the
imposition of a specific civil penalty or the suspension or loss of a
license or permit.
B. Public agenda meetings. In public agenda meetings, the public will be
permitted to participate in the proceedings, at the discretion of the
Chair. Such a meeting shall be held preceding each regular meeting at
the Municipal Building for the purpose of reviewing the agenda. All
reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents
or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the
Clerk at a reasonable time in advance of a public agenda conference
meeting, whereupon the Clerk shall, as far in advance of such meeting
as circumstances will permit, furnish a copy thereof to each member of
the Council, the Mayor, the Business Administrator and the Township
Attorney. [Amended 3-22-76 by Ord. No. 76-1-OO; 3-23-87 by Ord.
No. 87-827]
C. Procedure. The Council shall not exclude the public from any meeting
to discuss any matter described in this section until the Council shall
first adopt a resolution, at a meeting to which the public shall be
admitted, stating the general nature of the subject to be discussed and
stating, as precisely as possible, the time when and the circumstances
under which the discussion conducted in closed session can be
disclosed to the public.
D. Notice of meetings. All municipal agencies required to comply with the
Open Public Meetings Act of 1975 (Sunshine Laws), as set forth in
§ 3-52, shall furnish the Township Clerk with an annual schedule, or any
revision thereof, of regular meetings to be held during the year and
shall furnish the Township Clerk with notice of the time, date, location
and, to the extent known, the agenda, at least 48 hours in advance of
any meeting not referred to in the annual schedule or revision. The
Clerk shall post all such schedules and notices in the main lobby of the
Municipal Building, shall provide notice to the newspapers, shall
maintain a copy in his office and shall certify to the foregoing in writing.
The Clerk's written certification shall be delivered to the presiding
officer of the municipal agency, who shall state at a public meeting that
adequate notice of the meeting has been given. Any person may request
§ 3-7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-7
1:16
§ 3-8. President and Vice President of Council. [Amended 11-12-79
by Ord. No. 79-197]
The Council, at its first meeting on or after January 1 of any year, shall
elect a President of the Council from among its members, to serve for a
term of one year or until the election and qualification of his/her successor.
At the same time the Council may elect a Vice President of the Council,
to serve for a period of one year or until the election and qualification of
his/her successor, who shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of
the President of the Council whenever the President may be absent. In the
absence of both the President and Vice President of the Council, the Council
shall elect a temporary presiding officer who shall have the functions,
powers and duties of the President during his/her absence. Upon the arrival
of the President or the Vice President, as the case may be, the officer
presiding shall relinquish the Chair immediately upon the conclusion of the
particular item of business before the Council. The President of the Council
shall preside at its meetings. He/she shall preserve order and decorum at
all meetings of the Council. He/she shall state every question coming before
the Council, announce the decisions of the Council and decide all questions
of order, subject to appeal to the Council. He/she shall appoint all special
committees with the advice and consent of the Council and shall sign all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his/her presence.
§ 3-9. Roll call.
As soon as a meeting is called to order, the Clerk or his Deputy shall
alphabetically call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
shall be entered in the minutes.
§ 3-10. Quorum.
A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall constitute a
quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council, but a lesser
number may adjourn any meeting from time to time.
§ 3-11. Order of business. [Amended 4-23-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-U;
2-14-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-XX; 3-11-85 by Ord. No. 85-643; 2-28-94 by
Ord. No. 94-10]
the Clerk to mail him copies of any regular meeting schedule or revision
and any advance written notice of any regular, special or rescheduled
meeting of a municipal agency upon payment of a fee of $25 which
will entitle such person to receive notice until December 31 of the year
in question. The payment of $25 shall cover all municipal agencies or
any lesser number referred to in § 3-52. [Added 2-9-76 by Ord. No.
76-1-MM]
Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 104-6 et seq.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:17
A. The business of the Council at each action meeting shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the following order: [Amended
2-28-94 by Ord. No. 94-10]
(1) Roll call.
(2) Scheduling public hearings.
(3) Reports of Mayor, administrative officers, boards and committees.
(4) General public discussions.
(5) Consent agenda.
(6) Unfinished business.
(7) New business.
(8) Petitions and communications.
(9) Adjournment.
B. Those items on the council agenda which are considered routine by the
Municipal Council shall be marked with an asterisk. Prior to voting
upon any item on the consent agenda, the Chair shall open the meeting
to the public and Council to entertain requests for removal from the
consent agenda. There will be no separate discussion of items on the
consent agenda unless a Council member or citizen so request, in which
event the item will be removed from the consent agenda and considered
in its normal sequence on the agenda. Items to be included in the
consent agenda may include, but are not limited to, the following:
approval of minutes, payment of bill list, conveyances, easements,
leases and agreements previously approved in principle and award of
bids. Those items which appear on the consent agenda are not required
to be read at the public meeting in their entirety but may be read by
description only. If a Council member requests the removal of an item
from the consent agenda, the Clerk shall read that item by title only,
unless the Council member requests that the item be read in its
entirety. Once a matter is placed on the consent agenda, there will be
no separate discussion of that item. Those items so approved under the
consent agenda will appear in the Council minutes in their complete
and proper form. [Amended 3-13-78 by Ord. No. 78-3-A2; 4-8-85 by
Ord. No. 85-654]
2. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 78-3-A provided for the deletion of the sentence of this
subsection which provided an expiration for the effectiveness of the subsection. Section 3
of Ordinance No. 78-3-A provided as follows: "It is the intent of the East Brunswick
Township Council that the ordinance providing for a consent agenda is a permanent part
of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick, with no effective expiration date, unless
and until further action is taken by the East Brunswick Township Council."
§ 3-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-12
1:18
§ 3-12. Reading of minutes.
Unless a reading of the minutes of the previous meeting is requested by a
member of the Council, such minutes may be approved without a reading if
the Clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof.
§ 3-13. Rules of debate.
A. Presiding officer may debate and vote. The President or such other
member of the Council as may be presiding may move, second and
debate from the Chair, subject to such limitations of debate as are by
these rules imposed on all members, and shall not be deprived of any of
the rights and privileges of a Councilman by reason of his acting as the
presiding officer.
B. Obtaining the floor, improper references to be avoided. Every member
desiring to speak shall address the Chair and, upon recognition by the
presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate,
avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
C. Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he
shall be permitted to proceed.
D. Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
E. Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be
made either immediately during the same session or at a recessed or
adjourned session and may be seconded by any member. It may be
made at any time and have precedence over all other motions, and it
shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any
member of the Council from making or remaking the same or any other
motion at a subsequent meeting of the Council.
F. Synopsis of debate; when entered in minutes. The Clerk shall enter in
the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming before
the Council.
G. Remarks of councilman; when entered in minutes. A Councilman may
request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an
abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the
Council entered in the minutes.
H. Motion to adjourn. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and
shall be decided without debate.
I. Other matters. Any matter not covered by these rules shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order (Revised).
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14
1:19
§ 3-14. Order of vote.
Whenever a roll call vote is necessary, the Council shall vote alphabetically,
with the presiding officer voting last.
§ 3-15. Effect of Councilman not voting.
Voting silence or an abstention shall be construed as a vote with the
majority, except where a member disqualifies himself, in which case he shall
be considered as absent.
§ 3-16. Standing committees.
There shall be no standing committees of the Council other than the
committee of the whole. The President of the Council shall be the presiding
officer of the committee of the whole, and the rules of procedure of the
Council shall be observed in the committee of the whole as far as the same
may be applicable.
§ 3-17. Manner of addressing Council.
Upon recognition by the Chair, the person shall proceed to the floor and give
his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records. Unless
further time is granted by the Council, he shall limit his statement to five
minutes. Statements shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not
to any member thereof. A Councilman shall not direct any question to a
speaker addressing the Council, except through the presiding officer.
§ 3-18. Enforcement of order.
The President of the Council may request the Division of Police to designate
a police officer to serve as Sergeant-at-Arms at Council meetings. He shall
carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum at Council meetings, and it
shall be his duty to place any person under arrest who violates the order
and decorum of a meeting and to cause him to be prosecuted under the
provisions of this Code upon a complaint signed by the presiding officer.
§ 3-19. Adoption of ordinances and resolutions.
A. All ordinances shall be prepared by the Township Attorney upon
direction of the Council or the Mayor. Prior to introduction, each
proposed ordinance requiring or permitting administrative action may
be submitted to the Administrator and the department head concerned,
each of whom shall submit to the Council an opinion as to the
administrative implications of the proposed ordinance or resolution.
B. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Council. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single
object which shall be expressed in its title.
§ 3-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-19
1:20
§ 3-20. Action after Mayor's veto.
Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following a
veto by the Mayor, the Clerk shall append to such ordinance a certification
of the action of the Council upon such reconsideration in substantially the
following form:
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
on the _____day of __________, 20_____, was delivered to the Mayor on the
_____day of __________, 20____, and was returned to me on the _____day of
___________, 20 _____, together with the Mayor's statement of the reasons for
which he was constrained to withhold his approval of such ordinance, item
or part thereof. On reconsideration thereof on the _____day of __________,
20_____(the Council duly resolved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its
members to enact such ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the
Mayor's veto), or (the Mayor's veto was sustained)."
Dated: __________
Clerk: __________
§ 3-21. Ordinances not returned by the Mayor.
Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk
within 10 days after it has been presented to him, the Clerk shall append to
such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form:
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the Council
on the _____day of __________, 20_____, and was presented to the Mayor duly
C. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the
manner provided by general law. Each ordinance passed by the Council
shall be promptly delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor, and he shall,
within 10 days after receiving any ordinance, either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the Council by
delivering it to the Clerk, together with a statement setting forth his
objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance or any
item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval,
unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the Council within 10
days after it has been presented to him or unless the Council, upon
reconsideration thereof on or after the third day following its return by
the Mayor, shall, by a vote of two thirds (2/3) of the members, resolve to
override the Mayor's veto.
D. No ordinance other than the local Budget Ordinance shall take effect
less than twenty (20) days after its final passage by Council and
approval by the Mayor, where such approval is required, unless the
Council shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least
two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Council vote in favor of such
resolution.
§ 3-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21
1:21
certified on the _____day of __________, 20_____, and upon his failure to sign
it or to return and file it with the Clerk within ten days thereafter, the said
ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had signed it."
Dated: __________
Clerk: __________
§ 3-22. Matters required to be filed with Clerk.
The Council shall file with the Clerk all petitions, resolutions or other
papers considered by it on each matter. All reports to the Council and all
resolutions shall be filed with the Clerk.
§ 3-23. Appointments.
With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member of the
Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to be filled.
Where there is a single office to be filled, the sense of the Council on the
appointment shall be taken as to each nominee, and the nominee receiving
a majority shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more than one office
to be filled, such as on a board or authority, the same procedure shall
be followed with respect to each office separately until the total number
of appointments to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the
Chair, a group of nominations may be considered at once where there is no
apparent division in the Council as to the nominees included in the group.
§ 3-23.1. Community Housing Corporation appointments. [Added
10-9-78 by Ord. No. 78-70]
The East Brunswick Township Council shall have the authority to appoint
one person to serve as a trustee on the East Brunswick Community Housing
Corporation for a period of two years. The appointee may be a member of
the Township Council or a member of the general public.
§ 3-23.2. East Brunswick Arts Coalition, Nonprofit, LLC
appointments. [Added 6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-10]
The East Brunswick Arts Coalition Board shall consist of 12 members, of
which seven will be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
council.
The seven voting members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of Council shall be allocated as follows:
Four (4) members will be residents of the Township.
Three (3) members will be selected using the Creative Arts Inventory and
are not required to be residents of the Township.
Each of following Organizations, the Township Arts Commission, Museum
Corporation, Human Relations Commission, Historical Society, and
§ 3-21 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-23.2
1:22
Playhouse 22 shall appoint one member to represent their Organization on
the Board, for a total five members.
§ 3-24. Removal of officers and members of boards and
commissions.
§ 3-25. Investigations.
The Council may, in its discretion, require any municipal officer to prepare
and submit sworn statements regarding his official duties and the
performance thereof, and the Council may otherwise investigate the
conduct of any department, officer or agency of the municipal government.
A. The Council may for cause remove any municipal officer or member of a
board or commission for which the Council is required by statute to
hold removal hearings, including the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
Planning Board, Environmental Commission and Library Board, but the
Council shall not have the power to remove the Mayor or a member of
Council. Members of all other boards and commissions for which the
Council is not required by statute to hold removal hearings shall be
notified by the chairpersons of the board or commission, if such
member misses two consecutive official meetings without good cause,
that such member shall be removed from the board or commission if he
or she misses a third meeting without good cause. The member shall
have a right to appeal and request a hearing before the entire board or
commission, which hearing and general proceedings shall be conducted
under the same terms and provisions governing Council hearings under
§ 3-24B and C of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick, and such
board or commission shall conduct all other hearings on removal of a
member for cause. [Amended 9-27-76 by Ord. No. 76-1-QQ]
B. The Council shall consider a motion to remove for cause only after
removal has been duly proposed and considered at an agenda
conference.
C. A motion for removal shall set forth the alleged cause for removal,
making specific charges, and provide for notice and an opportunity to
be heard to the affected officer. The Clerk shall forthwith cause a copy
of the motion for removal, together with a statement of the causes and
charges involved and notice of the time and place fixed for the hearing,
to be served personally or by certified mail upon the officer affected.
The hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days
after the date of such service and may be adjourned from time to time.
Such hearings shall be open to the public, and the officer charged shall
be entitled to be represented by his own counsel. Following the
conclusion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall call for a vote on
the motion which shall be determined by a majority vote of the Council.
§ 3-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-26
1:23
§ 3-26. Annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the municipality's
accounts and financial transactions, as required by law. Such annual audit
shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected
by the Council.
§ 3-27. Attorney to the Township Council. [Amended 12-9-68 by Ord.
No. 68-1-G]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XI, the Township Council, by
resolution, may from time to time appoint or retain an attorney, other than
the Township Attorney, to advise and represent the Council in its capacity as
the legislative body and governing body of the Township. No appointment or
retainer shall extend beyond the calendar year in which it is made, except
that the Council may permit an attorney to continue to represent it in any
litigation which continues beyond the end of the calendar year. Whenever
the Council directs the attorney appointed or retained under this section
to represent it in any administrative proceedings or litigation, the Attorney
to the Township Council shall be the official representative of the Council,
and the Township Attorney's position shall be limited to representing the
executive branch of the government.
§ 3-28. Constables. [Amended 4-14-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-CC]
§ 3-29. Smoking at Council meetings prohibited. [Added 1-10-77 by
Ord. No. 76-1-UU]
Due to the fact that smoking is a major cause of disease, disability, public
nuisance and irritation to smokers and nonsmokers alike, it is hereby
provided that smoking shall be prohibited at all meetings of the Township
Council and all joint meetings in which the Township Council takes part.
Notices shall be posted at all Council meetings and on all Council meeting
announcements indicating as follows: "Smoking Not Permitted During
Meetings of Township Council." Any violation of this section shall result in a
fine of not more than $25.
A. The Council may from time to time elect Municipal Constables as
provided for by law (N.J.R.S. 40:41-34 et seq.).
B. The total number of Constables elected shall not exceed five, and each
shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of their
appointment.
C. The Constables shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law and,
before entering upon the execution of their duties, shall furnish bonds
to the municipality in such sums as the Council may deem sufficient.
§ 3-26 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-29
1:24
ARTICLE III
Clerk
§ 3-30. Appointment; term; qualifications; general powers and
duties. [Amended 5-11-81 by Ord. No. 81-348]
The Council shall appoint a Clerk for the term of three years or until the
appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Prior to appointment,
the Clerk shall have been qualified by training and experience to perform
the duties of office. He or she shall serve as Clerk of the Council and have
such other functions, powers and duties as are provided for by the charter
and Code.
§ 3-31. Duties. [Amended 4-23-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-U; 12-28-92 by
Ord. No. 92-54]
The Clerk shall:
§ 3-32. Affixing of Municipal Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the Municipal Seal to be affixed to instruments and
writings when specifically authorized by law or when necessary to exemplify
any document or record in his office or to certify an act or paper which,
A. Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council and of
the proceedings of any special Council committee upon request of the
chairman of the committee.
B. Preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions, and at the close of
each year, with the advice and assistance of the Department of Law, the
Clerk shall compile, codify and bind all the ordinances and resolutions
then in effect and shall properly index such compilation or codification
and provide for its publication.
C. Have and take custody of all the official books, papers and documents of
the municipality for which no other repository is provided by the
charter or ordinance and preserve and keep them safely.
D. Provide secretarial and clerical services for Councilmen in the
discharge of their official duties.
E. Receive and open public bids pursuant to notice thereof at a specified
time during the regular working office hours in the Township of East
Brunswick, which are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday,
except holidays.
F. Receive and process all tax appeals served and filed in accordance with
N.J.R.S. 54:3-21. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-144]
G. Maintain and administer records of vital statistics including births,
deaths and marriages, in accordance with state law and issue marriage
licenses pursuant to law. [Added 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-54]
§ 3-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-32
1:25
from the records of his office, shall appear to be a true copy of any public
record or proceeding. He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be
affixed to any instrument, writing or other paper except as provided in this
subsection, unless required by law.
§ 3-32.1. Use of the logo of the Township of East Brunswick. [Added
11-13-95 by Ord. No. 95-38]
§ 3-33. Publication of ordinances.
The Clerk shall publish ordinances as required by law and shall file in his
office the requisite proofs of such publication.
§ 3-34. Notices to Council. [Amended 2-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-4]
The Clerk shall issue and deliver, with the assistance of the Department of
Public Safety, if needed, all notices of meetings required to be given to the
Council within the time prescribed by law and shall promptly inform Council
members of action taken by the Mayor with respect to any ordinances. The
Clerk shall also deliver with the assistance of the Department of Public
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate the use
of the logo of the Township of East Brunswick.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall
have the meanings set forth herein
TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK — The Township of East Brunswick,
its officers, employees, and duly authorized agents and representatives.
LOGO OF THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK — The symbol,
or any part thereon, officially adopted to be used by the Township
of East Brunswick which includes a graphic design with the words
"home, education and commerce" written thereon and the words "plan,
purpose and progress" written on a ribbon underneath said design,
encircled by a border with the following written words thereon,
"Township of East Brunswick, N.J. Heart of Middlesex County" as
contained in the Municipal Seal.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, corporation, trust,
partnership, board, council, commission, committee or any other entity.
C. Permitted Use of the Logo of the Township of East Brunswick. It shall be
lawful for the Township of East Brunswick to use and display the logo of
the Township of East Brunswick to identify the conduct of official
business of the Township of East Brunswick as defined in this chapter
and to signify attestation of the Township of East Brunswick, as
required by the Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-25 and any other law.
D. Prohibited Uses of the Logo of the Township of East Brunswick. No
person shall use or display the Township logo in an offensive,
slanderous or other manner which would degrade the Township of East
Brunswick.
§ 3-32 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-34
1:26
Safety, if needed, all documentation reasonably needed by the Council
concerning items or matters scheduled for discussion or action at any
Council meeting. Such documentation shall be delivered to Council
members at least 70 hours prior to any Council meeting at which the item
or matter is scheduled for discussion or action. The Council President, or
in his/her absence, the Council Vice President may waive this 70 hours
prior notice requirement if he/she believes that such a waiver is in the best
interest of the public. Any such waiver shall be in writing and shall include
a brief explanation of the reason for the waiver and filed with the Municipal
Clerk. Failure to deliver the documentation within the required time period
shall not invalidate any action taken by the Council. The consideration
by the Council of added starters is to be discouraged, however, added
starters may be considered and acted upon provided that the added starter
is accompanied by a written explanation of why documentation regarding
the same was not delivered to the Council within the above required time
period.
§ 3-35. Administration of licensing provisions.
The Clerk shall administer licenses pursuant to ordinance and general law.
The Department of Public Safety shall assist in inspection and enforcement
procedures required for such licensing.
§ 3-36. Handling of communications. [Amended 5-13-02 by Ord. No.
02-08]
The Clerk shall receive and transmit all written communications directly
or indirectly connected with official Township business, including but not
limited to any memoranda, correspondence, notes, reports, e-mail, facsimile
transmission, or any other writing to or on behalf of the Township Council
in accordance with the Handling of Communications Policy as adopted by
Council resolution. The Handling of Communications Policy shall be kept on
file with the Clerk and may be amended by Council resolution from time to
time.
The list of written communications listed above is not intended to serve
as an all-inclusive list of communications. Other types of written
communications may apply to this section.
All written communications directly or indirectly connected with official
Township business shall be deemed to be public record in accordance with
the Open Public Records Act, P.L. 2001, c. 404 (Jan. 8, 2002).
§ 3-37. Collection of fees.
The Clerk shall charge and receive for the use of the municipality such fees
for transcripts and certifications as shall be authorized by the Council.
§ 3-38. Additional functions.
The Clerk shall also:
§ 3-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-38
1:27
§ 3-39. Custodian of insurance policies, bonds and contracts.
The Clerk shall be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any Township office, officer or employee,
except his own bond which shall be placed in the custody of the Township
Treasurer; all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for
the benefit of the Township or to protect it against any claims, demands
or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Township may be a party.
The Clerk shall also have custody of all leases of property owned by the
Township. The Clerk shall be the depository for and have custody of all
performance bonds running to the Township as obligee and other forms of
noncash security given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other
persons on account of work done or to be done in or for the Township.
§ 3-40. Deputy Clerks.
There may be Deputy Municipal Clerks appointed by the Council who shall
have, exercise and perform the functions, powers and duties of the Clerk in
the absence or upon the direction of the Clerk.
§ 3-41. Issuance of certificates for subdivisions of land. [Repealed
6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-142]
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law and any other law or ordinance and receive for municipal
use the fees prescribed therefor.
Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 19:12-1 et seq.
B. Perform such functions as are vested in municipal clerks by state law
and ordinances relating to bingo and raffles licensing.
C. Have such other different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
§ 3-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-41
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Mayor and Other Administrative Officers
§ 3-42. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
municipality. He shall:
§ 3-42.1. Human Relations Council. [Added 2-25-91 by Ord. No.
91-23; amended 1-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-1; 6-14-93 by Ord. No.
93-31; 1-10-94 by Ord. No. 93-82; 1-22-96 by Ord. No. 95-48]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 10:5-10, the Mayor may appoint members of the
Human Relations Council consisting of 13 citizen members who shall serve
without compensation. One of the members shall be a member of the East
Brunswick Board of Education, to be selected by the President of the East
Brunswick Board of Education and shall serve for a term of 1 year. This
member may be appointed as long as he/she remains a member of the East
Brunswick Board of Education. As a member, this representative has full
voting rights. The Human Relations Council shall attempt to foster through
community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation
among the groups and elements of the inhabitants of the community. The
Human Relations Council is hereby empowered to make recommendations
to the Township Council for the development of policies and procedures in
general and for programs of formal and informal education that will aid in
eliminating all types of discrimination based on race, creed, color, national
origin, ancestry, age, marital status, affectional or sexual orientation or sex.
Three of the first appointees shall serve for a term of 3 years, two of the first
appointees shall serve for a term of 2 years and two of the first appointees
shall serve for a term of 1 year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made
for 3 years. All new appointments shall first be approved by a majority of
A. Enforce the charter and ordinances of the municipality.
B. Supervise all departments and employees and all property and
equipment of the municipal government.
C. Require each department to make an annual and such other reports of
its work as he may deem desirable.
D. Appoint all officers and employees for whose election or appointment
no other provision is made by charter or ordinance.
E. From time to time make such recommendations for action by the
Council as he may deem in the public interest.
F. Report, annually, at the beginning of the year, to the Council and the
public on the work of the previous year and the conditions and
requirements of the municipal government for the current year.
G. Have such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by the
charter and Code.
§ 3-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42.1
1:29
Human Relations Council members before final Mayoral appointment. If a
vacancy occurs in the middle of a term, it shall be filled by the Mayor with
the approval of a majority of Human Relations Council members to complete
the unexpired portion of the remaining term.
§ 3-42.2. Emergency Management Organization. [Moved to 3-87. By
Ord. 15-21, 10/12/15]
§ 3-43. Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate the Administrator, any other department head
or the Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be prevented by
absence from the municipality, disability or other cause from attending
to the duties of his office. During such time the person so designated by
the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor.
Whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend to the duties of his
office for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days for any of the above-stated
reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the Council, who shall
succeed to all rights, powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting
Mayor.
§ 3-44. Interim appointments.
Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the charter or Code to
be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and there
is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy,
in the absence of any contrary provision in the charter or ordinances,
by appointing an acting officer, including the designation of himself as
Acting Business Administrator in the event of a vacancy in that office. Such
appointee shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of the office
until it shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment shall terminate
not later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the appointment, unless
the Council shall by resolution authorize one or more extensions of such
period.
§ 3-45. Appointment and removal of department heads.
A. Each department shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with advice and consent of the Council. Each department
head shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him
and until the appointment and qualification of his successor.
B. The Mayor may, in his discretion, remove the Administrator or any
department head after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to
removing a department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of
his intention with the Council, and such removal shall become effective
on the 20th day after the filing of such notice unless the Council shall,
prior thereto, have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the
whole number of the Council, disapproving the removal.
§ 3-42.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-46
1:30
§ 3-46. Powers and duties of department heads.
Each department head shall:
A. Appoint and, with the approval of the Mayor, remove or suspend
subordinate officers and employees within his department subject to
the provisions of Chapter 28 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick.
B. Direct and supervise the work of the department and its employees.
C. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments, as
need appears.
D. Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
E. Adopt rules and regulations pertaining to his department. No rule or
regulation made by any department shall, except upon written approval
of the Mayor, take effect until at least 10 days after it is filed with the
Township Clerk as required by the charter. This limitation of time shall
not apply, however, to any order, rule or regulation which relates solely
to the organization or internal management of the municipal
government or a part thereof. The Clerk shall maintain a docket of all
orders, rules and regulations filed in his office, which docket shall show
the name of the issuing department, a brief description of the subject
matter and the date of filing. In the case of personnel rules and
regulations, a written copy of the rules and regulations shall be
distributed to the personnel of the department affected thereby and
shall be posted in the office of the department director. Copies shall also
be available to personnel of the department upon request.
F. Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as shall
be approved by the Administrator on the work of the department during
the preceding year.
§ 3-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-46
1:31

ARTICLE V
General Organization
§ 3-47. Departments, Municipal Clerk and Municipal Tax Assessor.
[Amended 11-22-71 by Ord. No. 71-1-Q; 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-174-B3; 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453; 8-27-90 by Ord. No. 90-45;
1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4; 7-26-99 by Ord.
No. 99-21]
The administrative functions, powers and duties of the municipality are
hereby allocated and assigned as follows:
§ 3-47.1. Smoking prohibited at meetings to which public is invited.
[Added 4-10-78 by Ord. No. 78-3]
A. Department of Administrative Services.
B. Department of Finance.
C. Department of Law.
D. Department of Public Safety.
E. Department of Health and Welfare. [Amended 2-9-98 by Ord. No.
98-4]
F. Department of Recreation, Parks, and Community Services. [Deleted
1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1]
G. Department of Planning and Engineering. [Added 8-14-78 by Ord.
No. 78-3; amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
H. Clerk.
I. Tax Assessor.
J. Department of Parks and Public Works. [Added 8-10-87 by Ord. No.
87-861; amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-21]
K. Department on Aging. [Added 8-29-90 by Ord. No. 90-45]
A. Due to the fact that smoking is a major cause of disease, disability,
public nuisance and irritation to smokers and nonsmokers alike, it is
hereby provided that smoking shall be prohibited at all meetings of all
Township boards, agencies, commissions and other bodies, to which
meetings the public has been invited. Notices shall be posted at all such
meetings and on announcements of such meetings indicating the
3. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 76-174B also provided for the repeal of those provisions
establishing the Department of Recreation and Parks (Sec. 2-18 of the former Revised
General Ordinances) as they were added 11-22-71 by Ord. No. 71-1-Q and amended
1-28-74 by Ord. No. 73-1-CC; 6-9-75 by Ord. No. 75-220; 8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-220-A;
9-22-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-EE; 9-22-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-FF.
§ 3-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-47.1
1:33
§ 3-47.2. Prohibiting political fundraising on public property.
[Added 12-14-98 by Ord. No. 98-35]
DEFINITIONS
A. CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of
the federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or
political organization at an election.
B. CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other
thing of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political
organization and all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of
liability to make any such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to
have been made upon the date when such commitment is made or
liability assumed.
C. POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Means any two or more persons acting
jointly, or any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or
promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or
candidates for federal, state, county, municipal or school board office.
A Political Organization includes, but is not limited to, organizations
otherwise defined as a political committee, a joint candidates
committee, and legislative leadership committee.
D. MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department,
board, commission or agency thereof.
E. MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position
in the municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board
or office thereof, whether the position is full time or part time,
compensated or uncompensated; and any employee of municipal
government or in any agency, commission, board or office thereof,
whether the position is full time or part time.
F. SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a Contribution
as same is defined herein.
G. PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles,
phones, fax machines, computers or other office equipment or supplies
and other real or personal property owned, leased or controlled by the
municipality, except for public roads and open park land and public
recreational facilities regularly made available for public use.
GENERAL REGULATIONS
following: "Smoking not permitted during meetings of East Brunswick
boards, commissions and agencies."
B. Any violation of this section shall result in a fine of not more than $25.
§ 3-47.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-47.2
1:34
A. Prohibition Against Soliciting or Accepting Political Contributions on
Public Property.
(1) No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit
to pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any
contribution for any candidate, elected official or political
organization while in or on the Property of the Municipality or
utilizing the Property of the Municipality.
B. Prohibited Forms of Fundraising.
(1) Prohibited forms of fundraising shall include but are not limited to:
(a) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal
telephones, fax machines or computers.
(b) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal
telephones while on the Property of the Municipality. This
prohibition shall not include the use of private cellular
telephones in private automobiles which are parked or
traveling on municipal property.
(c) Soliciting or accepting contribution through the use of
publicly owned computers or privately-owned personal
computers while on the Property of the Municipality.
(d) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(e) Sending correspondence which solicits contributions. This
prohibition shall not apply to the depositing of United States
Mail in United States Postal boxes which are located on
municipal property.
(f) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the Property of
the Municipality.
(g) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to
accept or solicit contributions.
C. Reporting Requirements. It shall be the responsibility of any employee,
appointed, or elected official who observes any prohibited forms of
fundraising to report such conduct to the municipal ethics board, if
one exists, or in the alternative, to the municipal prosecutor and the
municipal clerk who shall report same to the governing body.
D. Whistleblower Provision. It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected
official or appointee to be dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or
otherwise intimidated for complying with the reporting requirements
mandated by this Ordinance.
E. Violation. Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a
fine not exceeding $1,000.
§ 3-47.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-48
1:35
§ 3-48. Statutory agencies. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453;
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
Editor's Note: This section also contained provisions establishing the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment as they were amended
1-22-68 by Ord. No. 67-1-E; 12-9-68 by Ord. No. 68-1-F; 9-28-70 by Ord. No.
70-1-K; 11-26-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-Z; 12-26-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-BB; 6-27-77
by Ord. No. 77-1-HH. These provisions were deemed superseded by Ord.
No. 76-174-B which provided that the Planning Board would be established
as part of the Division of Development Services within the Department of
Administrative Services and that the Zoning Board of Adjustment would be
established as part of the Division of Code Management Services within the
Department of Administrative Services. Accordingly, the provisions on the
Planning Board as amended, are now § 132-4, and the provisions on the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as amended are now § 132-16.
In addition to the departments and positions provided for in § 3-47, there
shall be the following statutory agencies which are not assigned to any
department:
§ 3-49. Municipal Court. [Amended 4-23-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-U;
7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-80; 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 10-5-09 by Ord.
No. 09-23]
A. Free Public Library. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:54-1 et
seq. the Free Public Library shall be governed by a Board of Trustees
which shall consist of nine members, one of whom shall be the Mayor,
one of whom shall be the Superintendent of School and seven citizens
to be appointed by the Mayor, at least six of whom shall be residents of
the municipality. The initial terms of the five citizens shall be for terms
of one, two, three, four (4) and five years respectively, as they may be
selected by the Mayor, except that the sixth and seventh members shall
have terms of five years each. Upon the expiration of the term of office
of any of the citizen Trustees, the Mayor shall appoint a citizen for a
term of five years in the same manner as the original appointment was
made. Vacancies occurring in the Board of Trustees shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. [Amended 6-27-66 by Ord. No. 66-1-C;
6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-32]
A. Powers. There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.R.S. 2A:8-1, as amended and supplemented to be
known as the "Municipal Court of East Brunswick Township, Middlesex
County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the
impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held in the East
Brunswick Civic Center, 575 Ryders Lane, or such other place as the
Council shall designate from time to time by resolution, and shall
exercise all of the functions, powers, duties and jurisdictions conferred
upon municipal courts by the provisions of N.J.R.S. 2A:8-1, as amended
and supplemented, or any other law.
§ 3-48 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-49
1:36
B. Municipal Judge. [Amended 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 10-5-09 by
Ord. No. 09-23]
(1) There shall be a Municipal Judge, and where necessary a second
Municipal Judge, of the Municipal Court, appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council, who shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor shall be qualified and appointed.
(2) If necessary, a third special Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court
may be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of
appointment and until a successor shall be qualified and appointed.
[Amended 10-5-09 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(3) The Municipal Judges shall have the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdictions conferred by the Laws of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.R.S. 2A:8-1 et seq.) or by general law or ordinance.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
C. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-80]
(1) There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court and, where
necessary, Deputy Clerks, appointed by the Council. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall serve for a term of two years from the
date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified. The Term of each Deputy Court Clerk shall be set by the
resolution appointing him but shall not exceed two years.
(2) The duties of the Municipal Court Administrator and Deputy Clerks
shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(a) Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures
relating to the operation of the Court.
(b) Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants,
receiving complaints and dispensing information relating to
Court matters.
(c) Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
(d) Attending Court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them
in the docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court
documents; and preparing and issuing warrants and
commitments.
(e) Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their
sufficiency and equity; and receiving and accounting for fines
and costs.
§ 3-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:37
§ 3-50. Appointment of Business Administrator; duties.
A Business Administrator, with such qualifications as are provided by the
charter, shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. He shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing
him and until the appointment and qualification of his successor. The Mayor
may, in his discretion, remove any Business Administrator after notice and
an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a Business Administrator, the
Mayor shall first file written notice of his intention with the Council, and
such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after the filing of such
notice unless the Council shall, prior thereto, have adopted a resolution
by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the Council disapproving
the removal. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the
Administrator shall:
(f) Interviewing persons on informal police Court matters to
determine if there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary,
issuing summonses requiring Court appearances in this
regard; and maintaining and classifying records and files.
(3) Before entering upon the duties of his office, each Municipal Court
Administrator and Deputy Clerk shall enter into bond as required
by law.
A. Serve as chief of staff to the Mayor.
B. Supervise the management, planning and operations of all
departments, provided that such supervision shall not extend to the
exercise of the control function in the management of the finances of
the municipality, which shall be exercised by the Director of the
Department of Finance.
C. Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the municipal government not inconsistent with the
charter and Code.
D. Coordinate the operation and administration of the various
departments, divisions, officers and agencies of the municipal
government.
E. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and costs of municipal services.
F. Perform such other duties as the Code may require or as the Council
may otherwise prescribe.
G. Assign and transfer employees temporarily from one department to
another as efficient administration may require.
§ 3-49 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-51
1:38
§ 3-51. Department officers and employees.
Each department shall have such officers and employees with such
compensation and employment rights as shall be authorized by the charter,
Code or other ordinance.
§ 3-52. Agencies subject to Open Public Meetings Act. [Added
12-8-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-HH; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
The following municipal agencies are affected by the Open Public Meetings
Act, Chapter 231 of the Public Laws of 1975 and, as such, are subject to
all sections of this chapter which govern public meetings, agenda meetings
procedure, special meetings and related matters, including §§ 3-5 and 3-7,
as revised:
Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 10:4-6 et seq.
A. Township Council.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Planning Board.
D. Sewerage Authority. [Deleted 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
E. Library Board.
F. Rent Leveling Board.
G. Municipal Youth Guidance Council.
H. Environmental Commission.
I. Commission on Aging.
§ 3-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-52
1:39

ARTICLE VI
Department of Administrative Services
§ 3-53. Department established. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-174-B]
There shall be a Department of Administrative Services, the head of which
shall be the Administrator. He may designate the head of one of the
divisions of the department or another department director as Assistant
Administrator to have such other functions, powers and duties as may be
assigned by the Administrator.
§ 3-54. Division of Human Resources, Budget and Purchasing.
[Amended 4-14-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-CC; 2-9-76 by Ord. No. 76-1-NN;
6-28-76 by Ord. No 76-174-B; 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 1-26-09 by
Ord. No. 09-01]
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the repeal of the former § 3-54,
"Division of Central Services".
A. Within the Department of Administrative Services there shall be a
Division of Human Resources, Budget and Purchasing, to be
administered under the direction of the Business Administrator, the
Division shall:
(1) Prepare bid specifications for all Departments.
(2) Develop and administer the municipality's personnel program,
including up-to-date job classifications and pay plans, active
recruitment of needed personnel, in-service training programs and
a complete system of personnel records of municipal officers and
employees.
(3) Coordinate the processes of appointment and removal of municipal
employees within the various departments and, to this end, review
and approve proposed appointments and discharge of personnel
prior to any such action by any department to ensure compliance
with the provisions of the personnel policies of the Township.
(4) Prescribe and install uniform forms and procedures for budget
preparation by all departments.
(5) Assist the Administrator and the Mayor in the review and analysis
of budget requests and in the preparation of the budget document.
(6) Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services.
(7) Purchase all materials, supplies and equipment, work and labor
required by any department, office or agency of the Township. All
purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials
§ 3-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-54
1:41
or equipment or contractual services shall be pursuant to Article IX
of this chapter. [Amended 2-25-80 by Ord. No. 80-219].
B. Restrictions on the award of contracts to professional entities and
certain other entities who make certain political contributions. [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
(1) Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain contributors.
(a) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the
case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or otherwise
contract to procure services, including banking services/
relationships or insurance coverage services, including
contracts for extraordinary unspecifiable services, from any
professional business entity, if that entity has made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including inkind
contributions, to: (i) a campaign committee of any East
Brunswick candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract: or (ii) any
East Brunswick political party committee, club or similar
organization; or (iii) any political action committee (PAC) that
is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or
supporting East Brunswick municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders or if the municipal candidate or municipal officer
holder is a member of or in involved in the operations of the
PAC, in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection B(1)(d)
within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement.
(b) No professional business entity which enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to, any contract or agreement with the
municipality or any department or agency thereof for the
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage
services or any other no-bid consultants, including contracts
for extraordinary unspecifiable services, shall knowingly make
any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution,
including in-kind contributions, to: (i) any East Brunswick
candidate or holder of the public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract; or (ii) any East
Brunswick party committee, club or similar organization; or
(iii) any PAC that is organized for the primary purpose of
promoting or supporting East Brunswick municipal candidates
or municipal officeholders or if the municipal candidate or
municipal officer holder is a member of or in involved in the
operations of the PAC between the time of first
communications between that business entity and the
Township regarding a specific professional services agreement
and the later of the termination of negotiations or the signing
of the contract or agreement.
§ 3-54 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-54
1:42
(c) For purposes of this subsection, a "professional business
entity" seeking a public contract means an individual including
the individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home;
person; firm; corporation; professional corporation;
partnership; organization; or association. The definition of a
business entity includes all principals who own 10% or more of
the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
(d) Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business
entity" under this section may contribute consistent with the
limits set forth in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-11.3, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-11.4(c)
and (d), and N.J.S.A. 19:44A-11.5 in each election in a year, for
any purpose to each and any candidates for mayor or council,
or to any East Brunswick political party committee, club or
similar organization, political action committee (PAC) that is
organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting
East Brunswick municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders or if the municipal candidate or municipal officer
holder is a member of or in involved in the operations of the
PAC, without violating Subsection B(1)(a) of this section.
(e) For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to
have ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall
be:
[1] The East Brunswick Council, if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council.
[2] The Mayor of East Brunswick, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is
responsible for the award of a contract is appointed by the
Mayor.
(2) Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution of
money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions,
made by a professional business entity to any municipal candidate
for Mayor or Council, or municipal party committee or PAC
referenced in this ordinance shall be deemed a violation of this
section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of
any kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution
was made by the professional business entity prior to the effective
date of this section.
(3) Contribution statement by professional business entity.
(a) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure
services, including banking or insurance coverage services,
with any professional business entity, the Township or any of its
purchasing agents or agencies, including contracts for
extraordinary unspecifiable services as the case may be, shall
§ 3-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-54
1:43
receive a sworn statement from the professional business
entity made under penalty of perjury that the bidder or offer
or has not made a contribution in violation of Subsection A(1)
above.
(b) The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to
report any violations of this Act that may occur during the
negotiation or duration of a contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the
contract or agreement with the Township and shall be in
addition to any other certifications that may be required by any
other provision of law.
(4) Return of excess contributions. A professional business entity or
Township candidate or officeholder or municipal party committee,
club or similar organization, or PAC referenced in this subsection
may cure a violation of Subsection A(1) above, if, within 60 days
after making a contribution(s) which violates said Subsection A(1),
the professional business entity notifies the Township Council in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution
from the Township candidate or municipal political party, club or
similar organization, or PAC referenced in this subsection.
(5) Penalty.
(a) All East Brunswick professional service agreements shall
provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government
contract for a professional business entity as defined in
Subsection A(1)(c) to violate Subsection A(1)(b) or to
knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given, or to
make contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
(b) Any professional business entity as defined in Subsection
A(1)(c) and (d) who knowingly fails to reveal a contribution
made in violation of this Act, or who knowingly makes or makes
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution,
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future East Brunswick
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of
the violation.
(6) Severability. If any provision of this subsection, or the application
of any such provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held
invalid, the remainder of this subsection to the extent it can be
given effect, or the application of such provision to persons or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not
be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this
subsection are severable.
§ 3-54 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-54.1
1:44
§ 3-54.1. Special Assistant to the Mayor. [Added 1-27-97 by Ord. No.
97-1; deleted 1-26-09 by Ord. No. 09-01]
§ 3-54.2. Division of Recreation. [Added 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1;
amended 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4; 11-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-28;
7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-21 (See § 3-59 for listing of other
ordinances); 6-26-00 by Ord. No. 00-4; 12-22-08 by Ord. No. 08-23]
Editor's Note: This ordinance deleted § 3-59, Department of Recreation,
Parks § Community Services and incorporated it into new § 3-54.2, Divisions
of Recreation and Parks.
Editor's Note: See Department of Parks and Public Works, Article VIII.
Deleted 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32.
§ 3-54.3. Division of Economic Development. [Added 2-27-17 by
Ord. No. 17-09]
Within the Department of Administrative Services, there shall be a Division
of Economic Development, hereinafter referred to as the "Division". The
head of the Division shall be the Economic Development Officer.
The Economic Development Officer shall:
A. Assess the availability of vacant lands in the Township for economic
development purposes and classify such vacant lands according to their
adaptability for development thereon of various types of industrial,
professional, commercial and other business enterprises.
B. Advertise and promote the economic advantages and opportunities of
the Township and the availability of real estate within the Township for
economic development.
C. Act as a liaison on behalf of existing local business owners and potential
business owners in obtaining various permits and approvals from the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Environmental
Commission, Construction Inspection, Code Enforcement and any other
area of Municipal Government deemed applicable.
D. Undertake such other activities that may result in the retention,
improvement and attraction of professional, commercial, industrial and
other business development to the Township.
E. Help to implement all redevelopment plans.
F. Develop and administer the Shop East Brunswick Program.
§ 3-54.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-54.3
1:45

ARTICLE VII
Department of Planning and Engineering Department on Aging
[Added 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No.
89-12; 8-29-90 by Ord. No. 90-45; 1-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-2; 3-8-93
by Ord. No. 93-10; 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 2-9-98 by Ord. No.
98-4; 11-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-28; 4-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-19; 2-27-17
by Ord. 17-09]
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the addition of Art. VII,
Department of Planning and Community Development, and the repeal of
former §§ 3-55, Planning Management Agency, as amended, and 3-56,
Division of Development Services, as amended. The ordinance further
provided for the renumbering of Arts. VII through XVII to become IX
through XIX, respectively.
§ 3-55. Department of Planning and Engineering established.
[Amended 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4; 4-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-19;
2-27-17 by Ord. 17-09]
There shall be a Department of Planning and Engineering, the head of
which shall be the Director of Planning and Engineering, hereafter referred
to as the Planning Director. The Department shall include such officers and
employees as shall be required to fulfill its responsibilities set forth in the
following sections.
A. Under the direction and supervision of the Planning Director, the
Department shall be responsible for the conduct of all long-range
planning activity. As part of these responsibilities, the Department
shall:
(1) Advise and assist the Mayor, Council and the Planning Board in all
long-range planning and management matters relating to the
public and private development of the municipality.
(2) Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the municipality and report thereon to the
Planning Board, the Mayor and the Council.
(3) Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to
serve as the basis for planning recommendations.
(4) Conduct studies and prepare materials for the Master Plan or
general plans for development of the municipality and their
implementation.
(5) Prepare, evaluate and present to the Mayor, Council and Planning
Board plans for redevelopment and renewal of the municipality.
(6) Coordinate the long-range planning activity of all municipal
agencies.
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:47
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Planning Director, the
Project Planner shall be responsible for the oversight of all
development review within the Township, to ensure that all plans
comply with the procedures and specifications set forth in Chapter 132
of the Code, Land Use Procedures, Chapter 192, Subdivision of Land,
Chapter 228, Zoning, of the Code and such other sections of the Code or
charter that may pertain to development review. As part of these
responsibilities, the Department shall:
(1) Review, coordinate and evaluate with other agencies proposed site
plan and subdivision plats and variance applications for conformity
with municipal ordinances and to advise the Planning Board and
Zoning Board on all such matters.
(2) Maintain files and records on all maps, site plans, variances,
subdivisions and other planning data.
(3) Provide a secretariat and such staff assistance as the Planning
Board, Zoning Board and the Historic Preservation Commission
may require in the performance of their functions.
C. Under the direction and supervision of the Planning Director, the
Department shall administer all applications for aid from county, state,
federal or other sources.
D. Under the direction and supervision of the Planning Director, the
Department shall develop and administer programs and activities for
the rehabilitation of housing and the conservation of neighborhoods.
E. Planning Board. There shall be a Planning Board as established in
Chapter 132, Land Use Procedures. There is hereby established the
position of Attorney to the Planning Board. The Attorney shall be
appointed by the Planning Board at the first regular meeting of the
Planning Board after January 1 of each year. The term of the Attorney
shall be for a period of one year or until the appointment and
qualification of his successor. The compensation to be paid to the
Attorney shall be established by the Township Council in the annual
municipal budget. The Attorney shall be paid an annual retainer
covering the following services: attendance at two meetings per month
of the Planning Board; conferences with members of the Planning
Board, administrative staff, consultants and other professionals; legal
advice to the Planning Board and administrative staff; drafting of
resolutions and administrative functions required for preparation and
implementation of the budget. The Attorney shall be reasonably
compensated on a voucher basis for the non-retainer services and for all
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by him or her in connection with the
performance of those services; litigation; legal research, conferences
and other work related to litigations; drafting of ordinances; and
attendance and preparation for attendance at all meetings in excess of
twenty-four (24) in any calendar year.
§ 3-55 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-55
1:48
F. Division of Citizen and Consumer Services. [Added 4-24-89 by Ord.
No. 89-12; deleted 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1]
G. East Brunswick Economic Development Advisory Council. For the
purpose of advising and assisting the Mayor in promulgating economic
development strategies, there shall be an East Brunswick Economic
Development Advisory Council, hereinafter referred to as the
"Economic Advisory Council", which shall form advisory subcommittees
as it deems necessary. The Economic Advisory Council shall:
(1) Make periodic recommendations to the Mayor concerning areas of
economic growth that would be suitable for the Township.
(2) Make periodic recommendations to the Mayor concerning
programs that maintain and improve the existing commercial and
industrial base.
(3) Make periodic recommendations to the Mayor concerning
strategies that will help beautify commercial and industrial
properties within the Township and promote same through the use
of awards and other means.
(4) Submit an annual report to the Mayor.
The Economic Advisory Council shall consist of nine members.
One (1) shall be a member of the Township Council or his/her
designee. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Mayor. Three
(3) members shall be appointed by Council. The Chairman of the
Planning Board or his/her designee shall serve as a member. The
Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or his/her designee
shall serve as a member. All members shall serve for a term of three
years, provided, however, that of the members first appointed,
three shall be appointed for a term of one year, three shall be
appointed for a term of two years, and three shall be appointed for
a term of three years. The Mayor or his/her designee shall be ex
officio members of the Economic Advisory Council. The Mayor shall
designate the member of the Economic Advisory Council who shall
serve as its Chair. The Economic Advisory Council shall meet at
least four (4) times (i.e., quarterly) each year. Additional meetings
shall be held as required and deemed necessary by the Chair of the
Economic Advisory Council. [Amended 2-8-16 Ord. 16-03]
H. Zoning Board of Adjustment. There will be a Zoning Board of
Adjustment as established by Chapter 132, Land Use Procedures. There
is hereby established the position of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Attorney shall be appointed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment after January 1 of each year. The term of the Attorney shall
be for a period of one year or until the appointment and qualification of
his successor. The compensation to be paid to the Attorney shall be
established by the Township Council in the annual municipal budget.
The Attorney shall be paid on annual retainer covering the following
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:49
services: attendance at two meetings per month of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment; conferences with members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, administrative staff, consultants and other professionals;
legal advice to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and administrative
staff; drafting of resolutions; and administrative functions required
for preparation and implementation of the budget. The Attorney shall
be reasonably compensated on a voucher basis for the non-retainer
services and for all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by him or her in
connection with the performance of those services; litigation; legal
research, conferences and other work related to litigation; drafting
of ordinances; and attendance and preparation for attendance at all
meetings in excess of twenty-four (24) in any calendar year.
I. Rent Leveling Board. There shall be a Rent Leveling Board as
established by Chapter 169, Rent Control. The Department shall
provide a secretariat and such staff assistance as the Board may require
in the performance of its duties.
J. Under the direction and supervision of the Planning Director, there
shall be a Township Engineer who shall be responsible for all
engineering functions for the Township. The term of office for the
Township Engineer shall be in conformance with the appointment and
termination procedures for exempt employees found in Chapter 28,
Personnel Policies, of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick. As
part of these responsibilities, the Department shall: [Amended
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-90]
(1) Provide all staff engineering required, with the assistance of such
consultants as may from time to time be authorized.
(2) Prepare, maintain and preserve maps, charts and records of roads,
utilities, public buildings and structures of all public facilities
owned or operated by the municipality.
(3) Prepare, review and approve specifications for public works,
contracts, supervise and inspect the execution of such contracts
and certify satisfactory completion of work to authorize progress
payments pursuant to contract.
(4) Review proposed preliminary and final subdivision plats for
conformity with Chapter 192, Subdivision of Land, Chapter 132,
Land Use Procedures, and other land use requirements and advise
the Planning Board and Zoning Board as to such matters. The
Planning Board and Zoning Board shall not act on any subdivision
or variance application unless and until the findings and
recommendations of the Department have been submitted to the
Board and made a part of its public record.
(5) Maintain the Tax Map for the Division of Assessments in a current
status and promptly record thereon all changes of ownership from
information provided pursuant to law.
§ 3-55 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-55
1:50
(6) Furnish assessment searches in conformity with all statutory
requirements. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-141]
K. East Brunswick Business Appearance Improvement Committee also
known as "EB 18". [Added 1-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-2; deleted
4-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-19]
L. For the purposes of budgeting, personnel, purchasing and assignment
of staff assistance, the following Boards are assigned and allocated
within the Department of Planning and Engineering:
(1) Advisory Committee on Housing.
(2) Council on Economic Health.
(3) Historic Preservation Commission.
(4) Planning Board.
(5) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(6) Rent Leveling Board.
(7) Environmental Commission. [Added 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4]
M. Beautification Committee. [Added 3-8-93 by Ord. No. 93-10; deleted
4-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-19]
N. Division of Construction Inspection. [Added 8-14-78 by Ord. No.
78-49; amended 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former
§ 3-69, Powers and duties of Director (of Finance), amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-174-B.
This ordinance deleted the former § 3-69, and moved Division of
Construction Inspection from Department of Finance to Department of
Planning and Engineering.
Within the Department of Planning and Engineering there shall be a
Division of Construction Inspection, the head of which shall be the
Manager or Chief Construction Official.
(1) Under the supervision and direction of the Director, the Division
shall:
Administer and supervise the enforcement of Chapter 75,
Construction Codes, Uniform; Chapter 195, Swimming Pools,
Private; Chapter 197, Swimming Pools, Public; and Chapter 49,
Architectural Review, of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick, and such other codes or ordinances as the Director may
assign.
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:51
Inspect and approve all installations made in accordance with the
approval of the Planning Board or Zoning Board under subdivision
or site plan approvals.
(2) For the purposes of budgeting, personnel, purchasing and
assignments of staff assistance, the Construction Board of Appeals
is allocated and assigned to the Division of Construction Inspection.
O. Environmental Commission. [Added 5-29-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-V;
amended 8-26-74 by Ord. No. 74-192; 1-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-6;
2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4]
(1) Establishment of Commission purposes. The Conservation
Commission of the Township of East Brunswick, also to be known
as the "Environmental Commission," is hereby established
pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 (N.J.R.S. 40:56A-1 to
40:56A-5). The Commission is established for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Township of
East Brunswick.
(2) Members; appointment; term. The Commission shall consist of not
less than five nor more than seven members appointed by the
Mayor, one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board
and all of whom shall be residents of the Township of East
Brunswick. The members shall serve without compensation except
as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall designate one of the
members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the
Commission. The terms of office of the first Commissioners shall be
for one, two or three years, to be designated by the Mayor in
making the appointments, and their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification
of their successors. The appointments shall be made in such a
manner so that the terms of approximately one-third (1/3) of the
members shall expire each year.
There shall be two alternate members of the Environmental
Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1. The alternate members shall be designated at
the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2". The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed
shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate
No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate member
shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority
for the unexpired term only. An alternate member shall not be
permitted to act on any matter in which he has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate member
may, after public hearing if he requests one, be removed by the
governing body for cause. An alternate member may participate
§ 3-55 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-55
1:52
in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first. [Amended
1-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-6]
(3) Vacancies. The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a
hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
(4) Powers of Commission. The Commission shall have power to
conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas in the Township and may coordinate the activities of
unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and may advertise,
prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its
purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas and may, from time to time, recommend to the Planning
Board plans and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the
development and use of such areas.
(5) Acquisition by Commission. The Commission may, subject to the
approval of the Township Council, acquire property, both real and
personal, in the name of the Township of East Brunswick by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes
and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to the
terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to
acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual
right (including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or
reversions), as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve,
protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the Township.
(6) Records and annual reports. The Commission shall keep records of
its meetings and activities and make an annual report to the Mayor
and Township Council.
(7) Appropriations. The Commission may appoint such clerks and
other employees as it may from time to time require, provided that
the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it by the
Township Council.
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56
1:53
§ 3-56. Department on Aging established. [Added 8-29-90 by Ord.
No. 90-45; amended 6-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-10]
§ 3-56.1. Commission on Aging. [Amended 11-9-98 by Ord. No.
98-28; 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-16]
A. Department established. There shall be a Department on Aging, the
head of which shall be the Director of Aging. The Department shall
include such officers and employees as shall be required to fulfill its
responsibilities set forth in the following sections. Under the
supervision and directions of the Director, the Department on Aging
shall:
(1) Provide and operate an older adults drop-in center to provide social
and recreational programming for the older adults of the
community.
(2) Develop and coordinate a comprehensive program for the delivery
of services to older adults, including group and individual
counseling, vocational counseling and referral services to other
related agencies.
(3) Develop, implement and evaluate a program of leisure and
recreation services for older adults.
(4) Assist and promote in the development of programs serving the
elderly in cooperation with public, semi-public and private agencies
in the community.
(5) Act as an advocate for the elderly. To identify the needs of the
elderly. To assess the adequacy of existing programs and to
promote the implementation of solutions to problems confronting
older residents.
(6) Formulate and prepare community recreation plans and reports.
Submit an annual report documenting the activities and
accomplishments of the Office on Aging.
(7) Apply for grants, obtain interns, seek selection as a demonstration
site for new State and Federal programs interrelate with Municipal,
County, State and Federal services in the area of health, welfare
and human services.
(8) Offer special classes which are fee based in order to service a
special population and fees are to be reported to the Mayor and
Municipal Council thirty (30) days before the class or program may
be established. [Added 6-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-10]
A. Within the Department of Aging there shall be a Commission on Aging
which shall consist of not more than thirteen (13) members to be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council. Eleven (11) members shall serve for staggered terms of three
§ 3-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-56.1
1:54
years each, except that one member may receive a lifetime appointment
if that member has been a major contributor to the enhancement of
life for our senior population in the community, beginning with the first
day of January. One student member shall be appointed for a term of
one year, to run from June through May. Three (3) of the members shall
be professionals in the field of Geriatrics. These members will be exofficio
members who must work or live in East Brunswick. The Director
of the Department on Aging shall serve as Executive Secretary of the
Commission and shall be an ex officio member. Ex-officio members shall
have no voting privileges. [Amended 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-16]
B. The members of the Commission on Aging shall organize annually and
select a President, Vice President and Recording Secretary. The
Commission shall meet regularly and at such other times as the
President may direct.
C. The Commission on Aging shall be charged with the responsibility to
advise in the coordination and integration of programs and services
affecting the welfare of older adults aged sixty (60) and older who are
residents of East Brunswick. Residents eligible by age as described
above may enroll and participate in the programs and activities of the
Senior Citizens Center and Department on Aging.
D. The Commission shall report, advise and make recommendations to
[Amended 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-16]:
(1) The Department on Aging.
(2) The Mayor and Local Governing Body.
E. One (1) member of the Commission on Aging shall serve as a member of
the Recreation and Parks Advisory Board.
§ 3-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56.1
1:55

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Parks and Recreation
[Added 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; amended 4-8-85 by Ord. No.
85-653; 8-10-87 by Ord. No. 87-861; 8-27-90 by Ord. No. 90-45;
1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20; 9-27-10 by
Ord. No. 10-22; 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the addition of Art. VIII,
Department of Recreation, Parks and Public Works and the repeal of
former § 3-57, Division of Code Management Services, as amended.
The ordinance further provided for the renumbering of Arts. VII
through XVII to become IX through XIX, respectively.
§ 3-57. Department established. [Amended 7-27-81 by Ord. No.
81-366; deleted 4-8-85 by Ord. No. 85-653]
§ 3-58. Department of Parks and Recreation. [Amended 8-10-87 by
Ord. No. 87-861; 1-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 7-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-20; 11-18-02 by Ord. No. 02-05; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22;
12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
Department Established. There shall be a Department of Parks and
Recreation, the head of which shall be the Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Director shall serve as head of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
The Director shall be responsible for the supervision of all operations of
the Department of Parks and Recreation. The Department of Parks and
Recreation shall include such officers and employees as shall be required to
fulfill its responsibilities set forth in the following sections:
A. Under the supervision and direction of the Director, the Department of
Parks and Recreation shall: [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20;
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22; 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) Provide, maintain and repair playgrounds, playfields, indoor and
outdoor recreational facilities, public parks and public lands.
[Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(2) Coordinate the planning, acquisition and development of park
properties and other public lands. [Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-20]
(3) Designate by journal and maintain inventory of the various parks
and public lands. [Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(4) Provide and direct a Park Ranger Program to enforce the
provisions of Chapter 158-11 and rules and regulations adopted to
govern Parks and public lands usage. [Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-20; amended 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
§ 3-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58
1:57
(5) Manage the operations of the Crystal Springs Family Waterpark
Utility. [Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20; amended 4-24-17
by Ord. No. 17-19]
(6) Formulate and prepare community park plans and reports. Submit
an annual report documenting the activities and accomplishments
of the Department of Parks and Recreation as it relates to the
preservation, maintenance, planning, acquisition and development
of parks. [Added 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20; amended
12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(7) Develop, implement, and evaluate a program of recreation services
for children, youth and adults including, but not limited to sports,
social, instructional, environmental and outdoor recreation
programs. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(8) Develop, coordinate, evaluate and assist in the implementation of
youth serving programs in cooperation with semi-public and
private youth serving agencies in the community. [Added
12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(9) Develop, implement and evaluate a therapeutic recreation program
for special populations of the community with disabling handicaps.
[Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(10) Develop, implement and evaluate a program of public celebrations
and special events. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(11) Formulate and prepare community recreation plans and reports.
Submit an annual report documenting the activities and
accomplishments of the Department. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord.
No. 10-32]
(12) Assist and promote the development of recreation services by other
public, semi-public and private agencies in the community. [Added
12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
B. Community Services Section. There shall be a Community Services
Section, the head of which shall be the Supervisor of Community
Services. Under the supervision of the Director, the Supervisor shall:
[Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) Coordinate special events;
(2) Supervise health services contracting and Health Advisory Board
Staff;
(3) Perform other duties/functions as requested by the Director from
time to time.
C. Youth Programs Section. There shall be a Youth Section, the head of
which shall be the Supervisor of Youth Programs. Under the supervision
§ 3-58 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-58
1:58
and direction of the Director, this Section shall: [Added 12-20-10 by
Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) Develop a comprehensive program of youth services, including
individual, group and family counseling.
(2) Serve as a referral source and a resource to other social serving
agencies.
(3) Function in a general advocacy role for youth.
(4) Establish community-based outreach centers to provide social,
recreational and other appropriate services.
D. Recreation and Parks Advisory Board. There shall be a Recreation and
Parks Advisory Board under the supervision and direction of the
Director. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) The Advisory Board shall have 15 members, which shall consist of
the following:
(a) One (1) incumbent member of the Board of Education,
appointed by the Mayor for a term of three years.
(b) One (1) Council member selected by the Township Council for
a term of one year.
(c) One (1) member of the Arts Commission, appointed by the
Mayor for a term of three years.
(d) One (1) member of the Commission on Aging, appointed by the
Mayor for a term of three years.
(e) One (1) member of the Commission on Youth appointed by the
Mayor for a term of three years.
(f) One (1) member of the Coalition of Athletic Organization,
appointed by the Mayor for a term not to exceed three years.
(g) Nine (9) citizen members appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Council and serving terms
of three years each. The citizen members shall serve for
staggered terms of three years beginning with the first day of
January, and those first appointed shall hold terms of such
duration as will accomplish these staggered terms. The
Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation or the
Director's designee shall serve as the Executive Secretary of
the Board and shall be an ex officio member.
(2) The Board shall advise and make recommendations to the following
agencies and officials:
§ 3-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58
1:59
(a) The Director of Parks and Recreation or the Director's
designee and the Mayor concerning or relating to the
administration of the Department's programs.
(b) The Mayor and Council concerning or relating to matters of
philosophy and policy of the Divisions.
(3) The Board shall organize annually and select a President and Vice
President. The Board shall meet regularly and at such other times
as the President may direct. The Board may, at its discretion,
appoint and act through an executive committee of not less than
five members. The Board may establish bylaws to govern the
operation of the Board.
(4) The Mayor may appoint one lifetime emeritus member to the Board
if that member has been a major contributor to the enhancement of
the Township's park recreational programs and policies. The term
of any such appointment shall begin upon confirmation of same by
the Township Council.
E. Arts Commission. There shall be an Arts Commission whose purpose
shall be to foster and encourage cultural and educational activities in
order to encourage participation in and appreciation of the arts by all
citizens in the area.
(1) Composition. The Arts Commission shall consist of fourteen (14)
members to be appointed by the Mayor for staggered terms of
three years each, except that one member may receive a lifetime
appointment if that member has been a major contributor to the
cultural life of the community by promoting music, the graphic and
performing arts, historic preservation, the East Brunswick Museum
and the heritage of our community. The Arts Coordinator shall
serve as the Executive Secretary of the Commission.
(2) Appointments. In making appointments to the Commission, the
Mayor shall attempt to assure that the following interests are
represented among the membership:
(a) Visual, performing and literary artists.
(b) Arts management professionals.
(c) Educators in the humanities.
(d) The East Brunswick Museum.
(e) The East Brunswick Library.
(f) The Board of Education.
(g) Other community arts organizations.
(3) Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Arts Commission shall
be:
§ 3-58 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-58
1:60
(a) To establish short and long range objectives for the arts.
(b) To formulate policy recommendations on the arts.
(c) To develop and recommend a program for the arts.
(d) To evaluate programs of the arts.
(e) To approve a proposed budget and revisions as prepared by the
Arts Coordinator.
(f) To serve as coordinating body for all arts activities in the
Township.
(g) To foster the creation and organization of an independent arts
organization to be known as "Friends of the Arts."
(4) Recommendations. The Commission shall advise and make
recommendations to:
(a) The Mayor and Administrator concerning arts and cultural
affairs programming conducted by the Township, and
(b) Private and public agencies conducting arts and cultural
affairs programming.
(5) Organization. The Commission shall organize annually and select a
President and Vice President. The Commission may establish bylaws
to govern its operations. The Commission shall meet regularly
and at such times as the President shall direct. The Commission
may at its discretion, appoint and act through an executive
committee of not less than five members of the Commission. The
Commission shall appoint the following standing Committees
consisting of at least one commission member and one member of
the "Friends of the Arts;"
(a) Publicity Committee.
(b) Program Committee.
(c) Budget Committee.
The Commission may appoint other Committees it deems
necessary to conduct the business of the Commission.
(6) Representations and Reporting. A member of the Arts Commission
shall serve as a member of the Recreation and Parks Advisory
Board. The Arts Commission shall report annually to the Mayor and
Administrator.
F. Coalition of Athletic Organizations. [Ord. No. 97-1, amended 7-26-99
by Ord. No. 99-20; 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) There shall be a Coalition of Athletic Organizations which shall
consist of members to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
§ 3-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58
1:61
and consent of the Township Council. Approximately one-third (1/
3) of the members shall be appointed for a term of three years, onethird
(1/3) for a term of two years and one-third (1/3) for a term
of one year, with reappointments for staggered three-year terms.
The Recreation and Parks Advisory Board shall maintain a list
of all recognized sports groups and organizations. Each group or
organization shall submit the name of two of its members through
the Recreation and Parks Advisory Board to the Mayor for
appointment of a delegate and an alternate to the Coalition.
Appointed delegates shall serve as the official representative of the
group. However, in the absence of the delegate(s), the alternate(s)
may participate in the actions and deliberations of the Coalition,
including the casting of a vote. Appointed members of the Coalition
of Athletic Organizations shall remain members of the Coalition
only for the duration of their involvement with the sports group or
organization which they represent. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord.
No. 99-20; 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(2) The Coalition of Athletic Organizations shall organize, annually, by
selecting a President and Vice President. The Coalition shall meet
regularly and at such other times as the President shall direct. The
Director of Parks and Recreation shall serve as the Executive
Secretary and shall be an ex officio member of the Coalition.
[Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(3) The Coalition of Athletic Organizations shall: [Amended 12-20-10
by Ord. No. 10-32]
(a) Advise and make recommendations to the Department of Parks
and Recreation on matters related to sports and athletics.
[Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20; 12-20-10 by Ord.
No. 10-32]
(b) Advise and make recommendations to the Department of
Administration on matters related to sports and athletics.
(c) Serve as the coordinating body for private sports and athletic
programs operated in the Township.
(4) The Coalition of Athletic Organizations shall report, annually, to the
Recreation and Parks Advisory Board. The Mayor, with the
recommendation of the Sports Coalition, shall appoint from among
the members of the Coalition of Athletic Organizations one
representative to serve on the Recreation and Parks Advisory
Board. The Coalition of Athletic Organizations representative shall
remain a member of the Recreation and Parks Advisory Board only
for the duration of his or her involvement with the sports
organization which he or she represents.
(5) The Coalition of Athletic Organizations is allocated and assigned
within the Department of Parks and Recreation and shall be
§ 3-58 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-58
1:62
§ 3-58.1. Fees, charges and conduct. [Ord. No. 97-1, amended
7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-20; 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-14; 12-20-10 by
Ord. No. 10-32]
executed at the direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation or
the Director's designee.
A. The Department of Parks and Recreation is authorized to charge and
collect fees for the following: [Amended 12-20-10 by Ord. No.
10-32]
(1) Admission to or use of facilities under the control of the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(2) Registration in programs and activities sponsored by the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(3) Food, beverages, merchandise, transportation and other goals and
services offered in conjunction with facilities and programs
operated by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
B. The Department of Parks and Recreation, with the review and
concurrence of the Recreation and Parks Advisory Board (RPAB), may
establish a list of approved fees and charges on an annual basis and at
other times as may be necessary, subject to approval by the Mayor and
Council. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) Fees and charges for admission to or use of facilities shall be
established on the principle that the user pays a fee based on the
reasonable costs related to the maintenance and security of the
facility for the time it is being used.
(2) Fees and charges for registration in programs and activities shall
be established on the principle that the participant pays a fee based
on the reasonable costs directly related to the operation of the
program.
(3) Fees and charges for food, beverages, merchandise, transportation
and other goods and services shall be established on the principle
that the purchaser pays for the cost of the merchandise or services
plus the reasonable costs related to providing the merchandise or
services.
C. The Department of Parks and Recreation may designate facilities,
programs and services as free to the public. The Director may admit a
person to a facility or program where the Director has judged that the
individual would be otherwise prohibited from admission or
participation because of cost. [Amended 2-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
D. The Director of Parks and Recreation or the Director's Designee, may
cancel a program due to insufficient registration or other causes which
may affect the health, safety and welfare of program participants. The
§ 3-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58.1
1:63
§ 3-58.2. Department of Public Works. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No.
10-32]
Department established. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the
head of which shall be the Director of Public Works. The Director shall serve
as head of the Department and shall be removed therefrom in accordance
with Section 3-45 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick and
New Jersey Public Law 1981, Chapter 383, unless the Director qualifies
for tenure in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-154.6, any person holding the position of Director of Public Works
who has held that position full-time, continuously for five years or more
shall continue to hold that position, notwithstanding he or she is serving
for a fixed term, during good behavior and efficiency. The Director shall not
be removed therefrom for political or other reasons except for good cause,
upon written charges filed with the municipal clerk and after a public, fair
and impartial hearing. The above notwithstanding, the Director may be
retired when he or she shall have attained seventy (70) years of age. The
Director shall be responsible for the supervision of all operations of the
Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall include
such officers and employees as shall be required to fulfill its responsibilities
set forth in the following sections:
Director of Parks and Recreation, or the Director's designee shall
establish rules governing the operation of programs. The Director of
Parks and Recreation, or the Director's designee shall establish rules of
conduct governing the participants, and spectators who fail to observe
the rules of operation and conduct governing a program may be subject
to expulsion from the program by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
[Amended 2-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
A. Under the supervision and direction of the Director, the Department of
Public Works shall:
(1) Maintain and repair the streets, roads, culverts, and drainage
system of the municipality and construct and reconstruct such
streets as may be authorized.
(2) Provide for the cleaning and flushing of streets and the removal of
leaves as required.
(3) Clear and remove snow and ice from the streets and provide such
other street services as may be assigned by the Director of Public
Works.
(4) Maintain, repair and clean the municipality's storm water drainage
system, including sewers, lines, and mains.
(5) Maintain, repair, and install traffic safety signs, road markings, and
devices including traffic signs, street signs, road painting and
marking, guard rails, and other devices and appurtenances in the
public right of way.
§ 3-58.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-58.2
1:64
§ 3-59. Department of Recreation, Parks, and Community Services.
[Added 11-22-71 by Ord. No. 71-1-Q; amended 10-23-73 by Ord. No.
73-1-Y; 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-174-B; 4-8-85 by Ord. No. 85-653;
8-10-87 by Ord. No. 87-861; 8-27-90 by Ord. No. 90-45; 12-9-91 by
Ord. No. 91-119; 2-24-92 by Ord. No. 92-4; 2-22-93 by Ord. No. 93-8;
10-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-61; 1-24-94 by Ord. No. 94-1; 1-21-97 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
This section was deleted on 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1. See new section,
§ 3-54.2, Divisions of Recreation and Parks.
§ 3-59.1. Tax Assessor. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453]
(6) Provide a vehicle maintenance program for the preventive and
corrective care of municipal trucks, motor vehicles, and equipment.
(7) Maintain, repair, and clean all municipally owned buildings and
structures, including the Municipal Complex.
(8) Coordinate leaf collection, snow removal, and public lands
maintenance.
(9) Formulate and prepare community public works, plans and reports.
(10) Plant, trim and remove trees and shrubs on public property
including all public rights-of-way.
(11) Replace Township approved recycling containers at cost for
property owners who have lost or damaged the free container
provided to each property owner.
B. The Department shall submit an annual report documenting the
activities and accomplishments of the Department of Public Works.
A. There shall be a tax assessor who shall be appointed and serve in
accordance with state statute. He shall have, perform and discharge all
the functions, powers and duties prescribed by law for a municipal
assessor.
B. The office of the municipal tax assessor shall be subject to such general
administrative procedures and requirements as are departments of the
municipal government, including, but not limited to, the preparation
and submission of an annual budget and of such periodic budget
reports as are generally required of departments, and such accounting
controls, central purchasing practices, personnel procedures and
regulations, and central data processing services as are generally
required of departments.
C. The assessor shall maintain adequate assessment records for each
separate parcel of real property assessed or exempted and establish
and maintain such files, records and procedures as may be required for
the valuation and assessment of personal property pursuant to law.
§ 3-58.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-59.1
1:65
D. He shall supervise the maintenance of a current Tax Map of the
municipal as public record and cause to be recorded thereon all
changes in ownership or character of the real property assessed,
employing for that purpose the facilities of other departments as
provided by the Code.
§ 3-59.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-59.1
1:66
ARTICLE IX
Budget and Purchasing Procedures
[Amended 10-26-70 by Ord. No. 70-1-L; 4-14-75 by Ord. No.
75-1-CC]
§ 3-60. Budget preparation procedure.
§ 3-61. Budget operation.
A. The budget shall be prepared under the direction of the Mayor. During
the month of November, the Mayor shall require all department heads,
the Clerk and Tax Assessor, to submit requests for appropriations for
the ensuing budget year and to appear before the Mayor or the
Administrator at a public hearing on the various requests. [Amended
4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453]
B. The Administrator, with the assistance of the Director of Finance, shall
prepare all estimates of nonproperty tax revenues anticipated for the
support of each annual budget.
C. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the charter. There
shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of
expenditures and revenue. Such analysis shall include a comparison of
the total number of positions of each class and grade to be authorized
by the budget with the actual number thereof employed at the
beginning and ending of the preceding budget period. So far as
practicable, such analysis shall include appropriate statements of the
cost of performance of functional programs and activities in terms of
quantitative countable units of work for operating and capital
expenditures.
D. On or before the 15th day of January, the Mayor shall transmit to the
Council his budget document which shall include his proposed current
budget in the form prescribed by the local budget law and such
comment or statement as he may deem desirable.
A. In consultation with department heads, the Clerk and Tax Assessor, the
Administrator shall establish quarterly or such other periodic
allotments of appropriations as he may deem necessary. Each
department shall plan and administer its expenditure program within
the limits of such allotments. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453]
B. If at any time during the budget year the Administrator shall ascertain
that the municipal government is faced with the probability of incurring
a cash deficit for the current year, he shall reconsider the work
programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such
reconsideration and with the approval of the Mayor, he may revise
budget allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized
during the fiscal year. He shall file with the Director of Finance a copy
§ 3-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-61
1:67
§ 3-62. Awarding and execution of contracts.
All contracts shall be let pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) The
Mayor shall execute and sign contracts let and authorized pursuant to the
charter and ordinances.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40:50-1 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 198, and was
replaced by N.J.R.S. 40A:11-4 to 40A:11-6; N.J.R.S. 40:9-3 was repealed by
P.L. 1971, c. 199, and was replaced by N.J.R.S. 40A:12-16, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq., amended by Chapter 350 P.L. 1979.
§ 3-63. Purchase requests to go through Division of Administration;
sufficiency of funds to be checked. [Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No.
78-49; 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-453]
All purchases of any work, supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services for the municipality's account shall be made by the Division of
Central Services pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the
department, the Clerk and Tax Assessor, whose appropriation will be
charged and the certification of the Director of Finance that a sufficient
unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor.
§ 3-64. Standards and tests for materials to be purchased.
[Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49]
The Administrator shall establish and approve uniform standards for
requisitions and purchases. The Division of Central Services shall control
the delivery of all supplies, materials, equipment and other items purchased
and may make or cause to be made proper test checks and inspections
thereof. The Division shall ascertain whether the supplies, material,
equipment and other items purchased comply with the specifications and
shall cause laboratory or other tests to be made whenever, in the opinion
of the division head, it is necessary to determine whether the materials or
supplies furnished are of the quality and standard required.
§ 3-65. Purchasing procedures. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No.
82-453; 7-9-01 by Ord. No. 01-26]
of such revised allotments, and the Director of Finance shall control all
expenditures within the limits thereof.
A. Each department, the Clerk and Tax Assessor shall follow such
procedures and use such forms for purchasing as the Administrator
shall prescribe. Upon request of the Administrator, each department
head, the Clerk and Tax Assessor shall submit a complete statement of
the work and labor under contract and the materials, supplies and
equipment which will be required by the department during the
ensuing year, half year or quarter year as the Administrator may
determine, according to the best estimate of the department head, the
Clerk and Tax Assessor. Such statement shall be in such form and detail
§ 3-61 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-65
1:68
§ 3-66. Receiving procedure.
Immediately upon delivery of any purchase item, the receiving department
shall make a record thereof on a form to be approved by the Administrator,
and the department's acceptance of delivery shall be certified by the
department head. A voucher properly prepared and executed by the vendor
shall be submitted to the Treasurer who shall not authorize payment unless
and until he has first examined a properly prepared and certified receiving
report and has satisfied himself that the items billed were properly
authorized and delivered in accordance with a duly issued purchase order
or any change thereof authorized by the Division of Administration.
as the Administrator may require. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No.
82-453]
B. Where purchases are for an amount less than $2,625, the Department
shall obtain a statement of two verbal quotes as more particularly set
forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. Where purchases are for an
amount of more than $2,625 but less than $17,500, the using
Department shall send out for quotations using a standard form as more
particularly set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. [Amended
8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 4-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-247; 7-9-01 by
Ord. No. 01-26]
C. The Administrator shall establish a procedure for the purchase of any
item required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety
or welfare of the municipality, which will permit such emergency
purchases to be made for specific purposes in a manner other than that
prescribed by this subsection.
D. Except as the Administrator or such other officer as he may designate
may authorize in case of emergency, no purchase shall be made and no
bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the procedures
prescribed by or pursuant to the charter and Code have been followed.
E. The Administrator or such other officer as he may designate shall be in
charge of the purchasing of insurance. The procedure employed shall
be by public advertisement for bids, and the contract shall be awarded
to the lowest responsible bidder providing the broadest coverage for
the type of insurance bid. The Administrator or such other officer as he
may designate shall draw up the specifications for coverage. This
section shall not apply to the obtaining of insurance coverage or
binders when the safety or protection of public property or the public
conveyance require or the exigency of the public service will not admit
to such advertisement, in the discretion of the Administrator.
§ 3-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-67
1:69
§ 3-67. Financial disclosure by organizations receiving funds from
Township. [Added 12-8-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-II; amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-174-B]
All organizations, agencies, boards and other entities which receive
appropriations in excess of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.) in any
calendar year from the Township of East Brunswick in exchange for the
rendering of service to the community shall be required to file a profit
and loss statement and a balance sheet with the Township Clerk. The filed
documents shall be certified by the executive officer of the organization,
shall be prepared based upon sound acceptable accounting methods, as
determined by the Director of Finance, and shall reflect the cash flow of
the organization. All such documents shall be filed, annually, on or before
March 31, unless the organization shall obtain an extension of time from the
Township Clerk for good cause, such extension not to exceed sixty (60) days.
Good cause shall include difficulty in preparing required documents due to
a newly formed organization, difficulty in preparing documents based upon
the organization's fiscal year and similar considerations. If any organization
required to comply with this section shall fail to so comply, the Township
Council, upon receiving advice from the Clerk, may withhold payment of the
appropriation for the current and subsequent years.
§ 3-67 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-67
1:70
ARTICLE X
Department of Finance
§ 3-68. Department established; appointment of Director. [Amended
8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 9-25-89 by Ord. No. 89-72; 7-29-03 by
Ord. No. 03-26; 10-22-18 by Ord. No. 18-26]
A. There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be
known as the Chief Finance Officer as required under Chapter 110
Public Law 1988 and said person shall be subject to the provision of
Chapter 121 Public Laws of 1989. The Department shall include a
Division of Construction Inspection, a Division of Accounts and
Treasury, a Division of Revenue and a Division of Information Services.
B. The Director shall be responsible for:
(1) The establishment and supervision of all financial systems,
collection of revenues and reconciliation of accounts.
(2) The supervision of financial operations of the Water Utility as
established in § 3-81 of the Code. [Amended 4-8-85 by Ord. No.
85-653]
(3) The supervision of all operations of the Parking Utility as
established in § 3-83 of the Code.
C. The Director or any division head within the Department, except the
Collector of Revenue, may also occupy the office of Township Treasurer.
D. Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax. [Added 7-29-03 by Ord. No.
03-26; amended 10-22-18 by Ord. No. 18-26]
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to implement the
provisions of P.L. 2018 c. 49 with P.L. 2003, c. 114, which
authorizes the governing body a municipality to adopt an ordinance
imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for
every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a
hotel subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of
P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a
hotel room.
(2) There is hereby established a Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy
Tax and Transient Accommodations in the Township of East
Brunswick which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Township of East Brunswick on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a
hotel or motel room in the Township of East Brunswick on or after
§ 3-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-68
1:71
§ 3-68.1. Assistant Finance Director. [Added 1-21-97 by Ord. No.
97-1]
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be the position of Assistant
Finance Director appointed by the Mayor or his designate.
July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 P.L. 1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3 (sales tax) and C-54:32D-1 as amended.
(3) The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax shall be in addition to
any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance
or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a
hotel room or Transient Accommodations so defined in [Public Law:
2018] Chapter 49.
(4) In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114, P.L. 2018,
c. 49:
(a) All taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be paid by the
purchaser.
(b) A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this
ordinance.
(c) A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any
person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the
vendor, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated
to the customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the
customer.
(d) Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be
deemed a separate offense and each representation or
advertisement by a vendor for each day that the representation
or advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(e) The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be
$500 for each offense.
(5) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be collected on behalf of the
Township by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed
shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required
to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax
were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided that
the chief financial officer of the Township shall be joined as a party
in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 3-68 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-68.1
1:72
§ 3-69. Division of Construction Inspection. [Deleted 1-21-97 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
§ 3-70. Division of Accounts and Treasury. [Amended 3-13-95 by
Ord. No. 95-8; 9-11-95 by Ord. No. 95-33; 9-26-16 by Ord. 16-17]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Accounts and
Treasury, the head of which shall be the Treasurer. The Division shall:
A. Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Finance, the
Assistant Finance Director shall:
(1) Assist the Director in the carrying out of all of his/her
responsibilities, including but not limited to assisting the Director
with the management of all Divisions and Utilities within the
Department of Finance.
(2) Perform such other duties within the Department of Finance as
may be assigned from time to time by the Director, with the
approval of the Business Administrator.
(3) Perform such other duties within the Department of Finance as
may be assigned from time to time by the Business Administrator.
A. Prescribe and approve all financial systems and procedures and install
uniform charts of accounts.
B. Make revenue and expenditure estimates for the Mayor and
Administrator.
C. Maintain the central accounts and records.
D. Control all expenditures within the limits of appropriations through an
encumbrance system of budget operation.
E. Preaudit bills and claims.
F. Prepare warrant checks for signature.
G. Prepare biweekly payrolls for certification of the Business
Administrator.
H. Have the safekeeping and custody of all municipal securities,
investments and bonds of the Township.
I. Supervise financial proceedings for the issuance of municipal bonds of
the Township.
J. Invest and reinvest surplus or idle funds of the Township.
K. Serve as certifying agent for the New Jersey Public Employees
Retirement System with respect to municipal employees.
§ 3-68.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-70
1:73
§ 3-71. Board of Special Assessments. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord.
No. 82-453]
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Board of Special
Assessments for benefits from local improvements. The Board shall consist
of three discreet freeholders, residents of the municipality, in no way
interested in the improvement, to make the assessments for benefits for
such improvement. The Board shall be appointed by the Council. The Board
of Assessments shall report directly to the Director of Finance and shall
make all assessments for benefits accruing from local improvements under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
§ 3-72. Division of Revenue. [Amended 4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-40;
6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-65; 6-22-92 by Ord. No. 92-25; 12-28-92 by
Ord. No. 92-54]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Revenue, the
head of which shall be the Collector of Revenue. The Collector of Revenue
shall perform and exercise all the powers, duties and functions conferred
upon a collector of taxes, assessments and water rental. He shall also be the
Official Tax Search Officer and is authorized to make examinations and issue
tax search certificates with respect to liens for municipal taxes and other
charges which have the legal effect of a tax lien. The Division of Revenue
shall:
L. Administer all matters relating to the status, rights and benefits of
employees of the Township under the employees, benefit and welfare
programs.
M. Promptly pay interest and principal on municipal obligations as they fall
due.
N. Prepare Advance Retirement Agreements requiring employees to
provide advance notice of retirement in order to exercise the catch-up
provision of the Internal Revenue Code, Section 457, Deferred
Compensation Programs, as authorized and subject to Department of
Labor requirements and signed by the Chief Finance Officer. Business
Administrator is authorized to sign an Advance Retirement Agreement
with the Chief Finance Officer. [Added 3-13-95 by Ord. No. 95-8;
amended 9-11-95 by Ord. No. 95-33]
O. A revolving account is to be established to fund maintenance of grass,
weeds and other debris when non-responsive property owners do not
maintain their property as permitted under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13(a) in
accordance with municipal lien approval by council resolution. [Added
9-26-16 by Ord. 16-17]
A. Perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the rendering of bills for property
taxes pursuant to law, enforcement of tax collections by tax sales and
otherwise and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such
§ 3-70 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-72
1:74
manner as may be prescribed or approved pursuant to ordinance or
statute.
B. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes and municipal fees and charges permitted by N.J.S.A.
54:4-67 and receive penalties permitted by N.J.S.A. 54:4-61 when a tax
sale certificate has been issued and interest year to year which rate is
8% on the first $1,500 of delinquency and 18% on any amount in excess
of $1,500 pursuant to State law. [Amended 6-24-91 by Ord. No.
91-65]
C. Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other liens
on real property as may be authorized by law and charge and collect for
the use of the municipality the fee required pursuant to law for any such
search.
D. Receive and collect all current and delinquent water rents, including
penalties.
E. Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department and
deposit all funds received by it in depositories authorized by the
Council.
F. Charge a penalty in the amount of $20 in the event that checks for
payment of municipal charges are returned due to insufficient funds.
Commencing with January l, 1985, the Collector of Revenue may file a
revision to the amount of the penalty with the Municipal Clerk. The
Clerk shall immediately give notice to the Township Council and if no
action is taken to modify the revision, the revised amount shall be
substituted in place of the $15 set forth in this Ordinance. [Added
6-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-576; amended 6-22-92 by Ord. No. 92-25]
G. The Collector of Revenue or Chief Finance Officer shall provide proof to
accompany the processing of any application for a permit, license,
approval or release used or usable in connection with a designated
parcel of real property located within the Township of East Brunswick
and said applicant applies for a permit, license or use variance in
accordance with Title 40. There shall be no relief to this provision
unless specifically granted by resolution adopted by the governing body
of the Township of East Brunswick in accordance with a request made
as part of the application process. [Added 4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-40]
Editor's Note: This section is permitted in accordance with
Public Laws 1987, c. 174, which provides that the governing
body of a municipality may, by ordinance, as a condition for
the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued by;
or requiring the approval of the municipality, require that the
applicant, if he is the owner thereof, pay any delinquent
property taxes or assessments on the property wherein the
business or activity for which the license or permit is sought or
wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
§ 3-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-72
1:75
§ 3-72.1. Payment of fire insurance claims restricted. [Added
3-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-123]
If a search for municipal liens submitted by a claimant under a fire
insurance policy for claims in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars
(2,500.) discloses that taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or
charges have been levied and assessed and are due and payable against the
property in question, then the insurance company is prohibited from making
payment to such claimant until such time as all taxes and assessments
and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing on
the official certificate of search shall have been paid either by the owner
of such real property or by the insurance company, unless the Township
Council adopts a resolution authorizing a contract between the Township
of East Brunswick and the owner of the fire damaged property whereby all
delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal liens are to be paid by
installments.
§ 3-72.2. Division of Code Enforcement. [Added 3-28-88 by Ord. No.
88-916; amended 7-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-45]
Within the Department of Planning and Engineering, there shall be a
division of Code Enforcement, the head of which shall be the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall be responsible for enforcing Chapter 166,
Property Maintenance and such other codes or ordinances as the Director
may assign.
§ 3-73. Audit, approval and payment of bills and claims.
H. Administer and enforce the licensing of dogs and cats pursuant to law.
[Added 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-54]
I. Administer and enforce Food Vending Licenses. [Added 12-28-92 by
Ord. No. 92-54]
A. Bills, claims and demands against the municipality shall be deemed
approved or disapproved in accordance with the procedure prescribed
by this subsection. A voucher on a form prescribed by the Treasurer
shall be presented for each bill, claim or demand and shall be paid only
upon the approval of the Treasurer. Disbursements shall be made by a
check or draft signed by the Mayor or, in his absence, the Administrator
and countersigned by the Treasurer or, in his absence, the Deputy
Treasurer, except that payroll checks may be signed by the Treasurer
or, in his absence, the Deputy Treasurer upon certification of the
Administrator of the total payroll.
B. All of the signatures required on a check may be inscribed
mechanically. [Amended 10-9-67 by Ord. No. 67-1-D]
C. The Council shall approve or disapprove all claims after it has reviewed
the list of the bills. In the event that the Council questions a claim,
§ 3-72 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-73
1:76
§ 3-74. Certificates of search for municipal improvements.
[Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49]
The Township Engineer is designated pursuant to law to make and issue
official certificates of searches for municipal improvements authorized by
ordinance but not yet assessed, and he shall receive and remit to the
Collector of Revenue, for each certificate issued by him, the fee provided by
law (N.J.R.S. 54:5-14 et seq.).
supporting documentation shall be furnished by the administration.
[Amended 12-23-74 by Ord. No. 74-1-BB]
§ 3-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-74
1:77

ARTICLE XI
Department of Law
[Amended 4-8-96 by Ord. No. 95-49]
§ 3-75. Department established; appointment and qualifications of
the Director; compensation. [Amended 6-26-72 by Ord. No. 72-1-R;
7-23-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-W]
There shall be a Department of Law, the Director of which shall be the
Director of Law and Township Attorney. He shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The Director of Law
shall receive a salary, known as a "retainer," as compensation for the
performance of those services which are listed as retainer services in § 3-80
hereof. The Director of Law shall be reasonably compensated on a voucher
basis for those services which are listed as non-retainer services in § 3-80
and for all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by him in connection with the
performance of those services. Prior to his appointment, the Director of Law
shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law in the State of New
Jersey for at least five years.
§ 3-76. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-26-72 by Ord. No. 72-1-R;
3-29-94 by Ord. No. 94-19]
Except as may be otherwise provided by the charter or Code, the
Department of Law shall:
A. Provide legal advice and assistance to the Mayor and Council and to all
departments, boards and bodies, except where prohibited by laws, and
prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and against the
municipality. However, his duties shall not include services to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board.
B. Draft ordinances and resolutions and advise as to their form and
sufficiency prior to passage.
C. Review and approve all bid specifications, contracts, deeds, documents
and instruments prior to passage. [Amended 3-29-94 by Ord. No.
94-19]
D. Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Mayor, the Council or the Director of the Department of
Administration with respect to their official powers and duties.
E. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the municipality as directed by the Mayor or Council.
F. Subject to the approval of the Mayor and/or Council, the Township
Attorney shall have the power to enter into any agreement, compromise
or settlement of any litigation in which the municipality is involved,
provided that this subsection shall not be construed to limit or abridge
the discretion of the Township Attorney handling any matter in regard
§ 3-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-76
1:79
§ 3-77. Appointment of special counsel.
Whenever he deems the interests of the municipality so require, the
Township Attorney, with the approval of the Mayor and within the limits
of available appropriations, may appoint special counsel to assist in the
preparation, trial and argument of such legal matters or proceedings as he
may determine. If the Township Attorney should be disqualified with respect
to any matter, the Mayor may appoint special counsel with the approval of
the Township Council to represent the municipality for and with respect to
such matter.
§ 3-78. Prosecutions. [Amended 8-24-92 by Ord. No. 92-32]
The Township Attorney shall designate two attorneys to conduct
prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the Municipal court
of the Township of East Brunswick, including violations of ordinances of
the municipality, complaints of any department under state law and for
violations of rules or regulations duly promulgated by any department;
provided, however, that the Township Prosecutors shall not be responsible
for the prosecution of such crimes and offenses as are required by law to
be prosecuted by the County Prosecutor. The Township Prosecutor shall
not be required to prosecute complaints filed by private citizens except
where directed by the appropriate Municipal Court Judge or whenever the
Township Attorney shall determine that the Township has a special interest.
§ 3-78.1. Municipal Public Defenders. [Added 4-8-96 by Ord. No.
95-49; amended 2-23-98 by Ord. No. 98-6]
The Mayor shall nominate the Municipal Public Defender with advice and
consent of the Council. Such Municipal Public Defenders shall provide
representation for those indigent defendants charged with one or more
offenses described in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18 which are to be prosecuted in the
East Brunswick Municipal Court and who have made proper application
for such representation with the East Brunswick Municipal Court. Such
Municipal Public Defenders shall not be responsible for representation in
any other proceedings or in any appeal of any municipal proceeding.
to the proper conduct of any trial, action or proceeding or deprive him
of the powers and privileges ordinarily exercised in judicial proceedings
by counsel acting for private clients.
G. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the municipality's interest and report thereon from time to
time as the Mayor or Council may require. The Mayor or Council may
request a monthly report with copies filed with the Township Clerk, and
the report shall include all hours spent by attorneys in the conduct of
the Township business, with details as to legal services performed.
Payment shall be by voucher which shall contain the nature of the case,
time spent and legal services rendered or such other information as
required by the Mayor or Council.
§ 3-76 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-78.1
1:80
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this ordinance is to amend the East Brunswick
Municipal Code to provide for a Municipal Public Defender
Program in the Township of East Brunswick.
(2) Such a program is deemed in the best interests of the Township of
East Brunswick for the following reasons:
(a) Many defendants who appear in the East Brunswick Municipal
Court are indigent or of such limited means as to be unable to
afford to engage counsel;
(b) Both the State and Federal Constitutions guarantee persons
accused of serious offenses the right to the assistance of
counsel and require the State to provide counsel for such
defendants who cannot afford to engage counsel of their own;
(c) One way to assure representation for such persons in the East
Brunswick Municipal Court is by use of a Public Defender
engaged by the Township of East Brunswick, who can be
assigned by the Court to represent such persons;
(d) By providing for a Municipal Public Defender to ensure that
indigent persons are provided counsel, the Township of East
Brunswick will be promoting the interests of justice, helping to
assure expeditious disposition of cases before the East
Brunswick Municipal Court;
(e) As a means of defraying the costs for the services of a
Municipal Public Defender, N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17 authorizes the
collection of a $200 application fee in connection with the
appointment of counsel for indigent persons;
(f) By collecting the application fee authorized by N.J.S.A.
2B:24-17, the Township of East Brunswick will be reimbursed
for costs of providing the services of a Municipal Public
Defender.
B. Definitions relative to municipal public defenders. As used in this
Chapter 3-78.1:
(1) "Indigent defendant" means a person who is entitled to be
represented by a municipal public defender pursuant to this
Chapter 3-78.1, and does not have the present financial ability to
secure competent legal representation, as determined by Section
10 of this Chapter 3-78.1.
(2) "Municipal Court" means, unless herein specifically defined
otherwise, the East Brunswick Municipal Court.
(3) "Municipal public defender" means a person, as defined in Section
4 of this Chapter 3-78.1, appointed to represent indigent
§ 3-78.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-78.1
1:81
defendants in proceedings over which the municipal court has
jurisdiction.
(4) "Municipality" means, unless herein specifically defined otherwise,
the Township of East Brunswick.
C. Requirements for municipal public defenders. A municipal public
defender shall be an attorney-at-law of this State in good standing, and
shall serve for a term of one year from the date of his appointment, and
may continue to serve in office pending re-appointment or appointment
of a successor. A municipal public defender may be appointed to that
position in one or more municipal courts. The provisions of this Chapter
3-78.1 shall apply to each such position held. A municipal public
defender need not reside in the municipality where he acts as a
municipal public defender.
D. Autonomy of office. With the exception of the review procedure outlined
in Section 17, infra., the position of Municipal Public Defender shall be
independent from all departments and agencies of the Township
government, but, for purposes of budgeting and administration, shall be
allocated to the Department of Law.
E. Administration.
(1) Appointment of Municipal Public Defender.
(a) The Mayor shall nominate the Municipal Public Defender with
advice and consent of the Council.
(b) The Mayor may nominate additional municipal public
defenders with advice and consent of the Council as necessary
to administer justice in a timely and effective manner in the
municipal court. Additional nominations shall be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter 3-78.1.
(c) The Mayor shall nominate a "chief municipal public defender
with advice and consent of the Council, if the Municipal Court
has two or more municipal public defenders. The chief
municipal public defender shall have authority over other
municipal public defenders serving that court with respect to
the performance of their duties.
(d) Appointments to fill vacancies in the position of municipal
public defender shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter 3-78.1 as soon as practicable.
(e) In addition to any other means provided by law for the removal
from office of a public official, a municipal public defender may
be removed by the governing body of the municipality for good
cause shown and after a public hearing, and upon due notice
and an opportunity to be heard. Failure to reappoint a
municipal public defender for a second or subsequent term
§ 3-78.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-78.1
1:82
does not constitute a "removal from office" within the meaning
of this subsection.
(f) The municipal public defenders may represent private clients
in any municipality, including the municipality where they act
as a municipal public defender, subject to the Rules of Court
Governing the Conduct of Lawyers, Judges and Court
Personnel.
(2) Reporting and Payment.
(a) All Municipal Public Defenders shall provide monthly or
quarterly reports and vouchers as to services rendered during
that month to the Township Council.
(b) A municipal public defender shall receive compensation, either
on an hourly, per diem, annual or other basis as the
municipality may provide. The compensation of a municipal
public defender for services rendered pursuant to the
provisions of this act shall be in lieu of any and all other
compensation by the municipality. The ordinance, resolution or
agreement setting compensation shall set forth any additional
compensation to be paid for interlocutory appeals in the
Superior Court.
F. Duties of municipal public defender.
(1) It shall be the duty of the municipal public defender to represent,
except in the case of temporary unavailability or conflict of interest,
any defendant charged with an offense in municipal court who is an
indigent municipal defendant entitled to representation pursuant
to this act. All necessary services and facilities of representation,
including both expert and lay investigation and testimony as well as
other preparations, shall be provided in every case. The
municipality shall be responsible for payment for services pursuant
to this Section 6. The factors of need and real value to a defendant
may be weighed against the financial constraints of the
municipality in determining the necessary services and facilities of
representation. The final determination as to necessity for services
required pursuant to this Section 6 shall be made by the court.
(2) A municipal public defender shall be responsible for handling all
phases of the defense, including but not limited to discovery,
pretrial and post-trial hearings, motions, removals to federal
district court and other collateral functions reasonably related to
the defense. As used in this Subsection F(2), "post-trial hearing"
shall not include de novo appeals in Superior Court.
(3) Nothing in this Section 6 shall be deemed to require the
municipality to pay for expert and lay investigation or testimony for
a period of one year after the effective date of P.L. 1997, c. 256 (C.
2B:24-1 et seq.)
§ 3-78.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-78.1
1:83
G. Representation of indigent defendants.
(1) The municipal public defender shall represent an indigent
defendant charged in Municipal Court with a crime as specified in
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18 or, if in the opinion of the Municipal Court there is
a likelihood that the defendant, if convicted, of any other offense
will be subject to imprisonment or other consequence of
magnitude, the municipal public defender shall represent an
indigent defendant.
(2) If there is a vacancy in the office of municipal public defender, if the
municipal public defender is temporarily unavailable or if a finding
of conflict of interest precludes the municipal public defender from
representing an indigent defendant, the municipal prosecutor may
prosecute the offense if the municipal court appoints a qualified
attorney to represent the indigent defendant. Unless rates are
otherwise established by the municipality, the attorney shall be
entitled to compensation at the same rate as attorneys hired by the
Office of the Public Defender in conflict cases, with payment to be
made within 30 days. Once appointed, the attorney shall carry out
all duties of the municipal public defender in connection with the
case that is the subject of the appointment.
H. Communications protected under attorney-client privilege.
All communications between the indigent defendant and the municipal
public defender or any other attorney appointed to act as a municipal
public defender shall be fully protected by the attorney-client privilege
to the same extent and degree as though counsel has been privately
engaged. This shall not preclude the use by the municipal public
defender of privileged material for the preparation and disclosure of
statistical, case study and other sociological data, provided that in any
such use there shall be no disclosure of the identity of or means for
discovery of the identity of particular defendants.
I. Application for municipal public defender services.
(1) Eligibility For Services Of Municipal Public Defender.
(a) Eligibility for services of the municipal public defender shall be
determined by the municipal court on the basis of the need of
the defendant, except as provided in Section 12 of this Chapter
3-78.1. Need shall be measured according to section 14 of P.L.
1967, c. 43 (C. 2A:158A-14) and guidelines promulgated by the
New Jersey Supreme Court.
(b) In the event that a determination of eligibility cannot be made
before the time when the first services are to be rendered, or if
an initial determination is found to be erroneous, the municipal
court shall refer the defendant to the municipal public
defender provisionally, and if subsequently it is determined
that the defendant is ineligible the Municipal Court shall
§ 3-78.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-78.1
1:84
inform the defendant, and the defendant shall be obliged to
engage his own counsel and to reimburse the municipality for
the cost of the services rendered to the time.
(2) Application Fee, Waiver; Deposit In Dedicated Fund.
(a) Every person applying for representation by a Municipal Public
Defender shall, on approval of his application, pay an
application fee of not more than $200 to the Municipal Court
Administrator of the East Brunswick Municipal Court. The
Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the application fee
over a specific period of time not to exceed four months. In
accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme
Court, the Municipal Court may waive any required application
fee, in whole or in part, only if the Court determines, in its
discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the
applicant that the application fee represents an unreasonable
burden on the person seeking representation.
(b) Funds collected pursuant to Subsection a of this Section 9.2
shall be deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the
chief financial officer of the municipality or in the case of a
joint municipal court in a manner agreed to by the constituent
municipalities. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet
the costs incurred in providing the services of a municipal
public defender including, when required, expert and lay
investigation and testimony.
(c) Beginning in 1999, if it is determined by the Division of Local
Government Services during its annual review of the municipal
budget that the amount of money in a dedicated fund
established pursuant to this Section 9.2 exceeds by more than
25% the amount which the municipality expended during the
prior year providing the services of a municipal public
defender, the amount in excess of the amount expended shall
be forwarded to the Criminal Disposition and Review
Collection Fund administered by Victims of Crime
Compensation Board.
J. Investigation of financial status of defendant.
The Municipal Court shall make an investigation of the financial status
of each defendant seeking representation pursuant to this act and shall
have the authority to require a defendant to execute and deliver written
requests or authorizations required under applicable law to provide the
court with access to records of public or private sources, otherwise
confidential, as may be of aid in evaluating eligibility. The court is
authorized to obtain information from any public record office of the
State or of any subdivision or agency thereof on request and without
payment of the fees ordinarily required by law.
K. Eligibility of defendant under 18 years of age.
§ 3-78.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-78.1
1:85
Whenever a person entitled to representation by a municipal public
defender pursuant to this act, is under the age of 18 years, the
eligibility for services shall be determined on the basis of the financial
circumstances of the individual and the financial circumstances of the
individual's parents or legal guardians. The municipality shall be
entitled to recover the cost of legal services from the parents or legal
guardians as provided in Section 17 of this Chapter 3-78.1 and the
Municipal Court shall have authority to require parents or legal
guardians to execute and deliver the written requests or authorization
required under applicable law in order to provide the court with access
to records of public or private sources, otherwise confidential, as may
be of aid to it in evaluating eligibility.
L. Reimbursement to municipality.
If the defendant has or reasonably expects to have means to meet
some part, though not all, of the cost of the services rendered, the
defendant shall be required to reimburse the municipality, either by a
single payment or in installments in such amounts as he can reasonably
be expected to pay; but no default or failure in making payment shall
affect or reduce the rendering of services.
M. Lien on property of defendant.
(1) The municipality shall have a lien on any property to which the
defendant shall have or acquire an interest for an amount equal to
the reasonable value of the services rendered to a defendant
pursuant to this Chapter 3-78.1 as calculated at the same rate as
the Office of the Public Defender bills clients at that time.
(2) To effectuate such a lien for the municipality, the municipal
attorney shall file a notice setting forth services rendered to the
defendant and the reasonable value thereof with the Clerk of the
Superior Court. The filing of the notice with the Clerk of the
Superior Court shall constitute a lien on property for a period of 10
years from the date of filing, unless discharged sooner, and, except
for such time limitations, shall have the force and effect of a
judgment. Within 10 days of the filing of the notice, the municipal
attorney shall send by certified mail, or serve personally, a copy of
the notice with a statement of the date of the filing to or upon the
defendant at the defendant's last known address. If the municipal
attorney shall fail to give notice, the lien is void.
N. Compromise, settlement of claims.
The municipal attorney is authorized to compromise and settle any
claim for services performed pursuant to this Chapter 3-78.1 whenever
the financial circumstances of the person receiving the services are
such that, in the judgment of the municipal attorney, the best interest
of the State will be served by compromise and settlement.
O. Books for recording liens.
§ 3-78.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-78.1
1:86
§ 3-79. Records and papers to be surrendered to successor.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the administration of the Department of Law shall be and remain the
property of the municipality. Upon the termination of his service with the
municipality, each legal officer shall forthwith surrender to his successor
all such property, together with a written consent to substitution of his
successor in all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the
municipality is a party.
§ 3-80. Compensation: retainer services. [Added 6-26-72 by Ord. No.
72-1-R; amended 7-23-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-W; 3-29-94 by Ord. No.
The Clerk of the Superior Court shall provide separate books for the
recording of liens established pursuant to Section 13 of this Chapter
3-78.1, which books shall be properly indexed in the name of the
judgment debtor. The municipal attorney shall not be required to pay
filing or recording fees.
P. Collection of money due municipality.
The municipality attorney in the name of the municipality may do
all things necessary to collect any money due to the municipality by
way of reimbursement for services rendered by a municipal public
defender pursuant to this act. The municipal attorney may enter into
arrangements with any State or county agency to handle collections on
a cost basis. The municipal attorney shall have all the remedies and
proceedings available for collection which are available for or upon the
recovery of a judgment in a civil action and shall also be permitted to
collect counsel fees and costs from the defendant for such collection
action so that the same are not borne by the municipality.
Q. Review of municipal public defender program.
(1) Report. The Township Attorney and the Public Defender for the
Township of East Brunswick shall make and submit annually on or
before February 15th on the operation of Municipal Public
Defender Program for the prior calendar year. The report shall
include the following information:
(a) The number of cases in which a Municipal Public Defender is
appointed;
(b) The cost to the Township of East Brunswick for the services of
Municipal Public Defenders;
(c) The revenues received from fees collected pursuant to Section
5 of this Ordinance; and
(d) Recommendations with regard to the operation of the
Municipal Public Defender Program.
§ 3-78.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-80
1:87
94-19; 1-21-97 by Ord. No. 97-1; 3-29-94 by Ord. No. 94-19;
amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-18]
The Director of Law shall receive a fixed annual salary, known as a
"retainer," as set forth in the annual municipal budget. The retainer shall
cover the following services:
A. Attendance at all regular special and public meetings of the Township
Council;
B. The preparation of all ordinances and resolutions and conferences and
correspondence related to same;
C. Telephone conferences and general email communications with the
Mayor, Council and department and division heads and administrative
staff.
D. Administrative functions required of the Director of the Department of
Law.
§ 3-80 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-80
1:88
ARTICLE XII
Utilities
[Amended 2-23-65 by Ord. No. 65-1-A; 9-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-118;
4-26-71 by Ord. No. 71-1-O; 11-22-71 by Ord. No. 71-1-Q; 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-174-B4; 12-28-98 by Ord. No. 98-37]
§ 3-81. Water utility. [Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 4-8-85 by
Ord. No. 85-653; 8-10-87 by Ord. No. 87-861; 3-26-18 by Ord. No.
18-03]
Within the Department of Administrative Services there shall be a Water
Utility which shall have the responsibility of effectuating the purposes of
Chapter 218 of the Code of the Township East Brunswick.
A. There shall be a Water Production Section, the head of which shall be
the Director of Public Works, or the Director of another Township
Department, or the Director of the Water and Sewer Utilities. The
choice of which Director shall head the Water Production Section shall
be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
Under the supervision and direction of its Director, the Section shall:
[Amended 3-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-03]
(1) Use diligence and reasonable care to provide a constant supply of
water to consumers in accordance with Chapter 218 of Code of the
Township of East Brunswick, as applicable.
(2) Operate and maintain the water treatment plant, reservoir,
pumping stations and elevated storage tanks.
B. The Division of Public Works shall be responsible for maintenance,
construction and improvement of all capital operations of the Water
Utility. [Amended 3-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-03]
C. The Division of Revenue shall be responsible for collection of all
charges, and the Division of Accounts and Treasury shall be responsible
for investments of moneys and all such financial operations in
conjunction with the administration of water delivery within the
Township of East Brunswick.
D. There shall be a Water Policy Advisory Committee consisting of
residents of the Township of East Brunswick to advise the
Administration, Mayor, Council and/or Planning Board as is
appropriate. The Water Policy Advisory Committee shall be responsible
for an on-going review of the Water Supply Master Plan and report their
recommendations from time to time to the Planning Board, the Mayor
and Township Council. The Committee shall advise in the operation of
the Water Utility and in the development of a sufficient water supply of
adequate quality for the full development of the East Brunswick
4. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 76-174-B revised this Article to pertain to utilities. Formerly
this Article pertained to the Department of Public Works which was consolidated into
other departments.
§ 3-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-81
1:89
§ 3-82. Crystal Springs Family Waterpark Utility. [Amended 8-14-78
by Ord. No. 78-49; 4-8-85 by Ord. No. 85-653; 8-10-87 by Ord. No.
87-861; 1-24-94 by Ord. No. 94-1; 4-24-17 by Ord. No. 17-19]
Within the Department of Recreation, Parks and Community Services shall
be a Crystal Springs Family Waterpark Utility which shall have the
responsibility of effectuating the purposes of Chapters 158, 195 and 197 of
the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 3-83. Parking utility. [Amended 8-22-77 by Ord. No. 77-227-B;
8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 4-8-85 by Ord. No. 85-653; 4-22-85 by
Ord. No. 85-659; 6-24-85 by Ord. No. 85-674; 4-7-86 by Ord. No.
86-745; 12-8-86 by Ord. No. 86-806; 8-10-87 by Ord. No.
87-8591-11-88 by Ord. No. 87-892; 5-23-88 by Ord. No. 88-931;
3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-31; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-30; 8-30-03 by
Ord. No. 03-29; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-15; 11-14-11 by Ord. No.
11-19]
Editor's Note: These provisions, which are a part of Ord. No. 76-174-B,
were deemed to supersede Ord. No. 75-227, adopted 9-22-75, as amended
10-6-75 by Ord. No. 75-227-A, which created the East Brunswick Parking
Utility.
Within the Department of Finance there is hereby created and continued a
Parking Utility (N.J.S.A. 40A:1-1) within the Township. The Parking Utility,
while organized as a separate function and, for budgeting purposes, is
organized for self-liquidating purposes (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-33) and shall operate
as any department within the Township. The East Brunswick Parking Utility
shall be organized in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:60-25.1 and the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick. As any department, the Utility shall
be ultimately responsible for its administration to the Mayor and to be
under the legislative control of the Township Council. In accordance with
§ 3-50 of the Code, the Utility shall be under the direction of the Business
Administrator.
The Parking Utility shall be operated as follows:
community and shall annually recommend the water utility budget to
the Mayor. The size of the Committee shall be eleven (11) members, one
of whom shall be a member of the Township Council to be appointed
by the Township Council, and the remaining members to be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Council
for staggered terms of three years each, except that three members
shall serve for a one year term and three members shall serve for a
two year term at the time the first group of members is appointed.
[Added 2-22-82 by Ord. No. 82-437; 7-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-466;
12-27-82 by Ord. No. 82-485; 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-14]
A. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for maintenance,
construction and improvement of all capital operations of the Parking
Utility.
§ 3-81 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-83
1:90
B. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the collection of all
fees, investments of moneys and all such financial operations in
conjunction with the administration of public parking within the
Township of East Brunswick.
C. The East Brunswick Parking Utility is authorized to charge and enforce
parking rates according to the following:
(1) Automobile parking by permit at Transportation and Commerce
Center and other Township Parking Utility sites.
(a) $30 resident and $60 nonresident per month through
December 31, 2013 and increase to $65 on January 1, 2014.
(2) Truck parking will not be permitted.
(3) Day rate parking for automobiles without permit
(a) $5 per day.
(4) Automobile parking by permit at the Neilson Parking Plaza
(a) Residents of East Brunswick $30 per month
(b) Nonresidents of East Brunswick $60 per month through
December 31, 2013 and increase to $65 on January 1, 2014.
(c) $5 per day.
(d) Weekend parking for residents and nonresidents $3 effective
October 1, 2003 and $4 effective July 1, 2004 per day.
(5) Replacement fee for lost or destroyed permit $1.
D. A monthly permit will be sold for parking at the Transportation and
Commerce Center and preference will be given to East Brunswick
residents subject to rules and regulations to be adopted and
implemented by the East Brunswick Parking Utility.
E. The parking rates shown in (1), (3) and (4) shall apply to any new lots
which are operated by the East Brunswick Parking Utility.
F. The Collector of Revenue and the Director of Finance are hereby
instructed to account for all parking receipts according to existing state
law and subject to the annual audit.
G. In accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:48-10 all moneys received by or on
behalf of the Parking Utility shall be paid to the Collector of Revenue,
who shall deposit all such receipts within forty-eight (48) hours.
H. An annual budget shall be prepared in accordance with N.J.R.S. 40A:4.
I. The Parking Utility shall comply with all applicable provisions of
N.J.R.S. 40:62.
§ 3-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-83
1:91
§ 3-83.1. Construction inspection utility. [Added 3-19-79 by Ord. No.
79-122]
Within the Department of Administrative Services there shall be a
Construction Inspection Utility which shall have the responsibility of
effectuating the purposes of Chapters 49, Architectural Review, 75,
Construction Codes, Uniform, and 78, Contractors, Building, of the Code of
the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 3-83.2. Sewer utility. [Added 12-12-83 by Ord. No. 83-547;
amended 6-14-10 by Ord. No. 10-11; 6-25-12 by Ord. No. 12-05;
3-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-03]
Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Sewer Utility
which shall have the responsibility of effectuating the purposes of Chapter
219 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
J. The parking rates as delineated and the provisions of the permitted
parking system are to be enforced by the Parking Enforcement Officer
employed by the Parking Utility.
(1) Driving the wrong way on the parking garage ramps.
(2) Parking in a non-authorized area.
(3) Parking without payment.
(4) Parking without the appropriate permit.
(5) Stopping or standing in the buses only lane.
(6) Parking across designated stall.
(7) Driving wrong way in exit or entrance of parking facilities.
(8) Making and using fraudulent monthly parking permit.
(9) Failure to park head-on in stall. [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
K. The penalty for violating the parking rules and regulations shall be set
by the Court and listed on the Court's Violation Bureau schedule of
fines.
A. There shall be a Collection System, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works, or the Director of another Township
Department, or the Director of the Water and Sewer Utilities. The
choice of which Director shall head the Sewer Utility shall be made by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Under its
Director's supervision the System shall: [Added 6-14-10 by Ord. No.
10-11; amended 6-25-12 by Ord. No. 12-05; 3-26-18 by Ord. No.
18-03]
§ 3-83 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-83.2
1:92
§ 3-83.3. Police Training Utility. [Added 12-28-98 by Ord. No. 98-37]
(1) Use diligence and reasonable care to provide a safe collection
system for consumers in accordance with Chapter 219 of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick, as applicable. [Added 6-14-10
by Ord. No. 10-11]
(2) Operate and maintain the collection system and pumping stations.
[Added 6-14-10 by Ord. No. 10-11]
B. The Division of Engineering shall be responsible for design of,
construction and improvement of capital improvements of the Sewer
Utility. [Added 6-14-10 by Ord. No. 10-11]
C. The Division of Revenue in the Finance Department shall be responsible
for collection of all charges, and the Division of Accounts and Treasury
shall be responsible for investments of moneys and all such financial
operations in conjunction with the administration of sewerage delivery
within the Township of East Brunswick. [Added 6-14-10 by Ord. No.
10-11]
A. Department of Finance shall be responsible for the collection of all fees,
rate setting, investing of all monies and all such financial operations in
conjunction with the administration of the police training utility within
the Township of East Brunswick.
B. The Department of Public Safety shall be responsible for the staffing,
supervision, safety and management of the Utility property known as
the Police Firearms Training Facility.
§ 3-83.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-83.3
1:93

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Public Safety
§ 3-84. Department established. [Amended 7-10-72 by Ord. No.
72-1-S; 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-208;
3-28-88 by Ord. No. 88-913; 8-31-15 Ord. by 15-17]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall
be the Director of Public Safety, if one is appointed. If a Director is not
appointed and the position of Chief of Police is established and filled,
the Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and he shall be
directly responsible to the Appropriate Authority for the efficiency and
routine day to day operations thereof. The Department shall include the
Police Divisions, the Emergency Management Organization and the Bureau
of Animal Control. In addition, the Director shall be responsible for proper
liaison with the various volunteer fire companies and the rescue squad. The
Director may appoint Police Chaplains.
§ 3-84.1. Designation of Appropriate Authority. [Added 8-31-15 Ord.
15-17]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor or his designee is hereby
designated as the Appropriate Authority and is hereby vested with the
powers and duties of an Appropriate Authority as delegated by law.
§ 3-84.2. Chief of Police; Powers and Duties. [Added 8-31-15 Ord.
15-17]
The Township shall appoint a Chief of Police, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, and who shall be directly responsible to the Appropriate
Authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the
Department of Public Safety. The Chief of Police shall pursuant to any
policies established by the Township Council consistent with Township
Ordinances:
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Department of
Public Safety and any special emergency directives for the disposition
and discipline of the Department of Public Safety and its officers and
personnel.
B. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Department of Public Safety.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such authority, as he may deem necessary for the efficient
operation of the Department of Public Safety to be exercised under his
direction and supervision.
§ 3-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-84.2
1:95
§ 3-85. Police Divisions. [Amended 12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-1-H;
3-28-88 by Ord. No. 88-913; 1-28-02 by Ord. No. 02-03; 8-31-15 Ord.
No. 15-17]
There shall be four (4) Police Divisions (Patrol, Investigative, Traffic and
Administration) under the direction and supervision of the Chief of Police. In
the absence of a Chief of Police, the Chief shall appoint a Captain to exercise
the functions and duties of the Chief of Police in the his\her incapacitation
or absence. The Divisions shall consist of up to four (4) captains, up to 10
lieutenants, up to eleven (11) sergeants, and up to sixty-four (64) patrol
persons, to be appointed to these positions by the Mayor. The Divisions shall
be organized in such a manner and with such assignments of personnel as
the Chief shall order. The Divisions shall:
E. Report to the Appropriate Authority in such form as shall be prescribed
by the appropriate Authority on the operation of the Department, and
make such other reports as requested by the Appropriate Authority.
A. Preserve the public peace; protect life and property; prevent crime;
detect and arrest offenders against the penal law and ordinances
effective within the municipality; suppress riots, mobs and
insurrections; disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages; and
preserve order at all elections and public meetings and assemblages.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including
the marking and signing of roads to protect the safety and facilitate the
convenience of motorists and pedestrians.
C. Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places; inspect and observe all places of public amusement or
assemblage and all places of business requiring any state or municipal
license or permit; and report thereon to the appropriate department.
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
E. Provide for attendance of its members in the Municipal Court as
necessary for the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes
and offenses; and cooperate fully with law enforcement and prosecuting
authorities of federal, state, county and other local governments.
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Divisions.
G. Recommend and supervise the installation and maintenance of an
adequate and safe streetlighting system.
H. Be subject, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, to the jurisdiction of the
Appropriate Authority for the discipline of members of the Department
of Public Safety. [Amended 8-31-2015 Ord. No. 15-17]
§ 3-84.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-86
1:96
§ 3-86. Bureau of Fire Prevention and Bureau of Animal Control.
[Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No. 78-49; 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-208;
3-28-88 by Ord. No. 88-913]
There shall be a Bureau of Fire Prevention and a Bureau of Animal Control
within the Department of Public Safety.
§ 3-87. Emergency Management Organization. [Amended 3-28-88
by Ord. No. 88-913, Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. 15-21]
Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be an Emergency
Management Organization.
§ 3-88. Traffic Advisory Board. [Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-80;
amended 6-12-95 by Ord. No. 95-20]
Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be a Traffic Advisory
Board consisting of nine residents of the Township of East Brunswick,
one of whom shall be a member of the Commuter Advisory Committee
A. The head of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be the Fire Official, who
shall be responsible for enforcing Chapter 102, Fire Safety, of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick, and such other codes or ordinances
as the Director may assign.
B. The Bureau of Animal Control shall enforce Chapter 65 and 83 of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick by regulating the maintenance
of cats and dogs and such other codes or ordinances as the Director
may assign.
A. The Emergency Management Organization shall be headed by the
Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management who shall be a
resident of the Township and shall be appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor. The Municipal Coordinator shall have the
functions, powers and duties of a municipal disaster control director as
provided by law.
B. The Director of Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police may also serve
as Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management if appointed by
the Mayor.
C. The Director or Chief of Police, if a Director is not appointed, shall
appoint a Deputy Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management
with the approval of the Mayor. The Deputy, wherever possible, shall be
appointed from among the salaried officers or employees of the
Township.
D. A Local Disaster Council with powers and duties prescribed by general
law is hereby created. The Council shall consist of no more than 15
persons and shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. The Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management shall be
a member and serve as Chairman of the Council.
§ 3-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-88
1:97
and all of whom shall be voting members. The Mayor shall designate
one employee of the Township of East Brunswick who shall be a liaison
between the Traffic Advisory Board and the County, State, and Federal
Governments with regard to the Federal Clean Air Act; one employee in the
Township Department of Planning and Engineering and one employee in the
Township Department of Public Safety. Three (3) of the resident members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and five of the resident members shall be
appointed by the Council and one by the Commuter Advisory Board. The
members shall serve staggered terms of two years, beginning the first day
of January, except that the two additional members appointed by virtue of
this ordinance shall be appointed for an initial term which shall expire on
January 1, 1996 and thereafter for two year terms. The Board shall:
§ 3-88.1. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [Added 1-28-80 by Ord.
No. 80-212; 3-28-88 by Ord. No. 88-913]
(1) Identify and study traffic "trouble spots" and make recommendations to
reduce traffic on roads in East Brunswick.
(2) Work with the Department of Public Safety, Traffic Division, the Mayor,
Township Council, Middlesex County Road Department and New Jersey
Department of Transportation in order to come up with solutions to
traffic problems in the Township of East Brunswick.
(3) Study requirements of the Federal Clean Air Act and suggest ways in
which East Brunswick can meet federal requirements to reduce traffic
and to reduce air pollution and emissions from motor vehicles.
(4) Work with the East Brunswick business community in order to come up
with suggestions to reduce traffic through innovative approaches to
work hours, deliveries, car pools and van pools, and other approaches
which may reduce traffic.
(5) Work with any other governmental, citizen, or transportation group to
accomplish the foregoing.
A. The Director of Public Safety may from time to time appoint Special
Law Enforcement Officers pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the
amendments and supplements thereto and the provisions of the
ordinance.
B. Special Law Enforcement Officers may be appointed for terms not to
exceed one year, and the appointments may be revoked for cause after
adequate hearing, unless the appointment is for four months or less, in
which event the appointment may be revoked without cause or hearing.
Nothing herein shall be construed to require reappointment upon the
expiration of the term. The Special Law Enforcement Officers so
appointed shall not be members of the police force of the Township, and
their powers and duties as determined pursuant to this section shall
cease at the expiration of the term for which appointed.
§ 3-88 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-88.1
1:98
C. Before any such appointment is made, the Director of Public Safety
shall ascertain whether the applicant for appointment is qualified under
the applicable laws of New Jersey and the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. No person may be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement Officer
unless the person:
(1) Is a resident of this State during the term of appointment.
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(3) Is sound in body and of good health.
(4) Is of good moral character.
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office.
E. Such Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Director of Public Safety and/or his representative
and shall abide by the rules and regulations applicable to the conduct
and decorum of the regular Police Officers as now or hereafter adopted
insofar as they are applicable to the duties and responsibilities of
Special Law Enforcement Officers.
F. In addition, such Special Law Enforcement Officers shall:
(1) Perform duties at such time and place as approved by the Director
of Public Safety in accordance with the standard operating
procedures as now or hereafter adopted within the Department of
Public Safety.
(2) Report for Police duty to the Director of Public Safety or his
representative wherever ordered to do so in the event of any
emergency or disaster or when duty is required to protect the
safety of the public.
G. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officers shall be authorized to perform routine traffic
details, spectator control and similar duties. They shall have the power
to issue summonses for disorderly persons, petty disorderly persons,
ordinance offenses and violations of Title 39 of the revised statutes.
§ 3-88.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-88.1
1:99

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Health and Welfare
[Amended 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4]
§ 3-89. Department established. [Amended 9-30-74 by Ord. No.
74-1-Z; 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4]
Department generally. There shall be a Department of Health and Welfare,
the head of which shall be the Director, who shall also be the Health Officer.
The Department shall include the divisions of Health and Welfare.
§ 3-90. Division of Health. [Amended 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-54]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Health, the head of which
shall be the Health Officer. The Division shall:
§ 3-91. Advisory Health Council. [Amended 2-25-80 by Ord. No.
80-218; 10-25-04 by Ord. No. 04-19]
There shall be an Advisory Health Council consisting of fourteen (14)
citizens, one of which shall preferably be a physician and one shall be
a Member Emeritus. The members of the Advisory Health Council shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Council for staggered terms of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term. The Health Officer shall be a voting
member and shall serve as Secretary of the Advisory Health Council and
shall prepare and complete all files and minutes of all meetings. For budget,
personnel and purchasing purposes, the Advisory Health Council is
allocated and assigned to the Division of Health. The Advisory Health
Council shall have the following duties:
A. Have all of the functions, powers and duties of a local board of health,
except that as required by the charter, the Council shall have and
exercise all local legislative powers of a local board of health.
B. Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program, including,
but without limitation thereto, environmental sanitation, communicable
disease control, child and adult health and health education, laboratory
services and any other services as may be authorized by the charter or
ordinance and prescribed in Recognized Public Health Activities and
Minimum Standards for Performance for Local Health Departments in
New Jersey, promulgated by the Public Health Council of the New
Jersey Department of Health.
C. Supervise the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the
Township.
A. To make recommendations to the Health Officer and Mayor concerning
or relating to the operation and administration of the Division of Health.
§ 3-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-91
1:101
§ 3-92. Division of Welfare.
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Welfare, the head of
which shall be the Local Assistance Board appointed pursuant to law
(N.J.R.S. 44:8-1 et seq.). The Director of Welfare, under the supervision of
the Board, shall:
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 44:8-1 through 44:8-31 were repealed by P.L. 1940,
c. 183; however, Section 1 of P.L. 1940, c. 180, provided for the continuance
of Boards created pursuant to the repealed statutory provisions.
§ 3-93. Local Assistance Board. [Amended 8-14-78 by Ord. No.
78-49]
There shall be a Local Assistance Board consisting of five members, one
of whom shall be a woman. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council. They shall serve without
compensation but shall be allowed their actual expenses. One (1) member
B. To make recommendations to the Council concerning or touching upon
matters of policy or ordinances affecting the Division of Health.
C. Whenever an appeal is made to the Mayor from a ruling of the Health
Officer, the Mayor may convene the Advisory Health Council for the
purpose of soliciting its advice regarding a decision on the appeal. In
such cases, the opinion of the Advisory Health Council shall be advisory
in nature only, and the Mayor shall make his individual decision on the
matter after receiving the advice of the Advisory Health Council. In
cases where appeals are made to the Mayor, he shall set a date for the
hearing of the Advisory Health Council within fourteen (14) days after
receiving the written request and shall render his decision within 10
days after completion of the hearing.
A. Administer laws and ordinances relating to relief of the needy, including
the furnishing of all forms of public assistance to needy persons who
are eligible for assistance provided by law through county and state
agencies.
B. Provide or arrange for shelter and custodial care of dependent and
homeless men and women.
C. Enter into and perform cooperative agreements with voluntary
charitable organizations and services to effectuate its other functions
under this section.
D. Provide related social services, such as domestic relations counseling,
investigation of paternity cases, indigent burials and other public
welfare activities.
E. Cooperate with other public agencies and institutions and with
voluntary institutions in the certifications of medically indigent patients
for care and treatment.
§ 3-91 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-93
1:102
shall serve for one year and he may also be a member of the Council. The
other members shall serve for four-year staggered terms beginning the first
day of January. Vacancies shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired
term.
§ 3-94. Environmental Commission. [Added 5-29-73 by Ord. No.
73-1-V; amended 8-26-74 by Ord. No. 74-192; 1-28-91 by Ord. No.
91-6; 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-4]
This section was deleted on 2-9-98 in its entirety by Ord. No. 98-4. See new
section, § 3-55(O.), Department of Planning and Engineering.
§ 3-95. Powers of Director relative to food establishments. [Added
12-27-67 by Ord. No. 67-99]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
A. Emergency powers of the Director of the Department of Health,
Environment and Welfare. Whenever the Director of the Department of
Health, Environment and Welfare finds that the public safety will not
permit delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers
without having to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity
of giving notice or holding a hearing which would otherwise be required
under any provision of this chapter.
(1) Power to prevent the sale of food. The Director of the Department
of Health, Environment and Welfare may prohibit the importation,
storage or sale of any food, drink or other items intended for human
consumption or use from a source suspected of being infected,
contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
(2) Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Director of the
Department of Health, Environment and Welfare may order the
seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other items intended
for human consumption or use which are unwholesome or
dangerous or likely to cause sickness or injury to the persons who
consume or use it.
(3) Suspension of licenses. The Director of the Department of Health,
Environment and Welfare may temporarily suspend the license of
any person required to be licensed by any of the provisions of this
chapter if he finds that the licensed activity is being conducted in
such a manner as to endanger the health or safety of the public.
During the period of suspension, the Director may take such action
as he deems necessary to prevent the operation of the licensed
activity, including but not limited to impounding items intended for
human consumption, merchandise, supplies and equipment
necessary to carry on the licensed activity and posting and
padlocking the premises. Any suspension imposed under the
§ 3-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-95
1:103
authority granted by this section shall only be effective until a
hearing can be held after proper notice.
B. Right of entry.
(1) Right of entry to inspect premises. The Director of the Department
of Health, Environment and Welfare, his agents and employees
shall have the right to inspect any premises in the Township of East
Brunswick if they have reason to believe that any of the provisions
of any Township ordinances are being violated or as part of any
regular program of inspection.
(2) Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses
to permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Director of the
Department of Health, Environment and Welfare may apply to the
Magistrate of the Township of East Brunswick or any other court of
competent jurisdiction for a search warrant. The application shall
be based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part
of a regular program of inspections or that conditions and
circumstances, which shall be specified in the affidavit, exist which
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance, unhealthy
or unsanitary condition or violation of any provisions of this chapter
exists on the premises. If the Magistrate is satisfied as to the
matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
C. Abatement of nuisances.
(1) Notice to abate nuisance. Whenever anything declared by this
chapter to be a nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition
is found on any premises within the Township of East Brunswick,
notice as provided for in Subsection C(4) shall be given to the
owner or person in control of the premises to remove or abate it
within the time specified.
(2) Abatement by Director of the Department of Health, Environment
and Welfare. In the event of an emergency or in the event that the
owner or person in control of the premises fails to comply with the
notice within the time specified, or otherwise fails to remove or
abate the nuisance or condition, the Director of the Department of
Health, Environment and Welfare or his agents or employees shall
proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may cause it to be
removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as he shall
deem proper.
(3) Recovery of costs.
(a) Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the Township of
East Brunswick as a result of the Director of the Department of
Health, Environment and Welfare, his agents or employees
abating or removing or causing to be abated or removed any
§ 3-95 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-95
1:104
nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition, such costs and
expenses may be recovered in the following manner:
[1] In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such
costs shall be certified to the Division of Revenue and shall
be a part of the taxes next assessed upon the premises
upon which the nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy
condition was located.
[2] Where the Township is not permitted by law or it is
impractical to proceed under Subsection C(3)(a)[1], the
cost or expense shall be recovered by an action at law in
any court of competent jurisdiction, which action shall be
instituted by the Director of the Department of Health,
Environment and Welfare in the name of the Township.
(b) Regardless of how costs are actually recovered they shall be in
addition to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties
for the violation of this chapter.
(4) Manner of giving notice. Where the owner resides in the Township
or in the case of a tenant, written notice shall be served by
delivering a copy to him personally; or by leaving a copy thereof at
his dwelling house or usual place of abode with some competent
member of his family of the age of fourteen (14) years or over then
residing therein; or by delivering a copy thereof to a person
authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process
on his behalf. Where the owner resides outside the Township or
where the resident owner cannot be served as set forth above,
written notice shall be mailed to the owner by certified mail at his
last known address as shown on the tax records of the Township,
and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises. Where the violation is against a tenant and he cannot
be served as set forth above, it shall be sufficient to post a copy of
the notice in a conspicuous place on the demised premises.
Notwithstanding the provisions for written notice set forth above,
in the event of an emergency, the Director of the Department of
Health, Environment and Welfare or his duly authorized agents or
employees may give such oral and/or limited notice as
circumstances may permit. "Emergency" shall mean any condition
which, in the opinion of the Director of the Department of Health,
Environment and Welfare, constitutes an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the general public or any inhabitant of
the Township.
D. Power to make rules and regulations. The Director of the Department of
Health, Environment and Welfare may make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this section or for the
purpose of making the provisions of this section more effective. No
regulation, however, shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any
provision of this section, and no regulation shall impose any
§ 3-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-95
1:105
§ 3-95.1. Fees for retail food establishment re-inspections and retail
food establishment initial plan reviews by the County of Middlesex
Public Health Department as contracting agency for the Township.
[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-09]
requirement which is in addition to or greater than the requirements
that are expressly or by implication imposed by any provision of this
section.
(1) Retail food establishment re-inspections fee: $50.
(2) Retail food establishment initial plan review fee: $75.
(3) Fees are payable to the Middlesex County Public Health Department
within 10 business days of the re-inspection or plan review.
(4) Failure to pay the fee within 10 working days will result in a court
summons with fines as follows:
First Penalty: $100.
Second Penalty: $200.
Third and Subsequent Penalties: $400.
The fees and any subsequent court costs will be in addition to the fines
set forth for violations of this ordinance.
§ 3-95 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-95.1
1:106
ARTICLE XV
Regulations Applicable to Officers and Employees
§ 3-96. Compensation of Mayor and Council. [Amended 9-30-74 by
Ord. No. 74-1-AA; 5-23-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-EEE; 3-23-81 by Ord.
No. 81-340; 12-30-85 by Ord. No. 85-721; 8-23-99 by Ord. No. 99-36;
1-22-01 by Ord. No. 01-4]
§ 3-97. Filling of vacancies in the positions of department head or
division head.
A director may serve as a division head without additional compensation.
Except for the Director of the Department of Law, department heads shall
devote their full time to the proper and efficient discharge of the duties of
their respective offices. Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of head of
any division by resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the director of
the department may fill such vacancy temporarily by appointing an acting
head of such division who shall have and perform all the functions, powers
and duties of such division head until the office shall be filled permanently.
§ 3-98. Surety bonds.
A. Prior to January 1, 2001, compensation and benefits for the Mayor and
Council shall be at levels as were in effect on January 1, 1999. [Added
8-23-99 by Ord. No. 99-36]
B. Compensation for the Mayor and Council shall be paid beginning
January 1, 2001, at the following annual rates [Amended 8-23-99 by
Ord. No. 99-36]:
(1) Mayor: $20,000.
(2) Councilmember: $10,500.
(3) President of Council: $11,000.
C. Expenses for Council Members, the President of the Council and the
Mayor shall not be allowed except where they are described in detail
for particular duties or responsibilities and, where feasible, approved in
advance by the Council at a public meeting. In no case will expenses be
permitted for such things as personal telephone calls or local mileage.
[Amended 12-11-84 by Ord. No. 84-627; 8-23-99 by Ord. No.
99-36]
D. Effective January 1, 2001, neither Council Members, the President of
the Council, nor the Mayor shall be entitled to paid health benefits or
payments/stipends in lieu thereof, but they may purchase health
benefits through the Township sponsored self-insurance program at
cost through compensation reduction provided said benefits do not
exceed the rate established in § 3-96B. [Added 8-23-99 by Ord. No.
99-36; amended 1-22-01 by Ord. No. 01-4]
§ 3-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-98
1:107
§ 3-99. Conflicts of interest; use of confidential information.
[Repealed 3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-29]
§ 3-100. Standards of conduct. [Repealed 3-25-91 by Ord. No.
91-29]
§ 3-101. Code of Ethics. [Renamed and Amended 3-25-91 by Ord.
No. 91-29; amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
A. Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of his office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds and any other officer or employee who may be so
required by the Council shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as
may be fixed by resolution of the Council, binding him to the
municipality in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and
faithful performance of his duty. Each officer or employee required by
law to give bond shall execute such a bond with sufficient surety and
deliver the same to the Township Clerk, except that the Clerk shall
deliver his bond to the Treasurer before he enters upon the discharge of
the duties of his office or employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond
as herein required within thirty (30) days after due notification of his
election or appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the
Council.
C. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by any ordinance of the municipality to give a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in this state and, except in the case of
Constables, the premium therefor shall be paid by the Township. Each
bond shall be approved by the Department of Law as to form and
sufficiency, and nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent
the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
A. Title. This Section shall be known and may be cited as the East
Brunswick Township Code of Ethics.
B. Findings. The Township Council of the Township of East Brunswick
finds and declares that:
(1) Public office and employment are a public trust;
(2) The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend upon
the public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives;
(3) Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private
interests and the public duties of a government officer or employee,
that confidence is imperiled;
§ 3-98 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:108
(4) Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed, and to apprise their officers and
employees of the behavior which is expected of them while
conducting their public duties;
C. Purpose and Authority.
(1) It is the purpose of this Section to provide a method of assuring
that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements for officers and employees of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be clear, consistent, uniform in their application,
enforceable, and to provide those officers or employees with advice
and information concerning possible conflicts of interests which
might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
(2) It is the further purpose of this Section to implement the provisions
of the Local Government Ethics Law.
(3) This Section is enacted under the authority of the Local
Government Ethics Law, and under the further authority granted to
the Township of East Brunswick under the provisions of Titles 40
and 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
D. Definitions. As used in this Section: [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No.
10-22]
(1) "Agency" means any agency, board, governing body, including the
chief executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality
within the Township of East Brunswick, and any independent local
authority created by or appointed under the authority of the
Township of East Brunswick, which performs functions other than
of a purely advisory nature;
(2) "Business organizations" means any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union
or other legal entity;
(3) "Employee" means any person, whether compensated or not,
whether part-time or full-time, employed by or serving on an
agency who is not a local government officer;
(4) "Interest" means the ownership or control of more than 10% of the
profits, assets or stock of a business organization but shall not
include the control of assets in a non-union profit entity or labor
union;
(5) "Member of immediate family" means the spouse or dependent
child of an officer or employee residing in the same household.
(6) "Officer" means any person whether compensated or not, whether
part-time or full time who is one of the following: [Amended
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:109
(a) Member of the Township Council
(b) Mayor
(c) All municipal employees in grade 90 and above or
subsequently designated in the salary ordinances that are
adopted by the Township Council from time to time.
(d) Director of Law
(e) Members of the Planning Board
(f) Members of the Zoning Board
(g) Attorney for the Planning Board
(h) Attorney for the Zoning Board
(i) Township Engineer
(j) Township Planning Consultant
(k) Township Auditor
(l) Municipal Court Judge
(m) Township Prosecutors
(n) Local Assistance Board Members
(o) [Deleted 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(p) [Deleted 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(q) Members of the Board of Fire Commissioners for all Township
Fire Districts
(r) Member of Library Board of Trustees
(s) Director of East Brunswick Township Library
(t) Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined in Section 3 of the "New Jersey Employer-
Employee Relations Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3 of the Township of
East Brunswick or of an agency created under the authority of
or appointed by the Township of East Brunswick.
(7) "Officer or employee" means an officer or employee of the
Township of East Brunswick or of an agency under the authority of
or appointed by the Township of East Brunswick.
E. Ethical Standards. Officers and employees of the Township of East
Brunswick shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) No officer or employee of the Township of East Brunswick or
member of his or her immediate family shall have an interest in a
§ 3-101 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:110
business organization or engage in any business, transaction or
professional activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of his or her duties in the public interest;
(2) No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for
himself or others;
(3) No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
matter where he or she, a member of his or her immediate family,
or any business organization in which he or she has an interest, has
a direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that might
reasonably be expected to impair his or her objectivity or
independence or judgment;
(4) No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not which might reasonably be expected
to prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of
his or her official duties;
(5) No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family, or
any business organization in which he or she has an interest, shall
solicit or accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service,
promise of future employment, or other thing of value based upon
an understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service,
promise, or other thing of value was given or offered for the
purpose of influencing him, directly or indirectly, in the discharge
of his or her official duties. This provision shall not apply to the
solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an
announced candidate for elective public office, if the officer has no
knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if
accepted, was given with the intent to influence the officer in the
discharge of his or her official duties;
(6) No officer or employee shall use, or allow to be used, his or her
public office or employment, or any information, not generally
available to the members of the public, which he or she receives or
acquires in the course of and by reason of his or her office or
employment, for the purpose of securing financial gain for himself,
any member of his or her immediate family, or any business
organization with which he or she is associated;
(7) No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or
she has an interest shall represent any person or party other than
the Township in connection with any cause, proceeding, application
or other matter pending before any agency of the Township of East
Brunswick. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an
employee from representing another employee where the
representation is within the context of official labor union or similar
representational responsibilities;
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:111
(8) No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by
reason of his or her participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or
which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or
monetary gain accrues to him or her as a member of any business,
profession, occupation or group, to any greater extent than any
gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member
of such business.
(9) No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other
thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or
a member of his or her immediate family, whether directly or
indirectly, in return therefor; and
(10) Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Township of
East Brunswick, or members of his or her immediate family, from
representing himself, herself or themselves, in negotiations or
proceedings concerning his, her or their, own interests.
(11)No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall,
without receiving formal written authorization from the
appropriate person or body, disclose any confidential information
concerning any other officer or employee or any other person or
any property or governmental affairs of the Township.
(12)No officer or employee shall approve or disapprove or in any way
recommend the payment of any bill, voucher, or indebtedness owed
or allegedly owned by the Township in which he or she has a direct
or indirect personal, pecuniary or private interest.
(13)No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall
request, use or permit the use of any public property, vehicle,
equipment, labor or service for personal convenience or the private
advantage of himself or any other person. This prohibition shall not
be deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting,
using or permitting the use of such public property, vehicle,
equipment, material, labor or service which it is general practice to
make available to the public at large or which are provided as a
matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and employees
in the conduct of official business.
F. Financial Disclosure Statements.
(1) Officers of the Township shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the
name and address of each source and the officer's job title:
(a) Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000
received by the officer or a member of his or her immediate
family during the preceding calendar year. Individual client
§ 3-101 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:112
fees, customer receipts or commissions on transactions
received through a business organization need not be
separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly traded
security is the source of income, the security need not be
reported unless the local government officer or member of
his or her immediate family has an interest in the business
organization.
(b) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate
amount exceeding $250 from any single source of personal
appearances, speeches or writings received by the local
government officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year.
(c) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses
having an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single
source, excluding relatives, received by the local government
officer or a member of his or her immediate family during the
preceding calendar year.
(d) The name and address of all business organizations in which
the local government officer or a member of his or her
immediate family had an interest during the preceding
calendar year.
(e) The address and brief description of all real property in the
State in which the local government officer or a member of his
or her immediate family held an interest during the preceding
calendar year.
(2) The Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards Board shall
prescribe a financial disclosure statement form for filing purposes.
If a financial disclosure statement form has been promulgated by
the New Jersey Local Finance Board, in accordance with the New
Jersey Local Government Ethics Law, then that form shall be used.
The Township Clerk shall make the forms available to the officers
and employees required to file a financial disclosure statement.
(3) The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk within
90 days after the effective date of this Section or the effective date
of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law, whichever shall
first occur. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or before
April 30th of each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed with
the East Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board.
(4) All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
G. Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards Board.
(1) There is hereby established the Township of East Brunswick Ethical
Standards Board consisting of six members who are residents of
the Township, at least two of whom shall be public members. The
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:113
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Council.
The members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local
government affairs. No more than three members of the Board
shall be of the same political party. No member shall be a past
or present political chairperson or executive board member of a
municipal or county political committee. No one may be appointed
as a member if he/she has been a county committee person during
a 20 month period prior to appointment. Each member shall be a
resident of the Township of East Brunswick.
(2) The members of the Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards
Board shall annually elect a chairperson from among the
membership.
(3) The members shall serve for a term of five years; except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for a term of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years, and the remaining
members shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. Each
member shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed
and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the
Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the unexpired term.
(4) Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties under this Section.
(5) All hearings required pursuant to this Section shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a State agency in contested
cases under the "Administrative Procedure Chapter," N.J.S.A.
52-14B-1 et seq.
(6) In the event a hearing is to be held, the officer or employee charged
with violation of this section shall be accorded due process of law,
including but not limited to the following:
(a) Right to counsel.
(b) Right to prehearing discovery.
(c) Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any
person.
(d) Reasonable notice of hearing.
(e) Right to subpoena persons and documents.
(f) Right to make stenographic record of the hearing.
(g) Right of examination and cross-examination.
§ 3-101 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:114
H. Facilities and Staff.
(1) The Township Administrator shall provide the East Brunswick
Township Ethical Standards Board with the facilities needed for the
conduct of its business and the preservation of its records, and
shall supply equipment and supplies as may be necessary and as
may be provided for in the annual municipal budget.
(2) All necessary expenses incurred by the East Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board and its members shall be paid, upon
certification of the chairperson of the Board, by the Township Chief
Financial Officer, within the limits of funds appropriated in the
annual budget or by emergency appropriations for those purposes.
(3) The Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards Board may
request and receive assistance from Township Officers and
employees, including the Township Clerk and the Township
Attorney and may appoint employees, including independent
counsel, and clerical staff as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Chapter within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Township Council for those purposes in the annual budget. For
the purposes of budgeting, personnel and purchasing the Ethical
Standards Board is allocated and assigned within the Township
Clerk's Office.
I. Adoption of a Code of Ethics.
(1) At its first meeting, the Board shall elect a chairman by a majority
vote of all members of the Board. Within 90 days after the
appointment of the Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards
Board, the Board shall promulgate by resolution a code of ethics for
all officers and employees serving the Township. Officers and
employees serving a Township independent authority shall be
deemed to be serving the Township for purposes of this Section.
Until such time as the East Brunswick Ethical Standards Board
shall have adopted a code of ethics, the provisions set forth in §
3-101F shall serve as the code of ethics.
(2) The code of ethics promulgated by the Board shall be either
identical to the provisions set forth in § 3-101F or more restrictive,
but shall not be less restrictive.
(3) Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the code of
ethics, and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held on
the code of ethics, shall be published in the newspaper designated
for the publication of official notices for the Township and shall be
distributed to the Township Clerk and to the Township
Administrator for circulation among the officers and employees
serving the Township.
(4) The Township of East Brunswick Ethical Standards Board shall hold
a public hearing on the code of ethics not less than 30 days
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:115
following its promulgation at which any officer or employee of
the Township and any other person wishing to be heard shall be
permitted to testify.
(5) As a result of the hearing, the Board may amend or supplement the
code of ethics as it deems necessary.
(6) If the code of ethics is not identical to the provisions set forth in §
3-101F, the East Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board
shall, as required by law, submit the code of ethics to the New
Jersey Local Finance Board of approval.
(7) If the New Jersey Local Finance Board fails to act within sixty (60)
days of the submission, the code of ethics shall be deemed
approved.
(8) A code of ethics requiring approval by the New Jersey Local
Finance Board shall take effect 60 days after approval by the New
Jersey Local Finance Board.
(9) A code of ethics identical to the provisions set forth in § 3-101F
shall take effect 10 days after the public hearing.
(10) The Board shall forward a copy of the code of ethics to the
Township Clerk and shall make copies available to officers and
employees serving the Township.
(11) The Board shall meet annually on the third Wednesday of January,
at which time it shall elect a chairman.
(12) The Board shall review all financial disclosure statements not later
than 30 days after the filing deadline.
J. Powers of the Ethical Standards Board. The East Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings
with regard to possible violations of the municipal code of ethics or
financial disclosure requirements by local government officers or
employees serving the Township.
(2) To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the
attendance of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any
complaint or to the holding of a hearing.
(3) To forward to the county prosecutor or the Attorney General or
other governmental body any information concerning violations of
the code of ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers
or employees serving the Township which may warrant the
institution of other legal proceedings by the Attorney General.
(4) To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees serving
the Township as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances
§ 3-101 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:116
would constitute a violation of any provision of the code of ethics
or financial disclosure requirements.
(5) To enforce the provisions of the code of ethics and financial
disclosure requirements with regard to officers or employees
serving the Township and to impose penalties for the violation
thereof as are authorized by this Section; and
(6) To adopt rules and regulations and do other things as are necessary
to implement the purposes of this Section.
K. Advisory Opinions.
(1) An officer or employee of the Township of East Brunswick may
request and obtain from the East Brunswick Township Ethical
Standards Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed
activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation of the
code of ethics or any financial disclosure requirements.
(2) Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the Board
by the vote of two-thirds of all of its members directs that the
opinion be made public.
(3) Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer
or employee unless the Board in directing that the opinion be made
public so determines.
L. Complaints.
(1) The East Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board, upon
receipt of a signed written complaint by any person alleging that
the conduct of any officer or employee of the Township of East
Brunswick serving the Township is in conflict with the code of
ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge
receipt of the complaint within 30 days of receipt and initiate an
investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in
the complaint.
(2) The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint
is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable
factual basis.
(3) If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its
jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce that
conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
complainant and to the officer or employee of the Township of East
Brunswick against whom the complaint was filed.
(4) If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall
notify the officer or employee of the Township of East Brunswick
against whom the complaint was filed of the nature of the
complaint and the facts and circumstances set forth therein.
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:117
(5) The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present the
Board with any statement or information concerning the complaint
which he or she wishes.
(6) If the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to
whether the officer or employee of the Township of East Brunswick
is in conflict with the municipal code of ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements, the Board shall conduct a hearing
concerning the possible violation and any other facts and
circumstances which may have come to the attention of the Board
with respect to the conduct of the officer or employee.
(7) The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the
officer or employee is in conflict with the Code of ethics or any
financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by
no less than two-thirds of all members of the Board.
(8) If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict
with the code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may
impose any penalties which it believes appropriate within the limits
of this Chapter.
M. Enforcement and Penalties.
(1) An appointed officer or employee of the Township of East
Brunswick found guilty by East Brunswick Township Ethical
Standards Board of the violation of any provision of this Section or
of any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this Section, shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty may be
collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "penalty
enforcement law" N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1. The East Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board shall report its findings to the office or
agency having the power of removal or discipline of the appointed
officer or employee and may recommend that further disciplinary
action be taken.
(2) An elected officer or employee of the Township of East Brunswick
found guilty by the East Brunswick Township Ethical Standards
Board of the violation of any provision of this Section or of any code
of ethics in effect pursuant to this Section, shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the "penalty enforcement law"
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1).
(3) The finding by the East Brunswick Township Ethical Standards
Board that an appointed officer or employee of the Township of
East Brunswick is guilty of the violation of the provisions of this
Section, or of any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this Section,
shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal, suspension,
demotion or other disciplinary action by the officer or agency
having the power of removal or discipline.
§ 3-101 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-101
1:118
§ 3-102. Financial disclosures required of certain officials and
employees. [Repealed 3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-29]
§ 3-103. Disclosure statements deemed public records. [Repealed
3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-29]
§ 3-104. Review of disclosure statements by Board of Ethics;
reports to Township Council. [Repealed 3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-29]
§ 3-105. Sanctions for violations of standards of ethical conduct.
[Repealed 3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-29]
§ 3-106. Maintenance of public records; availability to the public.
[Added 8-27-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-X]
§ 3-107. Delivery of funds and records upon leaving office. [Added
8-27-73 by Ord. No. 73-1-X]
Upon the termination of office or the employment of any officer, employee
or board member, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor or, if there
N. Records of the Ethical Standards Board. All statements, complaints,
requests, or other written materials filed pursuant to this Section, and
any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts or other financial papers
prepared pursuant to this Section shall be preserved for a period of five
years from the date of filing or preparation, as the case may be.
O. Filing of Financial Disclosure Statements. The initial Financial
Disclosure Statements shall be filed with the Township Clerk, with copy
for the Ethical Standards Board, not later than May 31, 1991. All
Subsequent Financial Disclosure Statements shall be filed on or before
April 30th of each year.
A. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents acquired or produced in any municipal department shall be
carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved and be and remain
the sole property of the municipality and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such department except when required for
use in the official business of the municipality and shall then be
returned to such office without delay. Each municipal officer shall be
responsible for assuring that the requirements of this subsection are
complied with in respect to his particular office. This subsection shall
be subject to the provision of Destruction of Public Records Law, 1953
(N.J.R.S. 47:3-15 et seq.).
B. All public documents and records of the municipality shall, during office
hours, be open to public search, inspection or examination, subject to
and within the limitations prescribed by law, provided that such search,
inspection or examination does not interfere with the orderly operation
of the municipality.
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-107
1:119
be no successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by
the Council to receive the same all moneys, papers, books, memoranda,
accounts and data of any nature pertaining to his office.
§ 3-107 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-107
1:120
ARTICLE XVI
Delegation of Powers
§ 3-108. Delegation of powers authorized.
Wherever any officer of the Township is authorized by any provision of this
Code or any other ordinance of the Township to do any act, that act may
also be performed by any agent or subordinate of the officer authorized to
do it or by any other officer of the Township. This section shall not apply to
acts which are quasi-judicial or rule-making or which involve the exercise
of discretion or where special technical or professional skill or knowledge is
required.
§ 3-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-108
1:121

ARTICLE XVII
Hearing and Appeals
§ 3-109. Scope of article.
Unless a New Jersey statute or a provision of this Code provides otherwise,
this Article shall govern proceedings in all cases where the Township or
any of its officers, agents or employees are required to give any person an
opportunity to be heard, either on appeal or before taking action.
§ 3-110. Hearing authority designated.
For the purpose of this Article, "hearing authority" shall mean the officer or
body authorized to conduct a hearing.
§ 3-111. Notice of hearing; subpoena power.
In all cases where a hearing is mandatory, notice shall be given which shall
conform to the following requirements:
§ 3-112. Notice of hearings on appeals.
In all cases where a person is appealing from the action or decision of an
officer, agent or employee of the Township, as well as in all cases where a
hearing is required to be held only upon the request of the person affected,
notice of the appeal or request for a hearing shall be given in writing to
the hearing authority personally or by mail within 10 days after the person
affected is notified of the action or decision of the Township or its officer,
agent or employee. The hearing authority shall fix a time and place for a
hearing which shall be within a reasonable time after the notice of appeal
or request for hearing is filed, and written notice of the time and place fixed
for the hearing shall be given to the person affected.
A. Contents. The notice shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds on
which the proposed action is based and the time and place of the
hearing, which hearing shall be within a reasonable time after the
service of the notice.
B. Service. Notice may be served either personally upon the person or by
mailing a copy to him by certified mail at his last known address.
Service on a tenant or occupant may be made in the foregoing manner
or by leaving a copy of the notice at the premises with any occupant of
suitable age and discretion.
C. Subpoena power. The hearing authority shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses and documentary evidence with regard to all
hearings involving charges made against a member or officer of the
Police Department pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40A:14-148. The hearing
authority in all other hearings shall have the same power under N.J.R.S.
2A:67A-1. [Added 7-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-III; amended 8-14-78
by Ord. No. 78-49]
§ 3-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-113
1:123
§ 3-113. Hearing procedure.
A. At the hearing any person in interest shall have the right to be
represented by an attorney, to testify himself or to present witnesses in
support of his position, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and, at his
own expense, to have a stenographic record made of the proceedings.
This subsection shall not be construed to prevent the hearing authority
from imposing reasonable limitations upon the number of witnesses
who may testify or the length of time allowed for the examination or
cross-examination of any witness or making any other reasonable rule
or regulation designed to ensure that hearings are conducted in a fair,
orderly and expeditious manner.
B. Whenever any appeal is made to the Mayor from any final ruling or
decision of any municipal officer or employee arising under Chapters 75
and 126 and of this Code, the Chairman of the Construction Board of
Appeals or any member he may designate shall testify at the hearing
with regard to the recommendations of the Board. Within 10 days after
the conclusion of the hearing the Mayor shall render a written decision
to all parties. [Added 9-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-118; amended
2-13-78 by Ord. No. 78-302]
C. Whenever any appeal is made to the Mayor from any final ruling or
decision of any municipal officer or employee arising under Chapter
101 of this Code, the Chairman of the Fire Prevention Advisory
Committee or any member he may designate shall testify at the hearing
with regard to the recommendations of the Committee. Within 10 days
after the conclusion of the hearing the Mayor shall render a written
decision to all parties. [Added 9-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-118;
amended 2-13-78 by Ord. No. 78-302]
§ 3-113 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-113
1:124
ARTICLE XVIII
Fees for Services and Copies of Documents
[Added 4-12-65 by Ord. No. 65-10]
§ 3-114. Schedule of fees for copies of documents. [Amended
10-28-68 by Ord. No. 68-120; 2-24-70 by Ord. No. 70-1-I; 12-28-70
by Ord. No. 70-1-M; 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 5-9-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-DDD; 1-9-78 by Ord. No. 77-1-NNN; 11-12-79 by Ord. No.
79-196; 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-511; 12-11-84 by Ord. No. 84-629;
10-13-87 by Ord. No. 87-870; 8-22-88 by Ord. No. 88-949; 12-12-88
by Ord. 88-970; 6-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-32; 6-14-93 by Ord. No.
93-33; 6-12-95 by Ord. No. 95-18; 5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-11;
7-28-97 by Ord. No. 97-23; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-31; 2-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-9; 6-28-99 by Ord. No. 99-29; 6-11-01 by Ord. No. 01-22;
6-9-03 by Ord. No. 03-17; 7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-11; 6-12-06 by
Ord. No. 06-22; 3-26-07 by Ord. No. 07-10; 6-2-08 by Ord. No. 08-09;
10-25-10 by Ord. No. 10-24]
The following fees shall be charged for copies of public documents:
Purpose of Fee Fee
Accident reports [Amended 10-25-10 by
Ord. No. 10-24]
$5 unless requested in person
Case reports $3 first 2 pages
$1 each additional page
Drinking-driving reports $3 first 2 pages
$1 each additional page
Statements $3 first 2 pages
$1 each additional page
Criminal checks (verbal) $1 each
Criminal checks (letter) $2 each
Letters of good conduct $2 each
Miscellaneous service reports $3 per page
Missing-person report $3 first 2 pages
$1 each additional page
Special reports $3 first 2 pages $1 each
additional page
Fingerprinting $3
Photos, color, three and one-half by five
(3 1/2 x 5) inches
$2.50 each
Photos, color, five by seven (5 x 7) inches $6.50 each
§ 3-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-114
1:125
Purpose of Fee Fee
Photos, color, eight by twelve (8 x 12)
inches
$10 each
Permit to purchase pistol or revolver $2 each
Firearms I.D. card [Amended 6-11-01 by
Ord. No. 01-22]
$5 each
Alarm Board applications $5 each
Street Maps [Amended 6-2-08 by Ord.
No. 08-09]
$3 each
Zoning Map [Amended 10-27-97 by
Ord. No. 97-31; 6-2-08 by Ord. No.
08-09]
$3 each
Master Plan Map $1.25 each
Certified copies of a vital record and other
vital-statistics information from the
Department of Health, Education and
Welfare [Amended 6-14-93 by Ord. No.
93-33; 6-9-03 by Ord. No. 03-17;
7-26-04 by Ord. 04-11; 6-12-06 by Ord.
No. 06-22; 3-26-07 by Ord. No. 07-10]
$10 each
Vital records (Information only) [Added
6-9-03 by Ord. No. 03-17; amended
7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-11; 3-26-07 by
Ord. No. 07-10]
$5
Vital record corrections [Added 6-9-03
by Ord. No. 03-17; amended 7-26-04
by Ord. No. 04-11; 3-26-07 by Ord. No.
07-10]
$20
Extraordinary Service Charges - shall be
applied for any extensive use of
information technology or for the labor
cost of personnel providing the service
that is actually incurred by the agency for
the programming, clerical and supervisory
assistance required to provide a
government record in the medium
requested if it is not a medium routinely
used by the agency; not routinely
developed or maintained by an agency or
requiring a substantial amount of
manipulation or programming of
information [Added 7-26-04 by Ord. No.
04-11]
$45 per hour supervisory or
programming; $35 per hour
for clerical
§ 3-114 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-114
1:126
Purpose of Fee Fee
Plans and specifications [Amended
6-12-95 by Ord. No. 95-18]
Up to $100
Tax Maps/Vellum/Mylar Plans [Amended
6-12-95 by Ord. No. 95-18; 5-13-96 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
12" x 18" — $3
24" x 36" — $4
Paper Print Reproductions [Added
5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-11]
24" x 36" or smaller — $10
Larger than 24" x 36" — $1.75
sq. ft.
Larger street map/zoning map [Added
6-12-95 by Ord. No. 95-18]
$7
Topographic maps [Added 6-12-95 by
Ord. No. 95-18]
24" x 36" — $100
24" x 18" — $50
12" x 18" or smaller — $35
1997 Topographic maps (1"=30') [Added
2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-9]
$80 per acre for paper print
1965 Topographic maps (1"=100') [Added
2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-9]
$85 per acre for CAD 3-1/4
diskette
Standard Construction Details Book
[Added 5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-11]
$25
All other documents where multiple copies
are not available [Amended 6-14-93 by
Ord. No. 93-32; 10-25-10 by Ord. No.
10-24]
$0.06 per letter size or
smaller
$0.07 per legal size or larger
Bound volume of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of East
Brunswick
$150 each
Ordinance supplement $12 each
Certificates of occupancy $2 each
Zoning book $15 each
Land Use and Land Subdivision Book $10 each
Administrative Procedures Manual $100 each
BOCA Property Maintenance Code $4.50 each
Real Property Tax Information $2 per line item per year of
information requested
Real Benefit Assessment Information
(Special Assessment)
$2 per line item per year of
information requested
Tax Title Lien Information (water, sewer,
taxes, special assessment)
$2 per line item per year of
information requested
§ 3-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-114
1:127
Purpose of Fee Fee
Water Rent Charges and Information $2 per account per year of
information requested
Water Lien Information $2 per account per year of
information requested
Duplicate Real Property Tax Bill $5
Duplicate Tax Sale Certificate [Added
7-28-97 by Ord. No. 97-23, in
accordance with Ch. 99, P.L. 1997 by
the State of New Jersey]
$100
§ 3-114.1. Copy of Police Accident Reports. [Added 8-22-88 by Ord.
No. 88-949; amended 6-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-32; deleted 10-25-10
by Ord. No. 10-24]
§ 3-114.2. Breathalyzer ampoules. [Added 2-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-8]
The following fees shall be charged for furnishing breathalyzer tests
ampoules, which require specialized handling and packaging because the
ampoules contain concentrated acid - $7.50.
§ 3-114.3. Tapes of Township proceedings. [Added 1-28-91 by Ord.
No. 91-5]
A fee of $10 shall be charged for each tape recording of Township
proceedings.
§ 3-114.4. Municipal Court discovery. [Added 10-25-04 by Ord. No.
04-18]
A. All request for discovery in matters pending in the East Brunswick
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
East Brunswick for the discovery provided:
(a) $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied
(b) $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied
(c) $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter
(d) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail
(e) $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail
(f) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
§ 3-114 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-114.4
1:128
§ 3-115. Copying by person requesting documents permitted.
Where the document in question is more than $100 pages in length, the
Clerk may permit the person requesting copies to use his own copying
machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or mutilation of the
documents and that it would not be incompatible with the transaction
of public business. Such determination shall be completely within the
discretion of the Clerk.
§ 3-116. Copies of topographic map. [Deleted 6-12-95 by Ord. No.
95-18; amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-9]
The topical maps of the area of this Township prepared by Atlantis Aerial
Survey Company, Inc. compiled from photography dated December, 1996
consisting of topographic maps at scales of 1"=30' with 1' contours can be
purchased at the fee established in Section 3-114 of this code.
A digital form (AUTOCAD) of these topographic maps can be purchased at
an additional fee established in Section 3-114 of this code.
In order to prevent physical damage/deterioration to these maps, tracing
of these maps by any means is not permitted. No person who purchases
a print, sepia, digital or other form of reproducible copy of any street or
portion of a sheet of the aforesaid topographic maps shall sell or permit
the sale of such print, sepia, or digital form or the sale of any reproduction
or copy thereof or the sale of any portion thereof or the sale of any
reproduction or copy of a portion thereof.
§ 3-117. Schedule of fees for police services. [Added 9-25-67 by Ord.
No. 67-88; amended 8-12-68 by Ord. No. 68-113; 12-10-73 by Ord.
No. 73-1-AA; 1-27-75 by Ord. No. 75-1-CC; 4-26-76 by Ord. No.
76-1-PP; 3-28-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-ZZ; 1-14-80 by Ord. No. 79-206;
3-9-81 by Ord. No. 81-336; 9-26-83 by Ord. No. 83-533; 6-11-01 by
Ord. No. 01-21; 4-24-06 by Ord. No. 06-18; 8-31-15 Ord. No. 15-17;
9-28-15 by Ord. 15-19; 5-08-17 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(g) Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
(h) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Township of East Brunswick, e.g. another police department, the actual
costs paid to the other entity shall be paid to the other entity shall be
paid by the requestor.
A. The following fees shall be charged for assigning a police officer or a
special reserve police officer on quasi-duty and/or traffic duty:
§ 3-114.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-117
1:129
§ 3-117.1. Fees for services and reimbursement of costs - HazMat.
[Added 9-8-97 by Ord. No. 97-26]
§ 3-118. Disposition of fees.
The fees collected under this Article shall be deposited in the East
Brunswick Township General Revenue Account.
§ 3-118.1. Schedule of Fees for Mayor Services. [Added 4-16-07 by
Ord. No. 07-15; 8-27-18 by Ord. No. 18-20]
Type of Service Fee
Traffic Duty Overtime Rate for Senior
Patrolman
Quasi-Duty Public\Non Profit $48/hour
Quasi-Duty Private and Utilities $58/hour
Vehicle for Quasi $10/hour
B. An additional percentage fee, not to exceed 9%, of the total rate per
hour will be charged by the Township to reimburse the Township for
administrative costs incurred by the Township.
A. Fees for services and reimbursement of costs is hereby authorized in
accordance with Chapter 85 P.L. of 1991 permitting local municipalities
to recover the cost incurred for emergency response to HazMat
incidence. The Chief Finance Officer based upon support documents
provided by the Public Safety department is authorized to bill
responsible part causing the HazMat incident and seek reimbursement
for equipment, salaries at the burden rate, and materials required and
used to contain the hazardous material spill based upon inventory cost.
B. The Chief Finance Officer is authorized to seek reimbursement from the
State of New Jersey through the Spill Compensation and Control Act
(P.L. 1996 C. 141).
A. The purpose of this section is to establish policies and procedures for
the collection of fees associated with the performance of marriage by
the Mayor.
B. Persons seeking to be married by the Mayor of the Township of East
Brunswick shall remit a fee of $100. The fee shall be payable to the
Township of East Brunswick. Fees collected shall be deposited in the
Trust Fund to be appropriated by Township Council's Resolution.
C. The Mayor may waive said fee at his/her sole discretion.
§ 3-117 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-118.1
1:130
ARTICLE XIX
Township Seal
[Added 3-9-65 by Ord. No. 65-6]
§ 3-119. Official Seal established. [Amended 12-9-68 by Ord. No.
68-6-A]
The seal set forth below is hereby fixed and established as the Official Seal
of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 3-120. Clerk designated as custodian.
The Official Seal shall be kept in the office of the Township Clerk who shall
be the custodian thereof.
§ 3-121. Use of Seal.
The Township Clerk shall cause the seal to be affixed to all instruments,
documents and writings when required or authorized by law or any
ordinance or resolution of the Council. The Clerk shall also cause the seal
to be affixed when necessary to exemplify or certify any act or paper which,
from the records of his office, shall appear to have been an official act of the
Township or a true copy of any official instrument, document or writing of
the Township. He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to
any instrument, document or other writing except as herein above provided.
§ 3-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-121
1:131

ARTICLE XX
Protection for Township Officials
[Added 4-11-90 by Ord. No. 90-14]
§ 3-122. Protection for Township Officials. [Amended 11-22-93 by
Ord. No. 93-68]
It is the policy of the Township to provide full and complete protection to all
of its officers and employees from and against any and all suits, claims, and
demands in regard to their respective activities arising out of and related to
their public duties and public employment to the maximum extent permitted
by law and in accordance with the following standards.
A. Whenever an officer, employee, or member of a Township board,
agency, commission or any other legally constituted body of the
government of the Township of East Brunswick is a defendant in any
action or legal proceeding arising out of or incidental to the
performance of his duties, the governing body of the Township of East
Brunswick will provide said person with necessary means for the
defense of such action or proceeding, but not for his defense in a
disciplinary proceeding instituted against him by the Township of East
Brunswick or in a criminal proceeding instituted against him by the
Township of East Brunswick or in a criminal proceeding instituted as a
result of a complaint on behalf of the Township. If such disciplinary or
criminal proceeding instituted by complaint of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be dismissed or finally determined in favor of such
person, he/she shall be reimbursed for the expense of his/her defense.
B. The Township will indemnify any such person referred to in the
previous paragraph, other than for professional malpractice claims and
hold him/her harmless from any award of monetary damages in any
such legal proceeding and from any and all legal costs and expenses
incurred in connection with such action regardless of the limits of
insurance coverage available to the Township. [Amended 11-22-93 by
Ord. No. 93-68]
C. In any such legal proceeding, the Township will waive any rights for
contribution, indemnification or reimbursement from such person on
account of any monetary damages awarded against such person or for
any legal expense or other costs incurred in connection with any such
action, whether or not such amount exceeds insurance coverage
available to the Township.
D. The Township will not be responsible for legal costs and expenses
incurred by such person relative to the retention of separate counsel on
behalf of said person unless the Township specifically approves the
nature of costs and separate counsel retained by such person in
advance together with the fees and costs that can be anticipated.
E. None of the rights and benefits outlined above shall be afforded to such
person if it is established that his conduct was outside the scope of his
§ 3-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-122
1:133
§ 3-123. Exempt firemen. [Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-6]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-60 § 63 exempt firemen who are employees
of a municipality may not be terminated for political reasons, but only
for good cause after a fair and impartial hearing. The Township of East
Brunswick wishes to adopt this fair and reasonable protection for its exempt
firemen as part of its Municipal Code. Therefore, the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-60 and 40A:14-63 are hereby made a part of the Municipal Code of
the Township of East Brunswick.
employment or constituted a crime, actual fraud, actual malice or
willful misconduct.
§ 3-122 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-123
1:134
ARTICLE XXI
East Brunswick Community Action Committee
[Added 3-24-14 by Ord. No. 14-02]
§ 3-124. Establishment.
There is hereby established the East Brunswick Community Action
Committee.
§ 3-125. Membership, terms of office, vacancy.
A. The Community Action Committee shall consist of nine voting members
appointed as follows:
(1) The Mayor or his/her designee shall be the Chairperson of the
Committee
(2) One Councilmember, selected by the Township Council, shall be the
Vice Chairperson of the Committee
(3) Five members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(4) Three additional members shall be appointed by the Township
Council.
(5) There shall be one non-voting student member, appointed by the
Mayor.
B. Members shall serve without compensation and each shall be a resident
of the Township.
C. Terms of Office:
(1) The Mayor's term on the Committee shall be coterminous with the
term of the Office of Mayor.
(2) The Term for the Township Council Representative shall be for one
year, commencing January 1 of the year of appointment and ending
on December 31 of the year of appointment
(3) The terms of the Mayor's appointees first appointed under this
chapter shall be staggered with two appointees appointed for one
year terms and two appointed for two year terms. Thereafter, a
term of a regular member shall be for two years.
(4) The terms of the Council appointees first appointed under this
chapter shall be staggered with one appointee appointed for a one
year term and two appointed for two-year terms. Thereafter, the
term of a regular member shall be for two-years.
D. A vacancy on the Board occurring other than by expiration of term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the Appointing Body.
§ 3-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-126
1:135
§ 3-126. Powers and duties.
The Community Action Committee shall:
A. Provide assistance to Township residents and other community groups
in activities that will benefit the health and welfare of the community.
B. Assist Township Departments in the administration of charitable efforts
such as food drives, clothing drives.
C. Coordinating volunteer efforts for Community Clean Up or other
Community-oriented volunteer efforts.
D. Establish and maintain a list of volunteers and volunteer organizations
that are willing to assist during times of need.
E. Formulate recommendation to the governing body concerning the
development of activities and programs for residents of all ages.
F. Make such individual studies and reports as may be requested by the
Mayor or Township Council.
§ 3-126 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-126
1:136
Chapter 12
ELECTION DISTRICTS
[The election districts for the Township of East Brunswick are as
established by the Township Council by ordinance. Copies of the
ordinance establishing the current election districts, as amended,
are on file in the office of the Township Clerk and are available for
inspection during regular office hours.]
Chapter 28
PERSONNEL POLICIES
TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
[Added 2-10-03 by Ord. No. 03-03]
A copy of the text of this ordinance is on file in the Office of the Clerk of the
Township of East Brunswick*
TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK PERSONNEL POLICIES
[Adopted 3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-13; amended 4-19-04 by Ord. No.
04-03; 11-21-05 by Ord. No. 05-36]
A copy of the text of this ordinance is on file in the Office of the Clerk of the
Township of East Brunswick*
HISTORICAL NOTES:
Chapter 28, Personnel Policies, was repealed and rescinded 12-9-91 by Ord.
No. 91-113.
Chapter 28, Township of East Brunswick Personnel Policies, was adopted
3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-13.
*Interested persons may request a copy of the text of this Ordinance,
which is reproduced in the Township of East Brunswick Personnel
Policy Manual, during regular Township business hours. Monday
through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Chapter 35
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
[The salaries and compensation of the various officers and employees of the
Township of East Brunswick are set by the Township Council by ordinance.
Copies of current salary ordinances, as amended, are on file in the office
of the Township Clerk and are available for inspection during regular office
hours.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
§ 3-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-126
1:137
N.J.S.A. 43:15B-1 provides that any municipality may establish a deferred
compensation plan whereby the employer may enter into written agreement
with any of its employees thereby providing a voluntary deferral of salary
and such deferral shall remain in effect until the employee is terminated
or until a new contract is executed by the employee and employer. The
provisions of the salary deferral shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-2
of the local budget law, which requires that one or more public officials,
or the governing body as a whole, shall be designated and named to the
fiduciary responsibility for administration of said plan and investments.
The deferred compensation plan which is established shall be in compliance
with Section 457 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code and recent
amendments as adopted by the Congress through Revenue Acts of 1978
which require that all eligible state deferred compensation plans comply
with the classification systems to guarantee compliance with regulations
of the I.R.S., the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Department of
Social Security and the State enabling legislation.
The administration of the deferred compensation plan is recognized as a
critical factor and the rules and regulations provided for implementation
shall be promulgated by the Township Administrator and Director of
Finance and listed as part of the administrative procedures manual
clarifying such questions as, the interface with the local payroll system; who
shall be the plan coordinator; how collections of payments shall be made;
the role and responsibility of custodial functions; to insure appropriate
deferrals and safeguard with stringent control for accuracy, safety and
timeliness of investments. Also individual participants should receive
annual statements which reflect both the value of contributions and the
total amount which has been contributed. To insure compliance with the
federal regulations, clear procedures providing for an employee's
withdrawal of funds must be established and an annual review of these
procedures should be initiated each year.
Nothing herein shall obligate the Township of East Brunswick to set up or
maintain a deferred compensation plan.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 42
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
Editor's Note: The monetary penalty provision in Section 16:1 of
the Middlesex County Air Pollution Control Code, adopted by the
Township of East Brunswick, is hereby amended by increasing the
maximum monetary penalty from $500.00 to $2,500.00, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:2C-22, as amended. If the monetary amount should be
increased by State Statute, the Township of East Brunswick penalty
shall automatically be increased to equal that amount.
§ 3-126 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-126
1:138
Chapter 42, Air Pollution Control, adopted on 5-10-82 as Ord. No.
82-444 was repealed and rescinded on 11-26-84 by Ord. No. 84-612.
The Middlesex County Air Pollution Control Code, which has been
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, is hereby adopted in its place. A copy is on file in the
Office of the Township Clerk and is incorporated by reference in the
East Brunswick Code.
Section 18:2. Notwithstanding the content of any state statute, and
notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18.01 of the Middlesex County Air
Pollution Control Code, any private citizen may file a complaint in the East
Brunswick Municipal Court alleging violation of the Middlesex County Air
Pollution Control Code. No prior notice to the alleged violator is required.
Chapter 43
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 43-1. Findings and Declarations.
The Township Council does hereby find and declare that:
§ 43-2. Purpose.
A. The occupants of numerous residential, commercial and industrial
establishments in the Township of East Brunswick have found it
desirable to make provision for the installation, upon their premises at
their own cost and expense, of alarm systems for emergencies such as
burglar, fire and like alarms.
B. There is a growing number of alarm companies that sell or lease such
alarm systems entering into contracts with such occupants for the
installation, operation and maintenance of such alarm systems and
providing for the connection to the individual alarm system so installed
by them to a central location.
C. The number of private enterprises engaged in the alarm business, each
with its own system and equipment, has resulted in conditions that, if
not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower, time,
space facilities and finances of the Township of East Brunswick and its
Public Safety Department and the deterioration of the quality of service
to persons subscribing to the alarm services and inequities among the
alarm businesses in the Township of East Brunswick.
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide standards and regulations
for various types of local alarms, burglar, fire and other emergency
alarm devices whether by direct line, telephone or other means,
actuating devices at the East Brunswick Police Headquarters requiring
a response by the police department or fire department.
B. This chapter is also meant to encourage alarm users and alarm
companies to properly use and maintain the operation, effectiveness
§ 3-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-2
1:139
§ 43-3. Scope.
§ 43-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
and proper utilization of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false
alarms which may unduly divert law enforcement from responding to
criminal activity.
C. This chapter governs systems intended to summon law enforcement
response, requires registration, establishes fees, provides for penalties
for violations, establishes a system of administration and sets
conditions for suspension or loss of registration.
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any person, other than
the municipality, who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device or
local alarm designed to summon the police or fire department to any
location in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this
ordinance shall in no way prohibit alarm companies from providing
services by private sources to other offices within or without the
Township of East Brunswick.
A. ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — A person or persons designated by the
Township to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts
and administer the provisions of this chapter.
B. ALARM COMPANY — A person subject to the licensing requirements
and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or
monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance
with Township ordinances and state laws and regulations.
C. ALARM PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township allowing the
operation of an alarm system within the Township.
D. ALARM SIGNAL — A detectable signal, audible or visible, generated by
an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
E. ALARM SITE (also "security alarm site") — A structure or portion
thereof served by a single security alarm system (a "fixed" alarm site).
In a multi-tenant building or complex, each portion of the structure or
complex having its own security alarm system is considered a separate
alarm site.
F. ALARM SYSTEM — Any single device or assembly of equipment
designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or
other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law
enforcement is requested to respond such as burglary, intrusion, fire or
smoke. The following are exempt from this chapter: motor vehicle
§ 43-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-4
1:140
alarms, boat alarms, domestic violence alarms and alarms designed to
elicit a medical response.
G. ALARM USER — Any person, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any
other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or who
(which) controls a security alarm system at an alarm site; is named on
the registration; and is financially responsible for the operation of an
alarm system. Alarm user may mean more than one person, if more
than one person is listed on the registration and has accepted financial
responsibility for the operation of the alarm system.
H. ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class conducted for the
purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation
and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false
alarms.
I. ANSI/SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01 — The American
National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry
Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated
from time to time, that details recommended design features for
security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and
tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization
will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA
CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction."
J. AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE — An automatic dialing
device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall
include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates
to the East Brunswick Police Department a recorded message or code
signal indicating a need for law enforcement response.
K. BURGLARY ALARM (also "property/intrusion alarm") — An alarm
system that is used to detect and report an unauthorized entry or an
attempted unauthorized entry upon real property.
L. CANCELLATION — The process where response is terminated when
the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the East
Brunswick Police Department that there is not an existing situation at
the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch
request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this
is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will
be assessed.
M. CENTRAL OFFICE ALARM — Any alarm which when activated
transmits a signal to a remote location indicating an alarm condition.
N. CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Township of East Brunswick or his
designee.
§ 43-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-4
1:141
O. ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION (ECV) — An attempt by the
monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site
and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether
or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as
a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first
attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify himself
or herself to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid
before requesting law enforcement dispatch.
P. FALSE ALARM RESPONSE — The activation of an alarm system
through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper
installation or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or
agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel,
unless law enforcement response was canceled by the alarm user or
his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm
location.
This also means a police department response to an alarm dispatch
request by a commissioned officer of the department where, in the
opinion of that officer, no evidence of the commission or attempted
commission of a crime is present that can be reasonably attributed to
have caused the alarm activation.
A false alarm response is also deemed to have occurred when the
responding officer is unable to determine if evidence of a criminal
offense or attempted criminal offense is present because the alarm site
is inaccessible (e.g., where the alarm site is located:
1) Within a locked structure, such as an apartment building or
business complex with a common entry; or
2) Behind a locked gate and no person is present to provide access to
the officer; or
3) Contains a dog and no person is present to remove the dog so the
officer can inspect the site; or
4) Contains any type of "protective/reactive" device or contrivance).
A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be
determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent
conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
Q. GRACE PERIOD — No violation shall be assessed to any owner or
person that maintains an alarm system as provided for and defined
herein during the first 30 days of installation.
§ 43-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-4
1:142
§ 43-5. Issuance of Permits: Registration Terms and Fees.
R. LOCAL ALARM — An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site
that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not
monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an
alarm company or user.
S. PERMIT YEAR — A twelve-month period beginning on the day and
month on which an alarm permit is issued.
T. PERMITTEE — Any person owning or leasing an alarm device of any
type within the Township of East Brunswick.
U. PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association, or any other legal entity.
V. ROBBERY ALARM (also "duress alarm", "hold-up alarm" or "panic
alarm") — An alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic
activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism, on or near
the premises intended to signal that a robbery or other crime is in
progress, and that one or more persons are in need of immediate police
assistance in order to avoid injury, serious bodily harm or death at the
hands of the perpetrator of the robbery or other crime.
W. RUNAWAY ALARM — An alarm system that produces repeated alarm
signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The
East Brunswick Police Department may in its discretion discontinue
police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway
alarm.
X. SUSPEND ("suspension") — For the purposes of this chapter, means the
temporary loss for an alarm user of the privileges associated
specifically with the registration of a security alarm system in the
Township of East Brunswick.
Y. TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Brunswick or its agent(s).
A. Alarm registration is valid for one year. An alarm registration shall
expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed
annually by submitting an updated application to the alarm
administrator or its designated vendor. The alarm administrator shall
notify each alarm user of the need to renew thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to
submit an application prior to the registration expiration date. Failure
to renew will be classified as use of a non-registered alarm system and
citations and penalties shall be assessed without waiver. A late fee will
be assessed if the renewal is more than thirty (30) days late.
B. Alarm registration is issued to a person or persons ("alarm user")
having bona fide ownership or control of an alarm site (i.e., home
owner, business owner, renter, leaseholder, etc.) and specifically for
that alarm site or address.
§ 43-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:143
1) Alarm registration remains in the name(s) of the alarm user of
record until a change of ownership or control of the alarm site
occurs.
C. Alarm registration is attached to the alarm user and the alarm site
registration and is not transferable.
1) A new alarm site registration must be issued whenever there is a
change of ownership or control of an alarm site.
2) When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is
maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession
of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within
30 days of obtaining possession of the property.
3) There shall be a grace period where no violation shall be assessed
to any owner or person that maintains an alarm system as provided
for and defined herein during the first 30 days of installation.
D. Registration information is determined by the alarm administrator and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1) The name, complete address (including apt/suite number), email
address and telephone numbers of the person who will be the
registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance
and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed
under this article;
2) The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes
apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) or commercial;
3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification
of the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, duress, panic alarms or
other) and for each classification whether such alarm is audible or
silent;
4) Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site
5) Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site;
6) Names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are
able and have agreed to:
a. Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
b. Respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes at any time; and
c. Upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate
the alarm system if necessary.
7) Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following: the
date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system,
whichever is applicable; the name, address, and telephone number
of the alarm installation company or companies performing the
§ 43-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-5
1:144
alarm system installation, conversion or takeover and of the alarm
installation company responsible for providing repair service to the
alarm system.
8) The name, address, and telephone number of the monitoring
company if different from the alarm installation company.
9) That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system,
including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have
been left with the applicant by the alarm installation company.
10) That the alarm installation company has trained the applicant in
proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to
avoid false alarms.
11) That law enforcement response may be influenced by factors
including, but not limited to the availability of police units, priority
of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels, etc.
E. On receipt of the application, fees and copy of the signed certification,
the alarm administrator (or designee) shall issue a security alarm
registration number to the alarm user.
F. The security alarm registration number assigned to an alarm user
remains the same for as long as the alarm user continuously maintains
registration for the alarm site.
G. Registration may be renewed under the following conditions:
1) The alarm site has no past-due fees.
2) The alarm site's registration has not been suspended or revoked.
3) The alarm user either updates his registration information or
verifies that the current registration information is still correct.
H. Renewal information and fees are submitted to the alarm administrator
(or designee) on or before the initial registration anniversary date each
year.
I. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue a registration.
J. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change
that alters any of the information listed on the alarm registration
application within five (5) business days of such change.
K. All fines and fees owed by an applicant must be paid before an alarm
registration may be issued or renewed.
§ 43-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:145
§ 43-5.1. Issuance of Permits: Duties of Alarm User.
The alarm user shall:
§ 43-5.2. Issuance of Permits: Duties of Alarm Company.
L. The rates for security alarm registration fees are designated in § 43-13,
Enforcement of Provisions.
A. Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will
reduce or eliminate false alarms.
B. Provide the alarm company the permit number. (The number must be
provided to the communications center by the alarm company to insure
dispatch.)
C. Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's
location within a reasonable amount of time when notified by the East
Brunswick Township Police Department.
D. Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
E. Obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in
address or ownership of a business or residence.
A. Any person engaged in the alarm business in the Township shall comply
with the following:
1) Obtain and maintain the required state and/or Township license(s).
2) Provide the name, address and telephone numbers of the license
holder or a designee who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a
day, and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within a
reasonable amount of time.
3) Be able to provide the most current contact information for the
alarm user.
B. On and after 90 days after enactment of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall, on all new and upgraded installations, use only alarm
control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
C. Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must
provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm
system to the alarm user.
D. Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm
company for the alarm system.
E. Shall notify the alarm user at the time of alarm installation that they
shall submit to the alarm administrator or designee within seven days
the initial alarm registration application.
§ 43-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-5.2
1:146
§ 43-6. Central Office Alarm Systems and Local On-Site Alarm
Systems.
§ 43-7. Limitation of Township Obligations: Governmental
Immunity.
F. An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:
1) Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by
telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before
requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a
minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the
first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
himself or herself to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal
is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm,
or in cases where a crime-in progress has been verified by video
and/or audible means.
2) Provide alarm user registration numbers to the communications
center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations.
3) Communicate any available information about the alarm.
4) Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement
communications center as soon as possible following a
determination that response is unnecessary.
A. All alarm systems which are connected directly to a central office
operated by various alarm companies or local, on-site, alarm systems
shall be required to submit an approved application and payment of a
ten ($10.00) dollar registration fee made payable to the Township of
East Brunswick.
B. All central office alarm systems when equipped with a local bell and all
local alarm systems shall have a time relay or other device which will
limit the operation of said bell to fifteen (15) minutes or less.
C. If any person has a central office or local alarm system in existence at
the time of passage of this ordinance, he or she shall have thirty (30)
days from the effective date of this ordinance to register said alarm and
pay the appropriate fee.
A. An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability
and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a
notification is hereby disclaimed by the Township. All governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm
permit, the alarm user acknowledges that the response of the East
Brunswick Police Department may be influenced by factors such as: the
availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic
conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response
history.
§ 43-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-8
1:147
§ 43-8. Appeals.
§ 43-9. Rule Making Authority.
§ 43-10. Prohibited Acts.
§ 43-11. Severability.
§ 43-12. Violations and Penalties.
A. Whenever, under the provisions of this ordinance, the Chief of Police, or
any authorized representatives he may have designated, are
empowered to make a decision with respect to the installation,
operation and maintenance of any alarm equipment, or with respect to
the issuance or denial of any application relating thereto, any person
aggrieved by said decision may, within ten (10) days following said
decision, file a written appeal therefrom with the Business
Administrator of the Township of East Brunswick who shall conduct a
hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
A. The Township Council, may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping, efficient management and administration of said
system.
A. All newly installed horns, sirens and local alarms other than bells are
prohibited.
B. It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime
dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the
premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm.
C. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system
which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes.
D. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial
protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded
message to the East Brunswick Township Police Department.
A. If any article, section or subsection of this ordinance is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such provisions shall be deemed
severable.
A. Any person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation or other
entity who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum fines and penalties
established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, and as same shall be amended from
time to time. Each and every day a violation of this chapter shall exist
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 43-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-12
1:148
§ 43-13. Enforcement of Provisions.
B. Any persons installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this ordinance and each and every day the
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation.
A. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Department of Public Safety,
Township of East Brunswick.
B. Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and
determined that two or more false alarms within a permit year is
excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and shall be unlawful. Fees for
false alarms within a permit year shall be assessed against an alarm
user as follows:
Fee Schedule
Registration; Number of False Alarms Fee
1) Registration Fee: $10.00
2) Annual Renewal: Free, but must be completed within 30 days
of expiration
3) First False Alarm: No service fee
4) Second False Alarm: $25.00
5) Third False Alarm: $50.00
6) Fourth False Alarm: $75.00
7) Fifth False Alarm: $100.00
8) Sixth False Alarm: $125.00
9) Seventh False Alarm: $150.00
10) Eighth and every one after: $200.00
11) Robbery, Panic and Burglary Crime in Progress False Alarm
Service Fee is $150.00 for each false alarm beginning with the
first false alarm.
C. Payment of all fees. All fees shall be paid within 30 days from the date of
the Township invoice.
D. In addition, any person operating an unregistered alarm system will be
subject to a service fee of $50.00 for each false alarm incurred without
a permit in addition to any other applicable fees or fines.
E. If cancellation of an alarm dispatch request occurs prior to a police
officer arriving at the scene, no false alarm will be assessed.
F. If any fee or fine assessed on this section is not paid within 30 days after
a notice or invoice is mailed, a late fee in the amount of $5.00 shall be
imposed.
§ 43-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-13
1:149
§ 43-14. Alarm User Awareness Class.
§ 43-15. Confidentiality.
§ 43-16. Deadline for Compliance.
Chapter 45
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 45-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted under the authority granted by N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 to
33:1-96, also known as "Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933," as supplemented
and amended. The purposes of this chapter are to render effective the
provisions of the Act cited, the rules and regulations issued by the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New Jersey and
other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey and the United States of
America.
G. Violations will be enforced through the assessment of a civil penalty in
the amount according to the fee schedule above per violation.
A. The alarm administrator shall ensure that the on-line false alarm
awareness class is available for those alarm users having six or more
false alarm activations in any calendar year.
1) Each alarm user eligible for the class shall be contacted by mail or
by phone and asked to take the class.
2) The letter sent in these cases will specify the web page address and
the user password to be used that will show that the user has read
and passed the class.
B. Completion of the false alarm awareness class conducted by the alarm
administrator for an alarm user (i.e., the person responsible for
operation of a registered alarm system) and passing the on-line test
may serve to alleviate registration suspension one time per registered
alarm site. This shall apply only in cases of the number of false alarm
activations, not for non-payment of any assessed registration fees or
cost recovery fees for police response to a false alarm.
A. In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and
gathered through the alarm registration applications, no-response
records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be
held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the
Township, except where otherwise provided by law.
A. All existing alarm systems, commercial or residential, shall comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter on or before December 1, 2017.
§ 43-13 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 45-2
1:150
§ 45-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as they have in N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 and the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 45-3. Administrative authority.
The Township Council is designated as the authority which shall issue all
licenses and otherwise administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 45-4. Notice of application; term of license.
§ 45-5. Types of license; number issued; fees. [Amended 9-13-65 by
Ord. No. 65-30; 6-9-69 by Ord. No. R69-136; 7-12-71 by Ord. No.
71-136-A; 11-24-75 by Ord. No. 75-136-C; 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV; 10-15-03 by Ord. No. 03-32]
A. Proof of publication. Proof of publication of a notice of an application for
a license or a renewal or transfer of license shall be in the form
prescribed by state rules and regulations and shall be filed with the
Township Clerk immediately after the second publication of the notice.
B. License term. All licenses shall be for a term of one (1) year from the
first day of July in each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance, upon
presentation of the application. Any licensee who voluntarily
surrenders his license and who has not committed any violation of this
chapter or of any state law or rule or regulation and who has paid all
taxes and other charges that are due to the State of New Jersey or to
the Township of East Brunswick shall be entitled to fifty percent (50%)
of the prorated fee for the unexpired term.
A. The classes of licenses, annual license fees and maximum number of
licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the
Township of East Brunswick shall be as follows [Amended 8-21-78 by
Ord. No. 78-43; 9-28-82 by Ord. No. 82-472;10-15-03 by Ord. No.
03-32]:
Class of
License
Year
Commencing July
1
Annual License
Fee
Number of
Licenses
1978 $720.00 18
1979 $864.00
1980 $1,036.00
1981 $1,243.00
1982 $1,490.00
1983 $1,785.00
Plenary
retail
consumption
license
1984 $2,000.00
§ 45-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:151
§ 45-6. Licenses for hotels and motels. [Added 9-13-65 by Ord. No.
65-30; amended 7-12-71 by Ord. No. 71-136A]
The limitation on the number of licenses set forth in § 45-5 shall not prevent
the issuing of a plenary retail consumption license to a person operating a
hotel or motel containing one hundred (100) sleeping rooms or more under
the following conditions:
Class of
License
Year
Commencing July
1
Annual License
Fee
Number of
Licenses
2003 $2,400.00 17
2004 $2,500.00
1978 $516.00 5
1979 $619.00
1980 $742.00
1981 $890.00
1982 $1,068.00
1983 $1,281.00
1984 $1,537.00
1985 $1,844.00
1986 $2,000.00
2003 $2,400.00
Plenary
retail
distribution
license
2004 $2,500.00
1978 $180.00
1979 $150.00
Club license
2003 $125.00
B. The provisions of this section with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
A. With each original application or application for a transfer of a license
issued under this section, the applicant shall furnish the Township
Council with seven (7) detailed sketches of the hotel of sufficient size to
plainly show the designated sleeping rooms, the size of each room,
entrances, exits, fire precautionary devices and the location and
designation of all other rooms in the hotel. Each sketch shall be
certified by a licensed architect.
B. The sleeping-room areas shall strictly conform to the requirements of
all applicable ordinances of the Township of East Brunswick and laws of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 45-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 45-6
1:152
§ 45-7. Restrictions on location. [Amended 9-26-05 by Ord. No.
05-31]
§ 45-8. Hours of operations.
C. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be
transferred except to another hotel or motel containing one hundred
(100) sleeping rooms or more.
A. Restrictions. No plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail
distribution license shall be issued, or a place-to-place transfer of an
existing license granted, for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon
premises which are within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any existing
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages under another
plenary retail consumption or plenary retail distribution license, the
distance being measured from the nearest entrance of the nearest
licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk, as
provided in N.J.R.S. 33:1-76.
B. Exceptions. Subsection A shall not apply in the following cases:
(1) The renewal or person-to-person transfer of any plenary retail
consumption license or plenary retail distribution license which is
in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(2) The transfer of a license to another place within five hundred (500)
feet, measured in the manner provided in Subsection A, of the
premises for which the license was granted where the licensee has
been forced to vacate the licensed premises for any reason not
under his/her control which could not have been foreseen when the
license was granted. Once a transfer is granted under this section,
future transfers of the same license shall be only to a place within
five hundred (500) feet of the premises initially licensed and
vacated. Place-to-place transfers under the provisions of this
subsection are not a matter of right, but shall be granted only in the
discretion of the Township Council. [Amended 9-26-05 by Ord.
No. 05-29]
(3) A licensee who has been permitted to relocate within seven
hundred fifty (750) feet of another licensed premises in accordance
with Subsection B(2) shall have the same right to expand or enlarge
the premises covered by his/her license as he/her would had he/she
remained at the premises initially licensed and vacated. [Amended
9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-31]
(4) The issuance, transfer or renewal of any license in the following
zone districts: HC-2 (General Highway Commercial District), HC-3
(Highway Commercial Shopping Center District), and MXD (Mixed
Use District). [Added 9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-31]
§ 45-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-8
1:153
§ 45-9. Minors.
A. In general. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered or
consumed on any licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. on Sundays, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. on other days. [Amended 3-11-74 by Ord. No. 74-136-B;
5-22-17 by Ord. No. 17-24]
B. New Year's Day. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply on
January 1. On that day alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered and consumed at any time, except when January 1 is a
Sunday, in which case no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered or consumed on a licensed premises between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
C. Christmas Eve. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply on
December 24. On that day no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered and consumed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except when December 24 is a Sunday, in which case no alcoholic
beverages may be sold, served, delivered or consumed on a licensed
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. [Added
5-22-17 by Ord. No. 17-24]
D. Closing of premises. During the hours that sales are prohibited by this
section, the entire licensed premises shall be closed to all persons other
than owners of the business and their employees. This provision shall
not apply to any premises licensed under a club license or to any
licensed premises where a restaurant, market, hotel or bowling alley is
conducted. The foregoing places may remain open during the
prohibited hours in order to carry on normal business activities, except
the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the premises remains open, however,
the bar and any other place upon the licensed premises from which the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages is made shall be closed, and no
person other than an employee or owner of the business shall either be
behind the bar or seated or standing next to the bar. [Amended
2-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-729]
A. Presence.
Editor's note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
(1) No person under the age prescribed by law or state regulation for
the purchasing of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in any
premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or served for
consumption on the premises unless accompanied by his parent or
guardian.
(2) No plenary retail consumption or club license shall permit a person
under the age prescribed by law or state regulation for the
§ 45-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 45-9
1:154
§ 45-10. Restrictions on sales; regulations applicable to premises.
[Amended 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-29]
§ 45-11. Enforcement.
purchasing of alcoholic beverages in or upon the premises where
alcoholic beverages are sold or served.
(3) This subject shall not apply to persons under the age prescribed by
law or state regulation for the purchasing of alcoholic beverages
employed under permit issued by the State Director of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
B. Notice. All licensees operating premises where alcoholic beverages are
sold or served for consumption on the premises shall have permanently
displayed within clear view of each entrance to the room in which
alcoholic beverages are served a sign, with letters large enough to be
easily read by anyone entering the premises, stating "No minors
permitted in barroom unaccompanied by parent or
guardian...maximum penalty five hundred dollars ($500) or ninety (90)
days".
A. Sales to certain persons. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall
sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to
any mental defective, habitual drunkard, intoxicated person or person
under the age prescribed by law or state regulation for the purchasing
of alcoholic beverages, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages on any licensed premises by any of the above named classes
of persons, nor permit any such persons to congregate in or about the
licensed premises.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code: see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
B. Sales on credit. No sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises shall be made on credit. This subsection shall not
apply to persons holding a club license.
C. Access to premises. No person shall be served alcoholic beverages in
any room which is not open to the public, except that hotel guests may
be served in their rooms or in private dining rooms. This subsection
shall not apply to club licenses.
D. Other business. [Deleted 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-29]
E. Outside view of premises. All licensed premises, other than those for
which club licenses are issued, shall be so located that a normal-sized
adult can, on inspection from the exterior, view the interior of the
premises.
A. Enforcement authority. This chapter shall be enforced by the
Department of Public Safety of the Township of East Brunswick. This
§ 45-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-11
1:155
§ 45-12. Consumption and Possession of Alcohol by Underage
Persons on Private Property. [Added 4-16-07 by Ord. No. 07-16]
subsection shall not be construed as affecting the enforcement powers
of the New Jersey State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Revocation of license. Any license issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter of any provision of any applicable statute or any of the rules
and regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, by service of a five-day
notice of charges preferred against the licensee and affording a
reasonable opportunity for hearing. Any suspension or revocation shall
carry the penalties and prohibitions provided in the statutes referred to.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
A. Definitions.
(1) GUARDIAN — A person who is qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
(2) RELATIVE — An underage person's parent, grandparent, aunt,
uncle, sibling, first cousin or closer relative by blood, marriage or
adoption who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
B. Violations; exceptions
Any person under the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses, orders,
purchases, serves or consumes alcoholic beverages or who is under the
influence of alcoholic beverages within the municipality boundary of
the Township of East Brunswick shall be in violation of this ordinance
and subject to the penalties hereof. This section shall not apply to an
underage person consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in
connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or consuming
or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian, or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. This section
shall not apply to any underage person while actually engaged in
the performance of employment by a person who is licensed under
Title 33 of the New Jersey State Statutes or while actively engaged
in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or post secondary
educational institution; however, this ordinance shall not be construed
to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A.
33:1-18 or any other section of law against a person who is convicted of
unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the
sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 45-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 45-12
1:156
Chapter 49
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
§ 49-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
The Township Council hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior design
and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential neighborhood
tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate and neighboring
areas for residential purposes; tends to impair the value of both improved
and unimproved real property in such areas with attendant deterioration of
conditions affecting the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants
thereof and the community at large; and tends to deprive the municipality of
tax revenue and destroys a proper balance between the taxable value of real
property in such areas and the cost of municipal services provided therefor.
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent these and other harmful effects of
uniformity in the design and appearance of dwellings erected in any housing
development in the same residential neighborhood and thus to promote and
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 49-2. Construction of house substantially the same in exterior
design and appearance prohibited.
Except as provided in this chapter, not more than one (1) building permit
shall hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be erected in a housing
development consisting of two (2) or more houses if the dwelling is
substantially the same in exterior design and appearance as any
neighboring dwelling situated on the same or opposite side of the street
within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a dwelling then in existence or for
which a building permit has been issued or is pending. The distance herein
specified shall be construed to mean the distance between the side lines of
C. Penalties; fines
(1) The fine for such an offense under this Section shall be $250.00 for
a first offense and $350.00 for any subsequent offense.
(2) The court may further suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privilege of the defendant in addition to the fine authorized
for this offense. If a person at the time of the imposition of the such
sentence is less than seventeen years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the
day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months
after the defendant reaches the age of seventeen years. If a person
at the time of the imposition of such sentence under this Section
has a valid driver's license issued by the State, the court shall
immediately collect the license and forward same to the State
Motor Vehicle Commission along with the report.
§ 45-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:157
each lot or parcel as extended and measured along the center line of the
street.
§ 49-3. Standards. [Amended 6-13-66 by Ord. No. 66-27-A]
§ 49-4. Required design varieties.
In addition to the requirements specified in § 49-3, there shall be a variety of
separate basic house designs in every housing development and in no event
less than the following:
Total Number of Houses in the
Development
Minimum Number of Separate
Basic House Designs
4 to 7 2
8 to 15 3
16 to 25 4
26 to 40 5
41 and over 5, plus one for every 20 additional
houses or any part thereof.
A. Houses of the same model within the specified distance from each other
shall be considered substantially the same in exterior design and
appearance unless there is a substantial change in the exterior
appearance, including the following:
(1) Change in the silhouette which may include changes in the roof
design, chimneys, overhangs, fascias, porches, porticos,
breezeways, orientation of the garage, detached garages, etc.
(2) Change in the front entry design, approach and landscaping.
(3) Change in fenestration.
(4) Change in exterior finish material on all four (4) sides.
B. But, under no circumstances may more than two (2) houses of the same
model be built on consecutive lots on the same side of the street or, in
the alternative, opposite each other, regardless of the changes.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, basic house design refers to split-level,
ranch, bilevel, two-story, cape cod, colonial, or an architectural design
which in the judgment of the Construction Official will be consistent
with the intent of this chapter. Model refers to a basic house design
having substantially the same basic exterior dimensions and floor plan.
Variation in room sizes or reversal of the floor plans, front to back or
side to side, shall not constitute a separate floor plan. [Amended
1-25-82 by Ord. No. 82-435]
§ 49-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 49-5
1:158
§ 49-5. Submission of plan. [Amended 6-13-66 by Ord. No. 66-27-A;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-75]
To ensure conformity with the provisions of this chapter, no building permit
shall hereafter be issued for more than one (1) dwelling in any housing
development, except as provided for in § 49-6, until an engineer's survey
or architect's drawing of the entire tract or of the section then being
developed has been submitted to the Chief Construction Official, showing
thereon or on a schedule attached thereto the model number, type and
design of each house, with proper street and lot numbers for each house.
The survey or drawing shall also show the dimensions of each house, its
exact location on the lot with setbacks and width or depth of all yard spaces
and shall be accompanied by a picture, rendering or sketch of each basic
house design and the changes in each model for houses within the specified
distance referred to in § 49-2. In the event of any change in the layout
of the development, location of various houses or change in the design of
any house, a revised or amended plan and application shall be filed and
approved before such work is started.
§ 49-6. Performance guaranty. [Amended 10-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-75]
To further ensure conformity with the provisions of this chapter in respect
to new subdivisions for the purpose of a housing development, the Planning
Board of the Township of East Brunswick may, at its discretion, require an
affidavit or a performance guaranty, approved as to form by the Township
Attorney, that the subdivision will be developed so that the intent and
purpose of this chapter is satisfied. The Chief Construction Official is also
hereby authorized to require a similar affidavit or performance bond before
issuance of more than one (1) building permit in any housing development
or part thereof for any subdivision heretofore approved by the Planning
Board prior to the enactment of this chapter or for any land area not
required to be subdivided.
§ 49-7. Appeals. [Amended 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-75; 1-11-82 by
Ord. No. 81-429]
Appeals from any decision of the Chief Construction Official under the
provisions of this chapter shall be taken to the Construction Board of
Appeals, and relief may be granted by the Construction Board of Appeals
when, in his opinion, such relief is not detrimental to the public interest.
The Construction Board of Appeals shall schedule a hearing on the appeal
within the time permitted by the Rules governing the Construction Board
of Appeals after receiving written notice thereof, and it shall return its
decision within ten (10) days after completion of the hearing. The
Construction Board of Appeals may convene the Advisory Building Safety
Committee for the purpose of soliciting their advice, but the opinion of the
Committee shall only be advisory.
§ 49-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-8
1:159
§ 49-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-13-78 by Ord. No.
78-302]
Any owner or lessee or other person or persons who permits, takes part
or assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, for each and every violation thereof and for each and every day
that such violation thereof continues, be subject to the penalties provided
for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 51
ARMED SECURITY OFFICERS
§ 51-1. Intent.
Extensive commercial development within the Township has created a
demand for services of armed security officers stationed in various locations
throughout the Township. The primary intent of this ordinance is to prevent
an accidental shooting situation involving an armed security officer and
members of the East Brunswick Police Department. Requirements include
properly identifying the security officer, the officer's authority and location
and description of duties.
§ 51-2. Definitions.
Armed Security Officer is any person authorized by law to carry a firearm
within the State of New Jersey, including licensed private investigators and
their authorized employees or Municipal, County, State and Federal Law
Enforcement officers being paid by a commercial establishment to perform
a security function while armed. East Brunswick Police Officers are exempt
from this ordinance.
§ 51-3. Identification; Authority; Location and Description of
Duties; Duties.
A. Identification. The armed security officer will complete an application
for a photographic identification card. Applications are available at the
East Brunswick Department of Public Safety. One card will be issued to
the security officer, while copies of the officer's photograph are retained
in file and disseminated to East Brunswick Police Officers.
B. Authority. Written documentation of authority shall be furnished with
the security officer's application for a photographic identification card.
(1) Licensed Private Investigators shall furnish a copy of a valid Private
Investigators License.
(2) Law Enforcement Officers shall furnish a copy of their agency
issued identifications in addition to written documentation from
their Chief/Director Prosecutor specifically stating that the officer
§ 49-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 51-3
1:160
§ 51-4. Penalty.
Any person as defined herein who violates any provision of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or both, within the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during which a
violation occurred or continues.
Chapter 53
BARBERSHOPS
§ 53-1. Hours and days of operation.
No barbershop shall be open for business earlier than 8:30 a.m. or remain
open after 6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays and the days preceding the
holidays listed below, when they shall close no later than 7:00 p.m. All
barbershops shall be closed on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July Fourth,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas and on all Sundays and
Wednesdays, except those Wednesdays which occur in a week in which a
shop must close because of one of the holidays previously mentioned.
has been granted authorization to accept private security
employment, while armed, within the Township of East Brunswick.
C. Location and Description of Duties. The location of the employing
commercial establishment shall be furnished, including complete
identification of the person or persons seeking to employ the armed
security officer.
D. Duties. The duties of an armed security officer shall be identified in the
application, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Range of hours to be worked.
(2) Whether working at a fixed post, including exact location, or a
transitory location.
(3) Parameters of responsibility including the following:
(a) Cash flow control.
(b) Escorts to bank.
(c) Employee internal investigations.
(d) Shoplifter detection.
(e) Inventory control.
(f) Other.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-1
1:161
Chapter 58
BICYCLES
§ 58-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to encourage the safe and proper operation
of bicycles on the streets of the Township of East Brunswick, particularly
by children; to further the programs established by the township police,
schools and civic groups to train children in the safe operation of bicycles;
and to provide a means of identifying the owners of bicycles and violators of
this chapter and other statutes and ordinances governing the operation of
bicycles.
§ 58-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84
by Ord. No. 84-565]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any two-or three-wheeled vehicle having a rear drive which is
solely human powered and having a seat height of twenty-five (25) inches,
or greater, when the seat is in the lowest adjustable position.
§ 58-3. Registration required. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No.
76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
No bicycle shall be operated within the Township of East Brunswick unless
it has been registered and bears a registration tag.
§ 58-4. Application procedure. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No.
76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
Applications for the registration of a bicycle shall be made to the East
Brunswick Department of Public Safety, on a form approved by the Director
of Public Safety, and shall contain the following information:
§ 58-5. Inspection prior to issuance of registration. [Amended
10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
Before a registration is issued, the bicycle for which it is intended shall be
inspected by a member of the Department of Public Safety designated by
the Director of Public Safety. No registration shall be issued for a bicycle
A. The name and address of the bicycle owner.
B. A description of the bicycle, including the name of the manufacturer
and the serial number, if any.
C. Any other appropriate information which the Director of Public Safety
may require.
§ 53-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 58-5
1:162
which is in a state of disrepair or which has any mechanical defect or which
would for any other reason be unsafe to operate.
§ 58-6. Term of registration; renewal. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord.
No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
The registration shall be good for a period of one (1) year from the date of
issue. No fee shall be charged for the issuance of a tag. Upon the renewal of
the registration, the bicycle shall again be inspected by a person designated
by the Director of Public Safety.
§ 58-7. Display of tag. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262;
4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
Any person riding a registered bicycle shall display a tag. The tag shall be
securely fastened to the bicycle for which it is issued in such a manner that
it can be seen clearly for a distance of ten (10) feet.
§ 58-8. Transfer of registration without authorization prohibited.
[Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
No registration number shall be transferred from one person to another or
from one bicycle to another unless reissued by the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 58-9. Transfer procedure. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262;
4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
§ 58-10. Compliance with traffic laws and regulations. [Amended
10-12-76 by Ord. No 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
All persons operating bicycles in the Township of East Brunswick shall
conform to all applicable laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances
A. Report required. Any person transferring possession of a bicycle to
another within the Township of East Brunswick, whether by sale, gift or
otherwise, shall report that fact to the Department of Public Safety
within three (3) business days after the actual transfer.
B. Information. The report of transfer shall be made upon forms furnished
by the Department of Public Safety and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the person transferring the bicycle.
(2) The name, address and age of the person to whom the bicycle was
transferred.
(3) A description of the bicycle, including its make, model, color and
serial number, if any.
(4) If the bicycle was previously registered, its registration number.
§ 58-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-10
1:163
of the township, particularly those dealing with the regulation of traffic.
Bicycle operators shall obey the same rules as the drivers of motor vehicles
unless inapplicable or inappropriate.
§ 58-11. Vehicles to operate in single file. [Amended 10-12-76 by
Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
When two (2) or more bicycles are being operated together, the operators
shall ride in single file only.
§ 58-12. Passengers on vehicles not equipped for same prohibited.
[Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
No person shall ride on any part of a bicycle not intended for use by a rider,
nor shall more than one (1) person ride on a bicycle unless it is designed to
accommodate more that one (1) rider or operator.
§ 58-13. Operation of unsafe vehicles prohibited. [Amended
10-12-76 by Ord. No. 262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
No person shall operate a bicycle within the township while that bicycle is
in a defective, unsafe or dangerous condition.
§ 58-14. Inspections.
Any police officer may inspect any bicycle at any time if he has reason to
believe that it has not been validly registered, does not have its registration
tag properly attached or is not in a safe operating condition.
§ 58-15. Impounding of unsafe bicycles.
If a police officer determines that a bicycle is in so defective or unsafe a
condition as to constitute a danger to the safety of the person operating it
or to others, he may impound the bicycle immediately. A bicycle that has
been impounded shall not be released until the owner has given satisfactory
proof that the defects that led to the impounding will be corrected prior to
the bicycle again being operated in the township.
§ 58-16. Designation of violations. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No.
76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-565]
Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter who:
A. Fails to register a bicycle owned by him.
B. Fails to report the transfer of possession of a bicycle.
C. Knowingly operates or permits the operation of a bicycle owned by him
which is unregistered or which is in a defective or unsafe condition.
§ 58-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 58-17
1:164
§ 58-17. Parents and guardians responsible for violations by
minors. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No.
84-565]
Any parent or guardian having custody of a minor child who knowingly
permits that child to possess or operate a bicycle in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 58-18. Hearings on violations before Director of Public Safety;
penalties. [Amended 10-12-76 by Ord. No. 262; 4-9-84 by Ord. No.
84-565]
In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed by law for a violation
of this chapter, the Director of Public Safety, upon receiving information
that any person under the age of seventeen (17) has been accused of
violating any provision of this chapter, shall require that person to appear
before him or his representative for a hearing. The accused person shall be
notified of the time and place of the hearing, of the time and place of the
alleged offense and of the general nature of the acts constituting the alleged
offense. Notice shall be served on the accused person not less than five (5)
days before the date of the hearing and shall be in writing, but no special
form shall be required. At the hearing the accused shall enjoy the same
rights as a person charged before the Magistrate with a violation of the
laws of the State of New Jersey or of the provisions of this revision dealing
with the regulation of motor vehicle traffic. If the Director of Public Safety
is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the accused is guilty as
charged, he may prohibit the accused from operating a bicycle for whatever
period that he, in his discretion, deems just; or, where the offender has been
guilty of a flagrant or repeated violation of this chapter, he may permanently
prohibit the offender from operating a bicycle within the Township of East
Brunswick.
Chapter 61
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER DEBRIS
§ 61-1. Removal required. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-95-F;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-76; 8-14-89 by Ord. No. 89-48]
Whenever the Chief of Public Safety, (or) his designee(s), or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine that it is necessary and expedient for
the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, or to
eliminate fire hazard, to remove from any lands in the township brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash, junk, debris or other waste materials, the owner or tenant
shall be required to remove the same within ten (10) days after receipt
of written notice from the Chief Building Inspector or the Chief of Public
Safety, or the Code Enforcement Officer requiring the removal.
§ 58-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-2
1:165
§ 61-2. Cutting of plant life near roadways required. [Amended
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-76]
§ 61-3. Notice of order to remove. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-95-F; 8-14-89 by Ord. No. 89-48]
Notice may be served upon any owner or tenant, either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and, if by certified mail, the tenday
period within which the removal or cutting shall be accomplished shall
be deemed to have commenced or run from the date of the postmark on
the return receipt. Every notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal
or cutting as aforesaid, warn the owner or tenant of the lands to which it
refers that failure to accomplish the removal or cutting will result in the
removal or cutting by a private contractor as appointed and directed by the
Township. The notice shall also state that in the event of the removal or
cutting as directed the cost of the removal shall forthwith become a lien
upon the lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon the lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate and be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 61-4. Costs to become a lien. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-95-F; 8-14-89 by Ord. No. 89-48]
Whenever the owner or tenant of any lands receiving such notice shall
neglect or refuse to remove the brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash, junk, debris or other waste
materials or cutting the plant life within the time hereinabove provided,
the removal shall be accomplished by (or) a private contractor, under the
direction of the Code Enforcement Officer, who, upon completion thereof,
shall certify the cost to the Council. The Council shall examine the
certificate and, if it shall find the same to be correct, cause the cost thereof
to be charged against the lands. The amount of the charge shall forthwith
become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become and form
a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, to bear
A. It is hereby found and determined that plant life more than two and
one-half (2-1/2) feet in height, growing within ten (10) feet of any
roadway or within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any
roadways in the township, may constitute a traffic hazard. For the
purpose of this section, "plant life" shall mean and include trees,
hedges, shrubbery, brush and other plant life.
B. Whenever the Chief of Public Safety or his designee(s) shall determine
that plant life more than two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height, growing
within ten (10) feet of any roadway or within twenty-five (25) feet of the
intersection of any roadways in the township, constitutes a traffic
hazard, the owner or tenant shall be required to cut the plant life to a
height of not more than two and one-half (2-1/2) feet within ten (10)
days after receipt of written notice from the Chief of Public Safety or his
designee(s) requiring the cutting.
§ 61-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-4
1:166
interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 61-5. Removal of impediments on land abutting highways,
sidewalks and gutters. [Added 1-12-76 by Ord. No. 76-95-E]
The owner or tenant of all lands, abutting upon public roads, sidewalks and
gutters of such roads shall remove all grass, all weeds and impediments
therefrom within three (3) days after receiving notice to remove same and
shall remove all grass, weeds and impediments from the portion of any
street or roadway abutting on such lands in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.R.S. 40:65-12, which does not require a prior finding by the
municipality that such action is necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and general welfare or is necessary to eliminate a fire hazard.
Chapter 62
BUILDINGS - UNIFORM SYSTEM FOR NUMBERING
§ 62-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
BUILDING NUMBER — A number designation existent or assigned to a
dwelling unit, commercial property, or industrial building in the Township.
AUXILIARY BUILDING NUMBER — A number designation for a cluster of
units sharing common walls within a subdivision or industrial building or
corporate complex, subdivided in order to accommodate more than one (1)
tenant.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — The Director of Planning and Engineering or
the Director of Public Safety, or the Fire Official of the appropriate Local
Enforcing Agency whichever is appropriate in accordance with § 62-2 or
section § 62-10 of this Chapter.[Amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12;
12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
§ 62-2. Uniform System for Building Numbering. [Amended 4-24-89
by Ord. No. 89-12]
A. The Director of Planning and Engineering shall prepare, with the
concurrence of the Director of Public Safety, a property numbering plan
and program for the Township of East Brunswick.
B. The Director of Planning and Engineering is empowered to assign
building numbers and auxiliary building numbers for all existing
properties and all properties henceforth constructed in the Township
following the effective date of this Ordinance and to assign auxiliary
building numbers for those existing properties without said numbers
and to re-number properties within the Township where deemed to be
in the best interest of public safety.
§ 61-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:167
§ 62-3. Building Number Signs.
All required building number signs shall be displayed in a prominent and
legible manner, so as to be highly visible from said public or private street
on which the building fronts.
§ 62-4. Auxiliary Building Number Signs. [Amended 4-24-89 by Ord.
No. 89-12; 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
Auxiliary building number signs shall be provided where deemed necessary
by the Director of Planning and Engineering or the Fire Official of the
appropriate Local Enforcing Agency. Said signs shall be displayed along the
public or private street from which access is gained to the building. Said
signs shall be highly visible from said public or private street.
§ 62-5. Multiple Dwelling Number Signs.
Building number and auxiliary building number signs required in multiple
dwelling projects, corporate parks and similar complex developments, shall
be installed in uniform locations, to the extent possible.
§ 62-6. Display of Signs. [Amended 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
Building number signs and auxiliary building number signs shall be
mounted on the building, except in those cases where it is deemed
necessary to post signs at curbside adjacent to the building entrance. The
Township shall reserve the right to require posting of signs at both curbside
and on the building where deemed necessary in the best interest of public
safety. Numbers may be placed on curbside mailboxes provided they appear
on each side of the mailbox and are at least two (2") inches in height.
All other numbers must be at least four (4") inches in height and must
be clearly visible from the street. If numbers are painted, the color must
contrast with the color of surrounding surfaces. Numbers may be on house
doors or screen doors if they are also on another part of the building.
A. Each structure shall have one address in association with the roadway
it is accessed by.
B. Unit subdivisions within a structure shall have auxiliary (suite) numbers
in association with the main structure address.
1. Residential - Building number with unit numbers: 101, 102, 103,
104, 201, 202, 203, 204, etc.
2. Commercial - Building number with suite numbers: 400 Anyplace
Court, suite 1, suite 2, suite 3, or suite A, suite B, suite C, etc.
C. Looped roadways, courts, and private development addresses shall be
assigned with the ascending numbers running in the same general
direction as the road from which it is accessed or parallel streets
whenever possible.
§ 62-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 62-6
1:168
§ 62-7. Buildings Having Multiple Entrances.
All buildings having multiple entrances shall have auxiliary signs posted
on the buildings, which signs shall bear a letter or number identifying
the entire building. Each dwelling unit in the building shall have its own
identifying number or letter. All signs must be clearly visible from the street.
§ 62-8. Maintenance. [Amended 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
Building number signs and auxiliary building number signs as required by
this article shall be periodically maintained as needed to provide continued
high visibility. The property owner shall be responsible for said
maintenance.
§ 62-9. Notification of Postal Authorities. [Amended 4-24-89 by Ord.
No. 89-12]
The Director of Planning and Engineering shall be responsible for providing
a copy of written notification establishing building numbers or auxiliary
building numbers to the U.S. Post Master responsible for the areas in which
property is located.
§ 62-10. Enforcement. [Amended 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
D. Addresses of structures opposing each other along a roadway shall be
near each other in sequence even if some numbers must be dropped.
E. All structures shall post the designated address on the building,
preferably over the main entrance when clearly visible from the
roadway the building faces on, or on a mailbox or driveway entrance
address sign.
F. Each unit subdivision shall prominently post the units address
alongside or immediately above the units entrance. For units with doors
that are always in the closed position the unit address may be posted on
the door.
G. Driveway entrance address signs shall be posted in addition to those on
the building when necessary for visibility from the roadway; clear
delineation of the entrance; and when access to a particular unit is
limited to one of several driveway entrances.
H. Multi-tenant buildings shall have all doors to the exterior posted with
the individual unit address (front, rear, and sides), as well as the
business name on the sides and rear for other than residential
buildings.
I. All address designations and postings shall be determined in the
interest of the public safety responders quickly locating a building or
individual unit under emergency response conditions.
§ 62-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-10
1:169
Chapter 63
BUSINESSES AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 63-1. Declaration of Purpose and Scope of Article.
A. Any owner or agency, or a person or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be subject to a penalty to be determined by
the appropriate Fire Official. The effective date of the Enforcement
provisions set forth in this Section shall be twelve (12) months for
existing structures and twenty (20) days from the passage of this
amendment for new structures. [Amended 12-22-97 by Ord. No.
97-37]
B. The Fire Official of the appropriate Local Enforcing Agency shall be
responsible to enforce this article as an amendment to N.J.A.C. 5:18 et
seq., and penalties may be assessed as provided in the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Prevention Code. [Added 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
C. The maximum penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter
exists shall constitute a separate violation. [Added 12-22-97 by Ord.
No. 97-37]
D. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter
exists shall constitute a separate violation. [Added 12-22-97 by Ord.
No. 97-37]
E. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or not penalty at all may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation. [Added 12-22-97 by Ord. No. 97-37]
A. The scope of this Article is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited in the interest of the protection of the employees,
patrons, and law enforcement officers. It has been determined that the
unprotected and under-staffed business and commercial enterprises
are prey to the criminal element in our society during the late night and
early morning hours and that certain security devices must be provided
in order to protect the general public who use these establishments.
The intent of the East Brunswick Township Council in adopting this
Ordinance is to enhance the health, peace, safety and comfort of the
general public, to benefit the public health, morals, safety and general
welfare, and to deal with a situation which constitutes a danger and
hazard to public health and safety.
B. The provisions and requirements of this Article shall not apply to, nor
include, any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or
permitted to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws
§ 62-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 63-1
1:170
§ 63-2. Closing Hours, Personnel and Security Requirements.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited shall
be open between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 5:00 A.M., prevailing
time, unless:
§ 63-3. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on or which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 65
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 65, Cats, was repealed 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67 and
incorporated into Chapter 83, Dogs and Cats.]
Chapter 68
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED
§ 68-1. Cigarette vending machines prohibited.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors by automatic
vending machines, all cigarette vending machines are hereby prohibited in
the Township of East Brunswick.
of the United States, the State of New Jersey, or other municipal
ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article.
a. There are at least two (2) employees on continuous duty in that part of
the business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited;
or
b. The business or commercial establishment shall employ a security
officer or the premises has in operation a security device, which may
consist of a silent and/or audible burglar alarm connected to a central
security monitoring system designed to activate police response; a
closed circuit TV connected to a central security monitoring system
designed to activate police response or such other device which can be
activated instantaneously to notify law enforcement officers that a
crime or disorderly persons activity is in progress, but only if approved
by the Director of the Department of Public Safety of the Township of
East Brunswick.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-2
1:171
§ 68-2. Penalty.
Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under his or her control shall be subject to
a fine of $250.00. Each day on which such a machine is owned, operated,
rented or permitted on the premises shall result in an additional fine.
Chapter 75
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 75-1. Enforcing agency established. [Amended 8-24-92 by Ord.
No. 92-31]
§ 75-2. Construction Board of Appeals. [Amended 9-26-05 by Ord.
No. 05-28]
A. There is hereby established in the Township of East Brunswick a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Division of Construction Inspection," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official, Elevator
Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such additional
subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall thereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency. The Administrator shall make or
cause to have made an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of the
Construction Official and all subcode officials and recommend to the
Council a position-classification plan. [Amended 10-23-78 by Ord.
No. 78-78]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be
held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 52:27D-119 et seq.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such Board shall
consist of five members, plus one alternate member. At least one Board
member shall be a registered architect or licensed professional
engineer of building construction experience, and at least one Board
member shall be as qualified as a Plumbing Subcode Official and one as
qualified as an Electrical Subcode Official. No more than two Board
§ 68-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-2
1:172
members shall be selected from the same business or profession. Each
Board member shall have had at least three years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered
architect or, in the alternative, five years' experience in construction,
design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's
degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an accredited
institution of higher education or, as a further alternative, 10 years'
experience in construction, design, or supervision as a journeyman in
a construction trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or
inspector. At least one Board Member shall be certified as a NJ Fire
Marshall or Official by the Division of Fire Safety. [Amended 9-26-05
by Ord. No. 05-28]
B. The Mayor, with advice of Council, shall appoint the Board members
and any alternate members. For the members first appointed, the
Mayor shall designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a
term of three years and two for a term of four years. At the expiration of
such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of four
years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. The Mayor shall appoint such number of alternates, as may be
appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years or may, in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis.
D. No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the
Board.
E. All members and alternate members shall serve without compensation.
F. The Construction Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to appoint an
Attorney to represent it, the appointment being made at the first
regular meeting of the Board after January 1 of each year. The term of
the Attorney shall be for a period of one year or until the appointment
and qualification of his or her successor. The compensation to be paid to
the Attorney shall be established by the Township Council in the annual
municipal budget. [Added 5-8-78 by Ord. No. 78-14]
G. The Construction Board of Appeals application for an appeal shall
require a fee of $200. [Added 9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-28]
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:173
§ 75-3. Fees; disposition of moneys. [Amended 1-26-1981 by Ord.
No. 81-324; 9-14-1981 by Ord. No. 81-394; 1-31-1983 by Ord. No.
83-492; 2-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-899; 3-14-1988 by Ord. No.
88-904; 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-30; 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-71;
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 91-85; 8-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-31; 4-11-1994
by Ord. No. 94-20; 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-15; 9-26-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-28; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03;
amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Subsection A through L hereof and shall be paid before the permit is
issued.
A. The building subcode fees shall be:
(1) New construction: $0.05 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume unless the exception in Subsection A(1)(a) applies. The
minimum fee shall be $200.
(a) Exception: for Use Group S-1, S-2, F-1 or F-2, large volume
buildings exceeding 100,000 cubic feet of total structure
volume, the fee shall be $0.04 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume.
(2) Renovations, alterations and repairs: $30 per $1,000 of estimated
cost of the work, provided that the minimum fee shall be $75.
(a) Determining estimate costs. The applicant shall submit to the
Division of Construction Inspection the estimate cost data
produced by an architect, engineering, estimating firm or a
bonafide contractor's bid price. The Division shall make the
final decision regarding estimate cost. A copy of the contract is
to be provided.
(b) Fees based on cost per $1,000 shall include any part of a
$1,000.
(3) Additions: $0.05 per cubic foot of building or structure volume for
the added portion, unless the exception in Subsection A(1)(a) above
applies, provided that the minimum fee shall be $200.
(a) Fees based on a flat rate or cost per thousand shall be
determined by the larger of the two amounts.
(4) Combinations of renovations and additions: the sum of the fees
computed separately as renovations and additions.
(a) Fee for reinstatement of a lapsed permit shall be 20% of the
cost of the permit, for permits less than one year from date of
issue.
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:174
(5) Fences over six feet in height for all use groups and around
swimming pools as barrier for Residential R-5 use groups shall be
$75 and $200 for all other use groups.
(6) Sheds: $0.05 per cubic foot. The minimum fee shall be $100.
(7) Siding: The minimum fee shall be $75 or $30 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of construction.
(8) Re-roof: The minimum shall be $75 or $30 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of construction.
(9) Retaining wall.
(a) R-5 use groups less than 550 square feet: $100.
(b) R-5 use groups more than 550 square feet: $200.
(c) Other than use group R-5: $30 per $1,000 of the estimated cost
of construction.
(10) Heating devices or chimney:
(a) Masonry chimney. The minimum fee shall be $75 or $30 per
$1,000 of the estimated cost of construction.
(b) Metal chimney. The minimum fee shall be $75 or $30 per
$1,000 of the estimated cost of construction.
(c) Furnaces, HVAC ductwork residential R-5. The minimum fee
shall be $75 or $30 per $1,000 of the estimated construction
cost. All other use groups: The minimum fee shall be $200 per
system or $30 per $1,000 of the estimated construction cost.
(d) Fireplaces: $150.
(e) Radon systems: $75.
(11) Decks: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost of construction with a
minimum fee of $75.
(12) Temporary structures: Fee shall be $100.
(13) New pools:
(a) Fees for aboveground pools shall be $150 or $30 per $1,000 of
estimated cost.
(b) Fee for in-ground pools shall be $300 or $30 per $1,000 of
estimated cost.
(14) Fees for application of a variation:
Class I structure $500
Class II structure $300
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:175
Class III structure $200
(15) Fees for annual construction permits:
1-25 workers $325
Each additional worker over 25 $125
Training Registration per Subcode $140
(16) Change of contractor after a permit has been issued: $50.
(17) Revised or updated plans minimum fee: $65.
B. The plumbing subcode fees fee shall be:
(1) Based upon the number of plumbing fixtures and plumbing stacks
to be replaced or installed. The cost per fixture or stack shall be
$25 per unit, except as listed in Subsection B(2).
(2) The fees for the installation of a grease trap, oil interceptor, watercooled
air conditioner and other special equipment or devices shall
be $150.
(3) Fees for the installation or replacement of a building sewer, septic
systems or water service lines shall be based upon the number of
fixtures to be serviced. The cost shall be $25 per fixture. There
shall be a minimum fee of $100 for a sewer installation and $100
for water service installation.
(4) Fees for the installation of leaders and area drains shall be $20,
Residential R-5 and $50, all other use groups, per leader or area
drain.
(5) Fees for the installation of a building storm sewer system shall be:
Under 8 inches $100
Under 12 inches $150
Under 24 inches $250
24 inches and up $350
(6) For the purpose of computing fees, fixtures or stacks shall include,
but not be limited to, lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks, sinks,
urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor
drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes
washers, hot-water heaters, dental chairs, air cooled airconditioners,
sump pumps and/or similar devices.
(a) Gas boiler and heater installation fee: $150 or $15 per $1,000
of the estimated cost of construction for new or replacement
installations, except replacement of Residential R-5 boilers or
heaters shall be $45; gas pool heater, $100; roof-top units,
$100.
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:176
(b) Annual backflow test and Inspection: $100, except for
residential R-5 use groups.
(c) Residential air conditioning, $35; and all other use groups,
$75.
(7) There shall be a minimum charge for any plumbing subcode permit
of $50 or $25 per $1,000 of the plumbing cost. Residential R-5
backflow device fee shall be $50. Other use groups backflow device
fee shall be $15 per $1,000 or a minimum fee of $200.
(8) Gas piping fees.
Piping
(inches) Fee
3/8 to 1 $50
1 1/4 to 2 1/2 $75
3 to 6 $100
Over 6 $200
(9) Change of contractor after a permit is Issued: $50.
(10) Capping water and sewer with structure demolition: $75.
(11)Water heater.
(a) R-5: $20.
(b) Other: $50.
(12) Sump pump: $50.
(13) Revised or updated plans: minimum fee $65.
C. The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Receptacles and fixtures (including solar - per panel).
(a) 1 to 25 receptacles and fixtures: $75.
(b) 26 to 50 receptacles and fixtures: $125.
(c) 51 to 75 receptacles and fixtures: $165.
(d) 76 to 100 receptacles and fixtures: $205.
(e) 101 to 125 receptacles and fixtures: $245.
(f) 126 to 150 receptacles and fixtures: $285.
(g) 151 to 175 receptacles and fixtures: $325.
(h) 176 to 200 receptacles and fixtures: $365.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:177
(i) For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures
shall include lighting outlets, wall switches, fluorescent
fixtures, convenience receptacles or similar fixtures and solar
panels.
(2) Motors and electric devices.
(a) For each motor or electric device of less than one horsepower
or one kilowatt, the fee shall be in the amount of $40.
(b) For each motor or device of from one horsepower or one
kilowatt to five horsepower or five kilowatts, the fee shall be in
the amount of $65.
(c) For each motor or device of greater than five horsepower or
five kilowatts, the fee shall be in the amount of $50 plus $5 for
each increment of five horsepower or five kilowatts up to 50
horsepower or 50 kilowatts; and, thereafter, the fee shall be
increased $5 for each increment of 10 horsepower or 10
kilowatts.
(d) For the purpose of computing this fee, all motors shall be
counted, including control equipment; generators,
transformers and all heating; cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electric current.
(3) Service panels or sub panels or branch circuit feeders.
(a) For each service panel or sub panel of 100 amperes' capacity
or less, the fee shall be in the amount of $95.
(b) For each service panel or sub panel of greater than 100
amperes' capacity, the fee shall be:
Capacity (amperes) Fee
101 to 200 $115
201 to 400 $145
401 to 1,000 $370
Over 1,000 $520
(c) For the purposes of computing this fee, the term "service panel
or sub panel" shall include service conductors, feeders,
switchboards, switches and panelboards.
(d) Branch circuit feeders relocated, replacement, added to or
original equipment altered: the fee shall be in the amount of
$75.
(4) (Reserved)
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:178
(5) There shall be a minimum charge for any electrical subcode permit
of $75.
(6) Electrical fee for swimming pools, hot tub/spa shall be $95.
(a) For the purpose of computing this fee, the term "swimming
pool" shall include filter, heater, pumps, receptacle and lights
associated with the pool.
(7) Bonding of in ground swimming pools: $125.
(8) Annual commercial pool inspection: $175.
(9) Electric sign permit fee: $95.
(10) Residential air conditioner: $45 replacement; $75 new installation.
(11) Commercial air conditioner: $95.
(12) Whirlpool: $75.
(13) Protective signaling systems, including fire, burglar, lawn
sprinklers and all low-voltage wiring:
(a) Residential:
[1] Flat rate system: $65.
(b) Commercial/industrial:
[1] One to 15 devices: $120.
[2] Each additional five devices: $15.
[3] Control panel, each: $95.
[4] Related equipment: see fee schedule.
(14) Trailers: each unit: $120.
(15) Mobile homes, each unit: $120.
(16) Modular homes: apply fee schedule.
(17) Modular office panels, each unit: $35.
(18) Temporary installations and displays: display booth and temporary
installation.
(a) Less than 30 days each unit: $25.
(b) More than 30 days each unit: Apply fee schedule.
(19) Elevator:
(a) High voltage per unit: $175.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:179
(b) Low voltage/each unit: apply fee schedule.
(20) There shall be a minimum charge for any electrical subcode permit
and utility loan management device inspection of $30.
(21) Change of contractor after a permit is Issued: $50.
(22) Disconnection of service with structure demolition: $70.
D. The fee for a demolition permit shall be $200 for a one- or two-family
residence (Use Group R-5 of the Building Subcode) and $300 for all
other use groups. See Fire Section 19.
E. The fee for a permit for removal of one building from one lot to another
or to another location on the same lot shall be in the amount of $25 per
$1,000 of the estimated cost of moving the buildings, estimated cost of
new foundations and all work necessary to place the building in its
completed condition in the new location, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $100.
F. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged for the
construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are reviewed.
The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the amount of the
fee to be charged for the construction permit.
G. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $2.50 per square foot of
the surface area of the sign, provided that the minimum fee shall be
$100. In the case of double-faced signs, the area of the surface of only
one side of the sign shall be used for purposes of the fee computation.
H. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) A fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be required for all new
construction, additions, alterations or renovations, in the amount
not less than 10% of the permit fee with a minimum fee of $100.
(a) A certificate of occupancy fee for all new commercial buildings
or additions shall be 10% of the permit fee with a minimum fee
of $100.
(b) A certificate of occupancy fee for commercial renovation,
repair or alteration shall be 10% of the permit fee with a
minimum of $100.
(c) Spec. buildings, malls and similar structures: certificate of
occupancy for each tenant shall be $100.
(d) The certificate of occupancy fee for all new residential
buildings or additions shall be 10% of the permit fee with a
minimum fee of $100.
(e) The certificate of occupancy fee for residential renovation or
alteration shall be 10% of the permit fee with a minimum fee of
$100.
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:180
(f) The certificate of occupancy fee for residential additions,
renovations or alterations shall be payable at the time the
permit is issued.
(g) Inspection fee for minimum health and safety requirements for
existing building shall be $50 for Residential R-5 and $100 for
other use groups.
(h) The fee for each reinspection of existing buildings shall be $50.
(2) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $75 for
Residential R-5 and $200 for other use groups.
(a) A certificate of continued occupancy shall be required for a
change of owner or tenant in all use groups except Residential
R-5.
(3) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to change
of use shall be $200.
(4) An application processing fee shall be collected and shall be
nonrefundable when a construction permit is submitted for review.
Residential R-5 one- and two-family homes
Alteration/renovation: $75
Addition: $125
New house: $400
All other use groups
Alteration/renovation: $350
Addition: $550
CCO application: $75
New building: $1,500
(5) A nonrefundable prior approval review fee shall be collected with
all construction permit applications submitted for review:
R-5 Residential one- and two-family homes
Addition, alteration or renovation: $25
New home: $100
All other use groups
CCO application: $25
Alteration/renovation: $200
Addition: $300
New building: $500
I. Elevator/escalator fees:
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:181
(1) The department fees for witnessing acceptance tests and
performing inspections shall be as follows:
(a) The basic fees for elevator devices in structures not in Use
Group R-3 or R-4 shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $300.
[b] Over 10 floors: $450.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $275.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $300.
[4] Escalators, moving walks: $275.
[5] Dumbwaiters: $125.
[6] Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts
and manlifts: $125.
(b) Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[1] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $65.
[2] Counterweight governor and safeties: $150.
[3] Auxiliary power generator: $100.
(c) The Department fee for elevator devices in structures in Use
Group R-3 or R-4 shall be $150. This fee shall be waived when
signed statements and supporting inspection and acceptance
test reports are filed by an approved qualified agent or agency
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.19 and 2.20.
(d) The fee for witnessing acceptance tests of, and performing
inspections of, alterations shall be $150.
(2) The Department fees for routine and periodic tests and inspections
for elevator devices in structures not in Use Group R-3 or R-4 shall
be as follows:
(a) The fee for the six-month routine inspection of elevator devices
shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $175.
[b] Over 10 floors: $300.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $150.
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:182
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $175.
[4] Escalators, moving walks: $175.
(b) The fee for the one-year-period inspection and witnessing of
tests of elevator devices, which shall include a six-month
routine inspection, shall be:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $250.
[b] Over 10 floors: $300.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $200.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $250.
[4] Escalators, moving walks: $350.
[5] Dumbwaiters: $110.
[6] Manlifts, stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts: $150.
(c) Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows:
[1] Oil buffers (charge for oil buffer): $65.
[2] Counterweight governor and safeties: $100.
[3] Auxiliary power generator: $75.
(d) The fee for the three-year or five-year inspection of elevator
devices shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors (five-year inspection): $450.
[b] Over 10 floors (five-year inspection): $475.
[2] Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators:
[a] Three-year inspection: $300.
[b] Five-year inspection: $200.
(3) When the Department is the enforcing agency, the fees set forth in
Subsection I(2) above shall be paid annually in accordance with the
following schedule, which is based on the average of the fees to be
collected over a five-year period:
(a) Basic annual fee as follows:
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:183
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $450.
[b] Over 10 floors: $500.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $300.
[3] Roped hydraulic elevators: $325.
[4] Escalators, moving walks: $500.
[5] Dumbwaiters: $100.
[6] Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts,
manlifts: $150.
(b) Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features as follows:
[1] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $65.
[2] Counterweight governor and safeties: $100.
[3] Auxiliary power generator: $75.
(c) Revised or updated plans: minimum fee $65.
J. Fire subcode fees as follows:
(1) Fees for sprinklers:
1 to 20 Heads $125
21 to 100 Heads $200
Each additional head over 100 heads $2
+ Additional fee for each sprinkler riser $200
+ Each standpipe riser $230
+ Hydraulically designed systems
calculations @
$75
+ Fire pumps $300
+ Water storage tanks for fire protection
systems
$400
+ Fire flow test for design first hydrant $75
Each additional hydrant test for same site $25
+ Site fire protection underground and mains $200
(2) Range hood extinguishing systems:
Wet chemical: $150
Dry chemical: $150
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:184
Co2 suppression: $150
(3) Kitchen and hazardous hood exhaust system:
Type 1: $150
Type 2: $100
Residential kitchen exhaust hood: $35
(4) Foam fire suppression systems: $150.
(5) Pre-engineered fire suppression systems: $150.
(6) Heating devices (HVAC).
Residential heating units, new $75 per unit
Replacement R-5 unit of same
fuel type
$35 per unit
Commercial heating units $100 per unit
(7) Fireplace review: $75.
(8) Automatic fire alarm panel, replacement only: $150 or $100 per
10,000 square feet.
Fire alarm panel with system $150
Central station alarms $100
Manual fire alarm systems $75 for first device and $15
each additional
Duct smoke detector $65 for first 10 devices and $20
each additional
Residential smoke detectors $65
Smoke, heat, CO detectors and
water flow
$75 for first five devices and
$15 each additional
Signaling devices $75 for first 15 devices and $15
each additional
Supervisory devices $75 for first 15 devices and $15
each additional
Flame or beam smoke
detectors
$75
Security locks to fire system $75 for two locks and $15 each
additional
(9) Smoke removal systems: $400.
(10) Tank installation: all aboveground and below ground.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:185
0 to 600 gallons $150
601 to 1,100 gallons $200
1,101 to 2,000 gallons $250
Over 2,001 gallons $400
(11) The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $25 per $1,000 of the job
cost with a minimum of $65.
(12) Incinerator and crematorium: $365.
(13) Change of contractor after a permit is issued: $50.
(14) Elevator recall: $150.
(15) Emergency lights and exit lights: $65 for first five units and $20
each additional.
(16) Emergency and voice communication systems: $250.
(17) Generator systems: $100.
(18) Spray booth: $200.
(19) Tank demolition:
Up to 275 gallons $125
276 to 1,000 gallons $150
Over 1,000 gallons $300
(20) Revised or updated plans: minimum fee $65.
K. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the East Brunswick Township Council, annually,
a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses
of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act.5
L. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,6 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00371 or as amended by
Department of Community Affairs (DCA) per cubic foot of volume of
new construction, new buildings, and additions. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all other
construction shall be $1.35 per $1,000 of value of construction. Said
surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
5. Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 52:27D-119 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 75-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-3
1:186
§ 75-3.1. Chief Construction Official; fire-damaged or other
structurally unsafe buildings. [Added 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-408]
The East Brunswick Chief Construction Official is hereby designated as the
municipal officer who shall take remedial action with regard to buildings or
structures which are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use.
§ 75-3.2. Statement of Intent to be filed with Director of the
Department of Planning and Engineering. [Added 1-31-83 by Ord.
No. 83-488; amended 9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-28; 3-9-09 by Ord. No.
09-06]
On all applications for construction permits, change of use, tenant or owner,
the applicant shall file a detailed statement with the Director of the
Department of Planning and Engineering and apply to the Construction
Official for a Continuing Certificate of Occupancy except R-5 Residential use
group setting forth the existing use of the land and buildings which are the
subject of the application and the proposed use of the land and buildings
including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 75-3.3. Request for Information. [Added 5-22-89 by Ord. No.
89-30; amended 1-27-03 by Ord. No. 03-01]
This section is hereby repealed by the enactment of the New Jersey Open
Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq)
Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal
quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30,
and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter
for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first
become effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third
and fourth quarters only.
M. The enforcing agency shall report, annually, at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fees collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
(a) Number and type of employees;
(b) Present and proposed activity on the premises;
(c) Present and proposed customers or clientele, whether retail or
wholesale;
(c1) Drawing or Sketch of Layout and Floor Plan of existing Structure(s);
(d) Such other information which may reasonably be required by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Engineering to determine
whether or not a change of use is proposed which would necessitate an
application for site plan approval.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:187
§ 75-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency,
including but not limited to Section 2-6.5e, Construction Board of Appeals;
Chapter XIV, Plumbing; and Sections 16-1 through 16-6, inclusive, of the
Building Code. Section 16-7, Building Contractor Registration and Security,
is specially saved from repeal.
Editor's Note: Section 2-6.5e of the Revised General Ordinances formerly
created a Construction Board of Appeals within the Division of Code
Management Services within the Department of Administrative Services.
Chapter SIV of the Revised General Ordinances was adopted 6-13-66 as
Ord. No. 66-54 and amended 7-25-66 by Ord. No. 66-54-A; 8-12-68 by
Ord. No. 68-54B; 9-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-118; 12-9-68 by Ord. No. 68-54C;
4-14-69 by Ord. No. 69-134; 5-26-69 by Ord. No. 69-54-D. Sections 16-1
through 16-6 of the Revised General Ordinances were adopted 10-22-63
and amended 7-15-66 by Ord. No. 66-61; 9-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-118;
11-13-68 by Ord. No. 68-61-B; 5-14-73 by Ord. No. 73-61-G; 9-9-74 by Ord.
No. 74-61-I; 10-29-74 by Ord. No. 74-135-K; 11-11-74 by Ord. No. 74-61-J;
10-6-75 by Ord. No. 75-134-C.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Contractors, Building.
§ 75-5. Waiver of Building Permit Fees. [Added 11-8-99 by Ord. No.
99-44]
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing single family attached or detached
residential structure, or a two family residential structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, re-construction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit.
C. For the purposes of this section, "disabled person" means a person who
has a total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial gainful
activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be limited
to, any resident of the State of New Jersey who is disabled pursuant to
the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.§ 416), or the federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a
60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this paragraph
"blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better
eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the
§ 75-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 75-5
1:188
Chapter 78
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Ch. 78, Contractors, Building, adopted 6-25-73
as Ord. No. 73-61-H as Sec. 16-7 of the Revised General Ordinances,
was repealed 8-21-78 by Ord. No. 78-45, said repeal to be effective
9-3-78. Ord. No. 78-74, adopted 10-9-78, extended the effective date
of the repeal to coincide with the date that the state government is
prepared to implement the New Warranty and Builders' Registration
Act (Chapter 467 of the Laws of 1977).
Chapter 83
DOGS AND CATS
§ 83-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 12-10-07
by Ord. No. 07-29; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
As used in this chapter 83-1 et seq., the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole, or in significant part, the rescue
and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue
organizations.[Added 4-25-16 by Ord. 16-08]
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal animal control officer
or, in the absence or unavailability of such an officer, the chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality or his/her designee.[Added
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — An individual or group of individuals
who, with or without salary or compensation, house and care for homeless
animals in the home of an individual or in other facilities, with the intent
of placing the animals in responsible, more permanent homes as soon as
possible.[Added 4-25-16 by Ord. 16-08]
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Health.[Added 7-12-99
by Ord. No. 99-31]
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.[Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog, or livestock other than poultry.[Added
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
GROOMERS — Refers to both the hygienic care and cleaning of a dog, as
well as a process by which a dog's physical appearance is enhanced. A dog
groomer (or simply "groomer") is a person who earns their living grooming
dogs.[Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees shall be
considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1
1:189
LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained the age of seven (7)
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.[Added
4-25-16 by Ord. 16-08]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, means
every person, firm, association, corporation or responsible party for an
animal, owning, controlling, harboring or keeping any dog or cat which is
over the age of seven (7) months or possesses a set of permanent teeth
or any other animals. If the owner is a minor as defined by statute, the
minor's parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall be the owner for purposes of this
section.[Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 12-10-07 by Ord. No.
07-29; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to § 83-16III.[Added
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
TETHERING — The restraining of an animal by the tying to any object or
structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post, garage,
weight or shed, by any means, including, without limitation, rope, cord,
leash or running line, but shall not include the use of a leash used to
walk the animal or to form of restraint used in the transportation of an
animal.[Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
VICIOUS CAT — Any cat which has attacked or bitten any human being
without provocation.[Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to § 83-16II.[Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
§ 83-2. License required. [Amended 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67;
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
A. Licenses shall be required for the following dogs or cats of licensing
age:
(1) Any dog or cat owned and kept within the township on the first day
of January of any calendar year.
(2) Any dog or cat acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the township for more than ten (10)
days after acquisition.
(3) Any dog or cat attaining licensing age during the course of the
calendar year.
(4) Any unlicensed dog or cat brought into the township by any person
and kept within the township for more than ten (10) days.
§ 83-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-2
1:190
§ 83-3. License application. [Amended 9-10-79 by Ord. No. 79-167;
12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67; 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 12-10-07 by
Ord. No. 07-29; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
(5) Any dog or cat, licensed by another state, brought into the
township by any person and kept within the township for more than
ninety (90) days.
(6) Any dog that the municipal court declares to be potentially
dangerous. [Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
B. Only one (1) license and registration tag shall be required in any
licensing year for any dog or cat owned in New Jersey, and the license
and tag issued by any other municipality of this state shall be accepted
by the township as evidence of compliance with this chapter.
A. Each application for a dog or cat license shall be made to the East
Brunswick Collector of Revenue and shall give the following
information:
(1) A general description of the dog or cat sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, age, color and markings, and whether the dog
or cat is of a long-or short-haired variety.
(2) Name, street and post office address of the owner of the dog or cat
and the person who shall keep the dog or cat if other than the
owner, a telephone number for the owner of the dog or cat and the
person who shall keep the dog or cat if other than the owner.
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
B. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which they are
received. [Amended 12-10-07 by Ord. No. 07-29]
C. The township shall:
(1) Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to
the Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued by the township will be the three
number code assigned to the municipality in the regulations
promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-33. The Animal Control
Officer shall verify in writing, compliance to the Collector of
Revenue to license dogs in the municipality. [Added 7-12-99 by
Ord. No. 99-31]
(2) Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this act.
This telephone number shall be forwarded to the department and
any changes in this number shall be reported immediately to the
department. [Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
§ 83-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4
1:191
§ 83-4. Deadline for making application. [Amended 12-10-07 by
Ord. No. 07-29]
Applications for licenses for dogs or cats which are required to be licensed
by the provisions of § 83-2A(1) shall be made before the first day of April
of each year. In all other cases, the application for a license shall be made
within ten (10) days of the date upon which the dog or cat in question first
becomes subject to the provisions of this section.
§ 83-5. Application fees. [Amended 11-28-66 by Ord. No. 66-39-A;
11-12-73 by Ord. No. 73-39-B; 8-26-74 by Ord. No. 74-192; 1-24-77
by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 4-10-78 by Ord. No. 78-8; 3-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-125; 7-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-518; 4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-35;
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-26; 12-10-07 by
Ord. No. 07-29]
The person applying for the license shall pay a fee of $15.20 for each dog or
cat, annually, which includes one dollar and twenty cents ($1.20) for any dog
under Public Laws of 1983, Chapter 181. Any person applying for a license
shall pay a fee of $3.00 for any dog or cat of reproductive age which has
not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization,
pursuant to Assembly Bill 1917 adopted as Chapter 172 of the Laws of 1983.
The same fees shall be charged for the annual renewal of each license and
registration tag. There shall be a late fee of five dollars ($5.) for any license
which is applied for after it is due. There shall be a charge of two dollars
($2.) for the replacement of any license or tag. Notwithstanding the above,
the fee for each potentially dangerous dog license and each renewal thereof
shall be $500.00 annually in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
§ 83-6. Expiration date of license. [Amended 12-10-07 by Ord. No.
07-29]
Each dog or cat license and registration tag shall expire on the last day of
March of the year following the year in which it was issued.
§ 83-7. Exemption from fee for certain dogs. [Amended 12-10-07 by
Ord. No. 07-29]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye
dogs", dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs", or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed in the same manner as other dogs,
except that the owner shall not be required to pay any fee.
§ 83-8. Vaccination required.
No person shall own a dog or cat within the Township of East Brunswick
unless it has been vaccinated against rabies. This includes farm cats.
§ 83-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-9
1:192
§ 83-9. Vaccination procedure.
Vaccinations shall be performed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey. The vaccine used shall be from a manufacturer
licensed by the Bureau of Animal Industry of the United States Department
of Agriculture. The dosage shall be as recommended by the manufacturer.
All dogs and cats shall be revaccinated before the expiration of the period
of time for which the vaccine used is known to be effective.
§ 83-10. Dogs and cats not required to be vaccinated.
§ 83-11. Certificate of vaccination.
The fact that a dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies shall be
evidenced by a certificate from the veterinarian performing the vaccination.
The certificate shall either be on a form approved by the Director of Health
and Welfare or standard immunization certificate used by the veterinarian.
The certificate shall be presented to the Director of Health and Welfare
within ten (10) days after each vaccination. In the case of dogs being
vaccinated before being brought to the township, the certificate shall be
presented to the Director of Health and Welfare within ten (10) days after
the dog is brought into the township.
§ 83-12. Certificate of vaccination required prior to issuance of
license. [Amended 9-10-79 by Ord. No. 79-167]
No dog or cat license shall be issued until the certificate required by § 83-11
or the certificate provided for in § 83-10 is presented to the East Brunswick
Collector of Revenue.
§ 83-13. Fee For Township Vaccination. [Deleted 4-14-80 by Ord. No.
80-239]
§ 83-14. Regulations for dogs and cats. [Amended 8-22-16 by Ord.
16-13; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
No person shall own a dog or cat in the Township of East Brunswick except
in compliance with the following regulations. Cats are exempt from Section
83-14C-G:
A. The Director of Health and Welfare may exempt any dog or cat from the
provisions of §§ 83-8 through 83-13 if there is presented to him a
certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that it would be
undesirable to vaccinate a particular dog or cat for a specified period of
time because of the dog or cat's age, infirmity or other physical
condition.
A. Registration tags. A metal registration tag shall be issued for each dog
and cat licensed. Every licensed dog and cat shall wear a collar or
harness with its registration tag securely fastened to it. Elastic collars
may be used on cats.
§ 83-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-14
1:193
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except the Animal Control Officer
or a police officer in the performance of their duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
the owner, or attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for which it was
not issued. [Amended 11-12-73 by Ord. No. 73-39-B; 8-26-74 by
Ord. No. 74-192; l-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209]
C. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own any dog which habitually
barks or cries in a manner that would disturb a reasonable person,
particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Cats are
exempt.
D. Running at large. No person owning a dog shall permit it to run at large
upon the public streets or in any public park, in any public building or in
any other public place within the township, nor permit a dog to run at
large upon private property without the permission of the owner. Cats
are exempt.
E. Leashing of dogs. No person owning a dog shall permit it to be upon the
public streets or in any other public place in the township unless the
dog is securely fastened to an adequate leash not more than eight (8)
feet long and is accompanied by a person capable of controlling it. Cats
are exempt.
1) Collars - It shall be unlawful for any person to collar an animal with
a choke-type collar, prong-type collar, pinch-type collar, or rope.
The collar must be at least as large as the circumference of the
animal's neck plus one (1) inch and cannot be constructed primarily
of metal. [Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
F. Property damage. No person owning or in control of a dog shall permit
it to damage any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or other property.
Cats are exempt.
G. Curbing of dogs. Every person owning or in control of a dog shall be
responsible for curbing it whenever the dog is on public property or
property dedicated to public use. Cats are exempt.
H. Public Nuisance - Cats. A cat shall be considered a public nuisance if:
(1) it has no known owner or custodian, or, (2) if it has no known place
of custodial care or, (3) if it damages private or public property or, (4) if
it attacks lawful users or occupants of private or public property or, (5)
if it causes a definable public health hazard, supported by medical and/
or other documentation. [Added 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67]
I. Restrictions on Leaving Animals in Vehicles. No animal shall be
confined in a parked or standing vehicle or enclosed trailer for a period
of fifteen (15) or more minutes when the temperature during such
period is either below 32º F. or above 75º F. [Added 11-28-16 by Ord.
16-23]
J. Tethering of Dog [Added 8-22-16 by Ord. 16-13]
§ 83-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-14
1:194
1) Dogs may be tethered under the following circumstances:
a. The tether must be at least fifteen (15) feet long and have an
operative swivel on both ends, weigh no more than 1/8 of the
dog's weight and be attached to a properly fitted collar or
harness.
b. The collar used for tethering may not be a choke chain collar,
slip collar or prong collar.
c. The tethered dog must have easy access to drinking water,
edible food, dry ground and adequate shade and/or shelter
within the tethering area.
d. The tether may not be used in any area where it may be
tangled around an object, such as, but not limited to, a tree,
pole, fence or stake.
e. The tether cannot inhibit the movement of the animal's limbs
or cause injury, harm, entanglement or strangulation.
f. The tether must restrain the dog within the bounds of the
owner's or custodian's property.
g. The tether must terminate no less than five (5) feet from any
fence, pool, wall, vehicle, tree or roadway, or other object or
obstruction upon which the animal might harm himself.
h. Dogs may be tethered for no more than six (6) consecutive
hours in any twenty-four hour period of time.
i. If there are multiple dogs, each dog shall be tethered
separately and in such a manner that the tethers shall not
become entangled with each other.
j. No dog shall be tethered at a vacant structure or premises for
any purpose when it is not monitored by a competent adult who
is present at the property for the duration of such tethering.
k. No dog that is sick or injured shall be tethered.
l. No dogs shall be tethered between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 am.
m. No animal shall be left outside during inclement weather, e.g.
rain storms, snow storms, ice storms, hurricanes or thunder
storms.
2) Dog Shelters
a. Dog shelters shall be a suitable size to accommodate the dog in
both standing and lying positions.
§ 83-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-14
1:195
§ 83-15. Investigation of complaints against dogs or cats; report of
findings. [Amended 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209; 7-12-99 by Ord. No.
99-31]
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Safety and the Animal
Control Officer and/or any police officer to receive and investigate
complaints against dogs or cats. If he/they have reasonable cause to believe
that the dog or cat is a nuisance or poses a danger to persons or property,
he/they shall issue a Township summons to the owner for appearance before
the Judge of the East Brunswick Township Court.
§ 83-16. Hearing on complaint of vicious dog or cat; notice to
owner. [Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 3/10/03 by Ord. No.
03-05]
b. It shall be moisture-proof, windproof, ventilated and in cold
temperatures shall promote the retention of body heat.
c. It shall be made of durable material with a solid, moistureproof
floor raised at least two (2) inches from the ground.
d. It shall have a sufficient quantity of clean bedding material
consisting of hay, straw, cedar shavings, or equivalent to
provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
e. Drinking water is available in a clean, liquid state. Snow or ice
is not an acceptable water source.
f. The doghouse or similar structure and the surrounding area
shall be free from excessive dirt, trash and waste.
g. For temperatures below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, the doghouse
or structure shall have a wind break at the entrance.
h. For temperatures above 85 degrees Fahrenheit, all dogs must
be afforded one or more separate areas of shade large enough
to accommodate the entire body of each dog and protect them
from the direct rays of the sun.
I. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner of an allegedly vicious
dog or cat in writing that a complaint has been made and require the
owner to appear before the Municipal Court at a stated time and place
for a hearing. [Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
II. Dog declared vicious by municipal court; conditions. [Added 7-12-99
by Ord. No. 99-31]
A. The municipal court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S. 2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
§ 83-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-16
1:196
(2) Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in R.S.
4:22-24 and R.S. 4:22-26.
B. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog
was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
C. If the municipal court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to § 83-17.1IX, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog
may be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
III. Dog declared potentially dangerous; conditions. [Added 7-12-99 by
Ord. No. 99-31; amended 3/10/03 by Ord. No. 03-05]
A. The municipal court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous
if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of
bodily injury or death to a person; or
(2) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal, and
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person;
or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
(c) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or
encouraged to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons
or domestic animals.
B. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(1) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
if the dog was provoked; or
(2) Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor.
For the purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the
municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that
the dog was not provoked.
IV. Registration of potentially dangerous dogs; conditions.
If the municipal court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous,
it shall issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
[Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
§ 83-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-16
1:197
(1) To apply, at his own expense, to the Collector of Revenue to
license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a special
municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number, and red identification tag issued pursuant
to § 83-1 et seq. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent
location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until
the owner obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number, and red identification
tag;
(2) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises.
The sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet of the
enclosure required pursuant to paragraph (3) of this
subsection;
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the
potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
potentially dangerous dog will be kept and maintained, which
has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the potentially
dangerous dog from escaping by climbing, jumping or digging
and within a fence of at least six feet in height separated by at
least three feet from the confined area. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to
prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude any
release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous
dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the
enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a tether
approved by the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum
tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to
restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius
of no more than three feet from the owner and under the direct
supervision of the owner.
B. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the municipal court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance,
which may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall
contain a provision requiring the municipality in which the owner
resides to be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of
being notified by the insurance company of any cancellation,
termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
V. Obligations of owner of potentially dangerous dog.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall: [Added 7-12-99 by
Ord. No. 99-31]
§ 83-16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-16
1:198
A. Comply with the provisions of § 83-1 et seq. in accordance with a
schedule established by the municipal court, but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination;
B. Notify the licensing authority, local police department, and the
Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large, or
has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
C. Notify the licensing authority, local police department, and the
Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
D. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
E. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, police department or force, and Animal Control Officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner; and
F. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3, pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the
municipality as provided by § 83-5.
VI. Violation by owner; fine, seizure, impoundment of dog. [Added
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
A. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this act, or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply
with a court's order shall be subject to a fine or not more than
$1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The
municipal court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. An
Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions of § 83-1 et seq., or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or a court's order. The municipal court may order
that the dog so seized and impounded be destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner.
B. Fines, fees, used for enforcement by municipalities.
All fines and fees collected or received by the township pursuant
to subsection VIA above and § 83-5 shall be deposited in a special
account and used by the township to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter 83-1 et seq. as they relate to vicious or
potentially dangerous dogs.
VII. Monthly inspection to verify compliance.
§ 83-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-16
1:199
§ 83-17. Confinement of dogs or cats found to be vicious. [Amended
1-10-77 by Ord. No. 76-39-E]
No person owning or having control of a dog or cat which has been
determined to be vicious shall permit it to be outside the confines of the
home unless the yard or property is enclosed in such a fashion that the dog
or cat will not be able to run at large.
§ 83-18. Impoundment of certain dogs and cats. [Amended 1-28-80
by Ord. No. 80-209; 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with
§ 83-16IV.
VIII. Appeal of decision.
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer in the municipality
in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any final decision, order,
or judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of the
municipal court by filing an appeal with the Superior Court, Law
Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing The Courts of the
State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals
from courts of limited jurisdiction. [Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No.
99-31]
IX. Liability of owner for cost, of impounding, destroying dog; rabies
testing. [Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all
appeals pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the
dog shall be liable to the municipality for the costs and expenses of
impounding and destroying the dog. The owner shall incur the
expense of impounding the dog in a facility other than the
municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found
to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to
the time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New
Jersey State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
X. Hearing on subsequent action of dog.
If the municipal court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the municipal court shall retain the right to convene a
hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially
dangerous for any subsequent actions of the dog. [Added 7-12-99 by
Ord. No. 99-31]
§ 83-16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-18
1:200
§ 83-19. Destruction of certain dogs, cats, and other animals.
[Amended 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209; 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67;
5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-10]
The Animal Control Officer or any police officer or, in their absence and in
case of an emergency which will not permit delay, any person may kill any
of the following animals:
I. The Animal Control Officer and members of the Division of Police shall
take into custody and impound any of the following dogs or cats:
A. Any dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter § 83-1 et seq. [Amended 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31]
B. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner, which the Animal
Control Officer or a police officer has reason to believe is a stray
dog or cat.
C. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner of the dog or cat
without a current registration tag on its collar.
D. Any female dog in-season off the premises of the owner.
E. Any unmuzzled dog or cat which has been determined to be a
vicious dog or cat in the manner provided in § 83-15 through
§ 83-17.
II. In addition to the provisions cited in § 83-18I above, the Animal Control
Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the Animal Control Officer
has reasonable cause to believe that the dog: [Added 7-12-99 by Ord.
No. 99-31]
A. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
B. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
C. Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in R.S. 4:22-24 and
R.S. 4:22-26; or
D. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval
of the municipal health officer, the dog may be impounded in a
facility or other structure agreeable to the owner.
A. Any dog or cat determined to be a vicious dog or cat in the manner
provided in §§ 83-15 through 83-17 or any dog which is attacking or
§ 83-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-19
1:201
§ 83-20. Notice of seizure. [Amended 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67;
7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
which has just attacked a human being without provocation and which
cannot be seized with safety.
B. Any animal which is or appears to be suffering from rabies or which is
otherwise immediately dangerous to the public.
C. Any animal which has been so badly injured that it cannot be moved or
helped by a veterinarian.
I. General notice.
If any animal impounded or seized wears a registration tag or a collar
or harness having inscribed on or attached to it the name and address
of any person or the owner of the animal, The Animal Control Officer
shall immediately serve notice on the person whose address is given on
the collar or on the person owning the animal, stating that the animal
has been seized and may be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven (7) days after the service of the notice. A notice under this
section may be served either by delivering it to the person on whom it is
to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of
abode or at the address given on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail
in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known
place of abode or to the address given on the collar. [Added 7-12-99
by Ord. No. 99-31; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
II. Notice of impoundment; notice of hearing; return of statement by
owner; destruction of dog. [Added 7-12-99 by Ord. No. 99-31;
11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the municipal court and the
Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police officer immediately
that he/she has seized and impounded a dog, or that he has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic
animal and that a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer
shall through a reasonable effort attempt to determine the identity
of the owner of any dog seized and impounded. If its owner cannot
be identified within seven days that dog may be humanely
destroyed.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded, notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the
owner concerning the seizure and impoundment, and that, if the
owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine whether the
impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This notice
shall also require that the owner return within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating
whether he wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to
§ 83-19 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-20
1:202
§ 83-21. Disposition of impounded animals. [Amended 2-11-74 by
Ord. No. 74-39-D; 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67; 11-28-16 by Ord.
16-23]
Any impounded animal may be placed in a foster home, transferred to
another shelter, pound, kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or animal
rescue organization facility, or euthanized in a manner causing as little pain
as possible under any of the following contingencies:
§ 83-22. Fee for picking up animals. [Added 4-11-77 by Ord. No.
77-39-G; amended 4-10-78 by Ord. No. 78-8; 1-28-80 by Ord. No.
80-209; 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67; 2-22-16 by Ord. 16-04]
Any person whose animal shall be picked up by the Animal Control Officer
or a police officer shall be required to pay all expenses incurred by the
Township by reason of its detention. In addition to the expenses incurred
by the Township, the owner or person charged with the care of the animal
shall be required to pay the full maintenance charge imposed by the holding
facility for each full or partial day held, not to exceed $4.00 per day or the
limit set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16. The expenses of impoundment shall be
paid to the Revenue Office of the Township of East Brunswick, and a receipt
shall be delivered to the person paying such charges, which receipt shall be
the authority.
§ 83-23. Quarantining of certain dogs and cats authorized.
[Amended 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
When any dog or cat attacks or bites a human being, the Director of Public
Safety and/or Chief of Police or his representative may order the owner of
the dog or cat to confine it, either on the owner's premises or any other
relinquish ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be
humanely destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified
letter, or does not reply to the certified letter with a signed
statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may be humanely
destroyed.
A. When any animal seized has not been claimed by any person within
seven (7) days after notice or within seven (7) days of the animal's
seizure when notice cannot be given, as set forth in the previous
section.
B. If the person owning the animal seized has not paid all expenses
incurred by reason of its seizure, including a maintenance charge not to
exceed four dollars ($4.) per day. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV; 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-67]
C. If the seized dog or cat is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the
person owning, keeping or harboring such dog or cat has not procured
a license and registration tag as required by this chapter.
§ 83-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-23
1:203
reasonable location which the Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of
Police designates, for a period of at least ten (10) days. The expenses of
confining the dog or cat shall be borne by the owner.
§ 83-24. Examination of quarantined dogs or cats. [Amended
1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
The Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police or his representative
shall have the right to examine any dog or cat confined under the provisions
of § 83-23 at any reasonable time, including daily examinations, for a period
of ten (10) days after the dog or cat has attacked or bitten any person, to
ascertain whether the animal shows symptoms of rabies.
§ 83-25. Release from quarantine. [Amended 1-28-80 by Ord. No.
80-209; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
Regardless of whether or not the period of time from which the owner
was directed to confine the dog or cat has expired or not, no dog or cat
confined under the provisions of § 83-23 shall be released from quarantine
until the Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police issues a certificate
of release. The certificate shall only be issued after either the person
designated by the Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police or
representative to examine the dog or cat or a licensed veterinarian has
certified in writing that the animal appears to be healthy and free from
rabies.
§ 83-26. General quarantine. [Amended 1-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-209;
11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
Whenever the Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police or his
representative is notified by the State Department of Health or determines
himself that there is danger of an epidemic of rabies in the Township of
East Brunswick, he shall order all persons owning or having custody of dogs
or cats in the township to keep their dogs and cats confined to their own
premises. Notice that an order has been issued may be either written or
oral and may be served personally, by mail, by publication in a newspaper
circulating in the township, by conspicuously posting it in public places or
by any other method calculated to actually reach the persons affected.
§ 83-27. Enforcement official designated. [Amended 1-28-80 by Ord.
No. 80-209; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
The Director of Public Safety and/or Chief of Police and the Animal Control
Officer shall have the primary duty of enforcing this chapter.
§ 83-28. Access to premises.
Any officer authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this
chapter may go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog or dogs
which he may lawfully seize and impound when he is in immediate pursuit
§ 83-23 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 83-28
1:204
of such a dog or dogs, except that he shall not go upon the premises of the
owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids it.
§ 83-29. Interference with enforcement prohibited.
No person shall interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform
any duty under this chapter.
§ 83-30. Owner responsible for curbing dog. [Added 11-26-73 by
Ord. No. 73-39-C; amended 8-26-74 by Ord. No. 74-192]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park, school ground or any space where the public congregate or walk or
upon any public property or place whatsoever or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of said property. This restriction in
this section shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between
the curblines, which shall be used to curb such dog under the following
conditions:
§ 83-31. Kennels and Pet Shops. [Amended 4-25-16 by Ord. 16-08]
Any person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or operating any
dog kennel or pet shop engaged in the business of boarding or housing
dogs, within the limits of the Township of East Brunswick, shall pay for the
privilege of maintaining, conducting or operating such kennel a license fee
as established by N.J.R.S. 4:19-15.9 pursuant to which the annual license
fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten or less dogs shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) and for more than ten dogs twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be ten dollars ($10.00), unless
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.9 is amended to provide for another amount or fee shall be
charged for a shelter rescue organization or pound. This license tax shall be
in lieu of individual license taxes for such dogs.
A. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the
Department of Health.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section in a
sanitary method approved by the Department of Health.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
D. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog not
curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to be in violation of this section and subject to the penalty
provisions contained in Chapter 1, Article I.
§ 83-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-31.1
1:205
§ 83-31.1. Sale of Cats and Dogs in Kennels and Pet Shops,
Exceptions [Added 4-25-16 by Ord. 16-08]
§ 83-31.2. Groomers. [Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-23]
Shall annually be licensed and the fee is $50.00.
§ 83-32. Use of Animal Control Officer Out of Town. [Added 1-28-80
by Ord. No. 80-209]
It shall be permissible for the Animal Control Officer to respond to requests
for his/her services when notified through the Department of Public Safety
that a request has been received. The agency requesting the assistance
shall, at the conclusion of the assignment, be billed by the Department of
Public Safety for an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50) plus the hourly
rate of the Animal Control Officer and shall include premium pay charges
for request of services during non-standard working hours.
§ 83-33. Violation and Penalties. [Added 12-10-91 by Ord. No.
90-67]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or
imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days
or both.
Chapter 88
ILLICIT STORM SEWER CONNECTIONS, DUMPS AND
DUMPING
§ 88-1. Definitions and word usage. [Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-18]
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
1. An animal care facility; or
2. An animal rescue organization.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a shelter, pound or other
establishment from keeping, displaying or selling any cat or dog which
has been seized, rescued or donated.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meaning given hereafter. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely discretionary.
B. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
§ 83-31.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 88-1
1:206
§ 88-2. Illicit Connections to Municipal Storm Sewer System.
[Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-18]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm water system operated by East Brunswick
Township, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit. Nonphysical
connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows or
overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317(a), (b), (c).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains, that is owned and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — a permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other
than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-2
1:207
Township of East Brunswick any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
§ 88-3. Dumping restricted to authorized areas. [Amended 7-25-05
by Ord. No. 05-18]
Editors Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
No person shall throw, spill, dump, cast, track or deposit or cause to be
thrown, spilled, dumped, cast, tracked or deposited any mud, dirt or other
foreign matter, materials or liquid on or along any public street or highway
in the Township of East Brunswick. No person shall throw, spill, dump,
cast or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, spilled, dumped, cast or
deposited any brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, junk, debris or other waste materials on any
lands or on or along any public street or highway in the Township of East
Brunswick except in a duly licensed disposal area or junkyard. No person
shall allow any mud, dirt, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash, junk, debris, liquid or other
waste materials to remain on their premises, even if a person or persons
other than the owner of the premises was responsible for placing such items
there.
§ 88-4. Enforcement. [Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-18]
This chapter shall be enforced in Municipal Court upon a complaint signed
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Board of Health, the Department of
Parks and Public Works or the Public Safety Department of the Township
of East Brunswick. Further, if a complaint has been signed and issued, and
the Township prevails against the violator, the responsibility for compliance
shall lie with the violator. If the violator does not correct the violation the
Township shall take action to protect the general health of the public and
the cost of such actions shall be processed as a lien against the property
and in accordance with law.
Chapter 93
EMERGENCY, STATES OF
§ 93-1. Authority of Mayor to declare a state of emergency;
activities that may be regulated.
When there exists in the Township of East Brunswick a state of disaster or
emergency brought about by natural causes or by the action of any person
or persons and such state of disaster or emergency causes or may cause
violence and injury to be inflicted upon people in the Township of East
Brunswick and causes or may cause damage and destruction to property
in the Township of East Brunswick, both public and private, all being
§ 88-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 93-1
1:208
against the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township of East
Brunswick, then and in that event the Mayor shall have the authority to
declare that a state of disaster or emergency exists, and he shall have the
authority and be empowered to do the following:
§ 93-2. Announcement of state of emergency.
The Mayor, upon declaring that a state of disaster or emergency exists in
the Township of East Brunswick, shall forthwith advise any newspaper and
radio station located within the County of Middlesex and request that the
announced state of disaster or emergency be publicized at once.
§ 93-3. Mayor's decision to be final.
The judgment of the Mayor that a state of disaster or emergency exists
within the Township of East Brunswick and that it has caused or is likely
to cause injury and damage to person and property within the Township of
East Brunswick shall be final and absolute.
§ 93-4. Prohibited acts.
After the Mayor has declared that a state of disaster or emergency exists
in the Township of East Brunswick and has issued an order or proclamation
regulating the movements of persons or vehicles in or about the Township
of East Brunswick, or the dispensing by licensed persons of alcoholic
beverages therein, or the sale of gasoline by gasoline service stations
or firearms or ammunition by any retail business establishments in the
Township of East Brunswick, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this
chapter for any person to be upon the streets, ways or places in the
Township of East Brunswick, to drive vehicles over the streets in the
Township of East Brunswick, to dispense alcoholic beverages or to sell
gasoline at any gasoline service stations or firearms or ammunition at
any retail business establishments during the hours prohibited by said
A. Issue orders of proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public streets,
ways and places in the Township of East Brunswick.
B. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
streets in the Township of East Brunswick.
C. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
businesses licensed by the Township of East Brunswick to dispense in
any way alcoholic beverages shall be closed to business.
D. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations or firearms or ammunition
by any retail business establishments in the Township of East
Brunswick shall be closed to business.
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-4
1:209
order or proclamation, unless otherwise permitted by the Township of East
Brunswick.
§ 93-5. Violations and penalties.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of an order or
proclamation issued by the Mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 96
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS, OBSTRUCTION OF
§ 96-1. Interference with township officials prohibited. [Amended
8-23-76 by Ord. No. 76-95-G]
No person shall resist, obstruct or interfere with any township officer,
including any police officer, park ranger or member of a fire company or
first aid squad, in the performance of his or her duty, nor shall any person
disobey the lawful orders or instructions of any such officer or, without good
reason, refuse or neglect to assist him or her in the performance of his or
her duty when requested to do so.
§ 96-2. Interference with fire-fighting equipment prohibited.
§ 96-3. False alarms prohibited.
No person shall knowingly turn in or cause to be turned in a false fire alarm.
§ 96-4. Unauthorized opening of fire hydrants prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall open any fire hydrant without written
permission of the township.
Chapter 99
A. No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose except upon the
specific permission or orders of the officer in charge where the hose is
being used.
B. No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to
be placed on or within twenty (20) feet of the driveway approach of any
firehouse or other place where fire apparatus is then stored or within
ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant.
C. No unauthorized person with any vehicle shall follow within two
hundred (200) feet of any fire or rescue apparatus.
§ 93-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 96-4
1:210
FARMING AND AGRICULTURE
§ 99-1. Right to Farm. [Amended 3-27-89 by Ord. No. 89-6]
The Township of East Brunswick recognizes the right to farm, subject to
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and subject also to the restrictions
and regulations which may affect farming and agriculture, as set forth in
all health and sanitary codes of the Federal Government, the State of New
Jersey, the County of Middlesex and the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 99-2. Interpretation.
The right to farm as it is used in this section includes the use of large
irrigation pumps and equipment, serial and ground seeding and spraying,
large tractors, numerous farm laborers and the application of chemical
fertilizers and products for the control and elimination of insects, pests,
weeds, fungus and other substances injurious to the farming process or
for the purpose of producing from the land agricultural products, such as
vegetables, grains, hay, fruits, fibers, potatoes, wood, trees, plants, shrubs,
flowers and seeds. This right to farm shall also include the right to use land
for grazing by animals, subject to the restrictions contained elsewhere in
this Code for raising livestock.
§ 99-3. Regulation of Hours.
The foregoing uses and activities permitted in the Rural Preservation Zone,
when reasonable and necessary for the particular farming, livestock or fowl
production, and when conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices as the same may be determined and promulgated,
from time to time, by the Rutgers University School of Agriculture, may
occur on holidays, Sundays and weekdays, and the odors, dust and fumes
that are caused by the farming activities are specifically permitted as part
of the exercise of the right to farm in the Rural Preservation Zone.
§ 99-4. Findings.
It is expressly found that whatever temporary inconveniences may be
caused to others by such uses and activities so conducted, they are more
than offset by the benefits from farming to the neighborhood and
community and to society in general, by the preservation and continuance
of farming operations in East Brunswick Township and in New Jersey as a
source of agricultural products for this and future generations.
Chapter 101
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 101, Fire Prevention, adopted 3-13-67 as Ord. No. 67-68,
was repealed 9-9-85 by Ord. No. 85-696, effective December 31,
1986. See Chapter 102, Fire Safety.]
§ 96-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-4
1:211
Chapter 102
FIRE SAFETY
§ 102-1. Local Enforcement. [Amended 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of East Brunswick. The Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey is
hereby adopted as well as additional local amendments.
§ 102-2. Agency Designation. [Deleted 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-3. Duties. [Amended 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894; 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
The local enforcement agencies shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of East
Brunswick and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Code. The local enforcing agencies also shall carry out such other fire
safety inspections as authorized by the Uniform Fire Safety Act and local
ordinance.
§ 102-4. Life Hazard Uses. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
The local enforcing agencies established by § 102-2 of this ordinance shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 102-5. Organization. [Deleted 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-6. Fire Prevention Advisory Committee Created. [Amended
8-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-87; 10-11-94 by Ord. No. 94-45; 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
There is hereby established a Fire Prevention Advisory Committee to be
comprised of the Fire Official of each Local Enforcing Agency, the chief
of each of the three (3) local volunteer fire companies, one (1) fire
commissioner from each fire district, and three (3) citizens, one from each
fire district, appointed by the Mayor. The commissioner representatives
shall be appointed by resolution of their respective fire districts at their
annual reorganization meetings and their names forwarded to the Township
Clerk. The three (3) citizen members shall be selected on the basis of their
knowledge and experience in the field of fire prevention and shall serve
for a term of two (2) years. The terms of the other members of the Fire
Prevention Advisory Committee shall coincide with the terms of the offices
or positions they hold in the township or fire districts. The Fire Officials
shall be non-voting members.
§ 99-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-6
1:212
The mission of the Fire Prevention Advisory Committee will be to discuss
and bring to the attention of the Township Administration those critical
matters that relate to fire prevention and which are common concerns
throughout the Township of East Brunswick.
The Fire Prevention Advisory Committee, at its first meeting on or after
April 1, of each year, shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from among
its voting membership. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside
over all meetings, supervise preparation of agendas and such other duties
as may be assigned by the committee. The secretary shall be charged with
taking and preparing minutes of the meetings, meeting notices and such
other duties as may be assigned by the chairperson.
A representative of the East Brunswick Police Department, the Fire
Subcode Official and the Construction Official shall be in attendance at any
meeting of the Fire Prevention Advisory Committee upon request of the
Chairperson when information requiring their expertise is sought.
§ 102-7. Employment, Terms of Office, Removal of Fire Officials and
Inspectors. [Deleted 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-8. Board of Appeals. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and the
Uniform Fire Code N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19, any person aggrieved by any order
of the local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the Township of East Brunswick.
Exception: Violations of this Chapter that occur within owner-occupied,
detached one and two family dwellings used exclusively for dwelling
purposes, shall not be subject to Administrative Penalty actions. Violations
involving any dwelling unit shall be subject to the issuance of a summons to
appear in Municipal Court.
§ 102-9. Designation of Limits. [Amended 1-8-88 by Ord. No.
87-894; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. Storage of explosives and blasting agents. The limits in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as
the entire Township of East Brunswick.
B. Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks. The limits
in which the storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
storage tanks is prohibited are hereby established as the entire
Township of East Brunswick except the I/M Industrial Districts as
established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of East
Brunswick.
C. Bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids. The limits in which
new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are
hereby established as the entire Township except the I/M Industrial
§ 102-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-9
1:213
§ 102-10. Local Provisions. [Amended 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894;
8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-62; 7-24-95 by Ord. No. 95-24; 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
District as established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of East
Brunswick.
D. Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gas. The limits in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established
as follows
The entire Township except the I/M Industrial District. Note: Nothing
contained herein shall prohibit an existing installation from continuing
in existence provided it is in reasonable compliance with this code.
E. Storage and Use of Hazardous Materials and Chemicals. Storage of
Hazardous materials and chemicals shall be limited to the I/M Zone as
established in the East Brunswick zoning ordinance when in amounts so
as to require a permit as listed below.
F. Calcium Carbide and Acetylene Generators. It shall be a violation of this
code to use or install calcium carbide and/or acetylene generators in
any zone in the Township of East Brunswick.
A. Scope: These articles shall apply to all buildings, structures, or
premises located within East Brunswick Township.
B. Penalties: Penalties for violation of any local provisions as herein
contained shall be enforced in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
C. Status of Fire Code Violations and Penalties: The fee for a search for a
"Status of Fire Code Violations and Penalties" report as required by the
statutes shall be established as $50.00. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
D. The owner or operator of any building required to have a "central
control station" by the Uniform Construction Code in effect at the time
of issuance of any form of a certificate of occupancy or approval shall
have that "central control station" staffed by a minimum of one qualified
person twenty-four hours per day, everyday. Said person shall be
trained and qualified to operate all of the emergency systems, including
fire alarm, public address, elevator and air handling systems, and shall
remain in said "central control station" to assist the Fire Department
during alarm/or emergency conditions in the operation of such systems.
E. Any owner renting or selling to others for purposes other than use as a
dwelling unit shall notify, in writing, the appropriate Local Enforcing
Agency for the Fire District within whose boundaries the property
exists immediately (within 5 working days) upon the signing of a letter
of commitment or a lease, whichever occurs first of such transaction,
including the name of the lessee or buyer, effective date of the lease or
§ 102-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-10
1:214
§ 102-11. Regulations of Establishments Where Moving Pictures
Are Shown and Mechanical Amusement Devices Are Located in
Confined Quarters.
All establishments within the Township of East Brunswick in which movies
or films or shows of any kind are shown or staged on an individual booth
by booth basis or where mechanical coin operated amusement devices are
operated shall be subject to the following:
sale, and the address of the leased or sold property. [Added 7-24-95
by Ord. No. 95-24]
F. For purposes of this Section, "owner" shall mean any person who owns,
purports to own, manages, rents, leases or exercises control over a
building, structure, premises, or use, or a portion thereof. [Added
7-24-95 by Ord. No. 95-24]
G. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for anyone that causes damage
to items that the fire department may use directly, or may use as a sign
or indicator of fire protection equipment, or the destruction, defacing,
or otherwise causing damage to any fire protection device, sign,
indicator, or related item.
This would be items such as: fire department connections, signage
for fire department connections, hydrant flags or other markings,
standpipe or sprinkler equipment, fire extinguishers, or any other
related device.
H. Evacuations: Fire exit drills or the unplanned activation of a fire alarm
system in any occupancy shall include complete evacuation of all
occupants from the structure. Failure of any person to evacuate the
structure shall be a violation of this ordinance. [Added 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
I. The New Jersey Hotel, Motel, and Multiple Dwelling code N.J.A.C.
5:10-1 et seq. and the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code
are adopted herein by reference. [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. All aisles within such establishments shall not be less than fifty (50")
inches in width.
B. The viewing areas of the booths must be visible from a contiguous main
aisle and no doors may be closed at any time when the booth is
occupied.
C. The light level in such establishments shall not be less than ten (10')
foot candles at floor level.
D. The provisions, contained herein shall be in addition to, and not in place
of, all existing fire, building, maintenance and safety rules, regulations
and ordinances of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 102-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-12
1:215
§ 102-12. Promulgation of Operating Rules and Regulations for the
Fire Prevention Bureau. [Deleted 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-13. Permit Fees. [Amended 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894;
12-20-04 by Ord. No. 04-21]
§ 102-14. Permits. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894; amended
11-14-88 by Ord. No. 88-987; 7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-81; 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
A. The permit fees as established by the Uniform Fire Code and as
amended from time to time pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(f) shall remain
in full force and effect as set forth therein, or as amended in this
ordinance, and the local enforcement agencies shall be as designated in
§ 102-24, 26, and 27. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
B. The appropriate Fire Official may waive the permit fees in certain
instances when such fees are for the following [Amended 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]:
1. Churches when the permit is for something of an occasional nature
(not exceeding three times per year) and is part of religious
observances and/or training; and/or other charitable organizations;
and/or East Brunswick Township agencies and/or other non-profit
organizations.
2. Contractors and construction companies when working under a
valid permit issued by the East Brunswick Construction Official.
The above mentioned religious, charitable, and/or governmental
agencies will be responsible for submitting all applications as
required by the code and conforming to the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code and its local amendments. The waiver is only for the
payment of the otherwise required PERMIT fees. [Amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. Permits: A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or
handle materials, or to conduct processes which produce conditions
hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection
with such activities in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Such
permissions shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set
aside any of the provisions of this Code or any other code, ordinance,
statute, rule or regulation. Said permit shall remain in effect until it is
revoked, or one year unless otherwise specified. Permits are not
transferable and any change in use, operation, or tenancy shall require
a new permit. The following permits shall be required and shall have
fees as indicated.
1. Asphalt (Tar) Kettles: No person, firm or corporation shall make use
of or fire any asphalt (tar) kettle without first securing a permit
§ 102-12 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-14
1:216
from the Fire Official. $60.00 [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
2. Training and Education: No person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of providing fire brigade or emergency response team
training shall conduct such activities without first securing a
permit from the appropriate Fire Official. Permits issued under this
subsection shall be valid for all such work conducted within the
Local Enforcing Agency jurisdiction. Training of local fire
departments shall be exempt from this section. $100.00
The holder of the permit shall furnish the appropriate Fire Official
with a list of locations within the jurisdiction where the service
is provided as well as a course outline of the training provided.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
3. Liquefied Petroleum Gas or Liquefied Natural Gas: A permit shall
be obtained from the appropriate Fire Official for the storage or use
of liquefied petroleum or liquefied natural gas utilizing storage
containers with an aggregate water capacity exceeding three (3)
gallons and less than 2000 gallons when for use as other than
heating or cooking fuel at a one-or two-family owner occupied
residence or on recreational vehicles for non-commercial use. Fees
shall be as follows [Amended 7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-81;
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]:
a. 3 gallons to 49 gallons: $50.00
b. 50 gallons to 199 gallons: $100.00
c. 200 gallons to 999 gallons: $200.00
d. 1000 gallons to 2000 gallons: $300.00
4. Flammable or Combustible Liquids and Hazardous Materials: A
permit shall be obtained from the appropriate Fire Official to
remove, repair or alter in any way, a stationary tank for the storage
of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials, or to
modify or replace any line or dispensing device connected thereto.
(Fee $100.00) [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
5. Hazardous Materials: To store, handle or process hazardous
materials or chemicals which, because of their toxicity,
flammability, liability to explosion or decomposition, render
firefighting abnormally dangerous or difficult. Also, to store, handle
or process materials which are chemically unstable and which may
spontaneously form explosive compounds or undergo spontaneous
reactions of explosive violence or with sufficient evolution of heat
to be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals or materials shall include,
but not be limited to, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials,
potentially explosive chemicals, toxic materials, poisonous gasses,
pesticides, rodenticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. Fees shall be as
§ 102-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-14
1:217
follows: [Amended 7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-81; 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
a. 4 gallons or 9 pounds: $50.00
b. 5 gallons or 10 pounds to 24 gallons or 99 pounds: $100.00
c. 25 gallons or 100 pounds to 99 gallons or 249 pounds: $200.00
d. 100 gallons or 250 pounds: $300.00
6. Flammable and Combustible Liquids, above ground: A permit shall
be obtained for the storage and use of flammable and combustible
liquids. Fees shall be as follows: [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
a. Stationary tank 5 gallons to 24 gallons: $50.00
b. Stationary tank 25 gallons to 150 gallons: $100.00
c. Stationary tank 151 to 300 gallons: $200.00
d. Stationary tank 301 to 660 gallons: $300.00
e. Portable tank 5 gallons to 24 gallons: $50.00
f. Portable tank 25 gallons to 150 gallons: $100.00
g. Portable tank 151 gallons to 300 gallons: $200.00
h. Portable tank 301 gallons to 660 gallons: $300.00
i. Containers 5 gallons to 24 gallons: $50.00
j. Containers 25 gallons to 150 gallons: $100.00
k. Containers 151 gallons to 300 gallons: $200.00
l. Containers 301 gallons to 660 gallons: $300.00
Exceptions to A6: The storage and use of flammable and/or
combustible liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft,
motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant. Also
the storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar mixtures
when such liquids are stored for painting or maintenance or
similar purposes upon the premises and which are not stored
for a period of longer than thirty (30) days. [Amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
7. Process Equipment: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire
Official to install, modify, or alter process equipment not required
to have a permit under the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23, in which hazardous, flammable or combustible materials are
used and/or processed. (Fee $200.00) [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
§ 102-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-14
1:218
B. Business, Commercial, Multiple Dwelling Permit and Inspection Fees
[Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
1. Temporary Kiosks and Displays in Covered Malls: Each individual
or temporary (90 days or less) kiosk, display or concession shall be
required to obtain a Permit (Fee $42.00) unless covered by
Section(s) § 102-14B2 or § 102-14C. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
2. A permit shall be required for all occupancies and/or tenants and/or
uses within the common area of a building, such as a mall, market,
or other mercantile of less than 300 square feet. (Permit Fee
$25.00, Inspection fee $50.00) Examples: Kiosks in malls, over 90
days, vendors within a market, etc. [Added 11-14-88 by Ord. No.
88-967; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
3. A permit shall be required for all occupancies and/or tenants and/or
uses at any fair or special event booth 200 square feet or less that is
used for 14 days or less (Permit and inspection fee $25.00) [Added
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
4. A permit shall be required for any non-residential use of less than
400 square feet of gross floor area, with the exception of those
businesses registered with the State of New Jersey as Life Hazard
Uses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq, or permitted and
inspected under § 102-14B4. (Permit fee $25.00, Inspection fee
$50.00) [Amended 7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-81; 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
5. A permit shall be required for any Use Group B office only, 200
square feet or less, that is located within another building that is
registered and inspected for other uses and purposes, and is owned
and/or operated by a separate entity from the building owner. This
would include sub-lease type uses or independent offices within an
office mall. Fee for permit and inspection shall be $25.00. [Added
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
6. A permit shall be required for any non-residential occupancy or use
of less than 1,000 square feet, but more than 400 square feet, of
gross floor area, with the exception of those buildings registered
with the State of New Jersey as Life Hazard Uses, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (Permit Fee $25.00, Inspection Fee
$50.00) [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
7. A permit shall be required for any non-residential occupancy or use
of less than 2,500 square feet, but more than 1000 square feet, of
gross floor area, with the exception of those buildings registered
with the State of New Jersey as Life Hazard Uses, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (Permit Fee $25.00, Inspection Fee
$75.00)
§ 102-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-14
1:219
Permits are required on a yearly basis. Inspection fees are due and
payable within thirty calendar days. [Added 11-14-88 by Ord.
No. 88-967; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
8. A permit shall be required for any non-residential occupancy or use
of more than 2,500 square feet but less than 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area unless such use or occupancy is registered as a Life
Hazard use under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (Permit Fee $25.00,
Inspection Fee $125.00) [Added 11-14-88 by Ord. No. 88-967;
amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
9. A permit shall be required for any non-residential occupancy or use
of more than 5,000 square feet but less than 12,000 square feet of
gross floor area. (Permit Fee $25.00, Inspection Fee $175.00)
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
10. A permit shall be required for all uses and/or occupancies not
defined as Life Hazard uses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., with a gross floor area of over 12,000 square feet. (Permit Fee
$25.00, Inspection Fee $250.00)
Permits are required on a yearly basis. Inspection fees are due and
payable within thirty calendar days. [Added 11-14-88 by Ord.
No. 88-967; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
11. A permit shall be required for any use and/or occupancy which is an
eating and/or drinking establishment that has a capacity of less
than 50 occupants and in which no alcoholic beverages are served,
regardless of floor area. Exception: Life Hazard registered
premises pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (Permit Fee
$25.00, Inspection Fee $75.00)
Permits are required on a yearly basis. Inspection fees are due and
payable within thirty calendar days. [Added 11-14-88 by Ord.
No. 88-967; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
12. A permit shall be required for all structures or uses where 100 or
fewer persons may assemble for the purpose of amusement,
entertainment and/or recreation, including health spas. (Permit Fee
$250, Inspection Fee $150.00)
Permits are required on a yearly basis. Inspection fees are due and
payable within thirty calendar days.
Exception: Life Hazard uses registered pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
13. A permit shall be required for all structures used as hotels, motels,
and multiple dwellings as follows: [Amended 7-22-91 by Ord.
No. 91-81; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
a. Hotels and motels with common areas accessible to the
transient occupants and/or the public with 100 rooms or less: a
§ 102-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-14
1:220
permit fee of $25.00 and an inspection fee of $150.00.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
b. Multiple dwellings (such as apartment buildings) common
areas accessible to the tenants and/or public, a permit fee of
$25.00 and an inspection fee of $50.00. Permit fee shall be
assessed only once regardless of the number of buildings.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
c. Cyclical inspections of multiple dwelling residential units shall
be done in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code for compliance with Subchapter 3,
Subchapter 4, and this Ordinance. Each multiple dwelling unit
complex shall register annually with the appropriate Local
Enforcing Agency on the forms provided by that agency.
Inspection fees for cyclical inspections shall be $25.00 per
unit. These fees shall be assessed to, and the responsibility of
each complex owner if single ownership or Association for all
multiple owner complex units within the complex. Associations
may use Association rules and/or regulations to assess these
fees to individual unit owners. Complex owners, associations
and/or property management companies shall be responsible
for coordination with owners of residential units for access, or
providing owner information and/or have representative with
keys available to Local Enforcing Agency for contact or entry
purposes. [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
14. Inspections and certificates regarding smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide detectors required for sale, lease or other occupancy of
one and two family dwellings required by P.L. 1991, c. 92 (C.
57:27D-192 et seq.) shall have a fee of $50.00 per dwelling unit
inspected if requested more than 10 business days before change
of occupant. [Added 7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-8; amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
a. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid for any re-inspection required as a
result of a failed inspection under this requirement. [Added
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
b. Inspections requested to be scheduled 4 business days to 10
business days of change of occupant shall have a fee of $75.00.
[Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
c. Inspections requested to be scheduled less than 4 business
days from date of change of occupant shall have a fee of
$125.00. [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
d. A fee of $75.00 shall be paid for any inspection required as a
result of the failure of the party not being present for the first
scheduled time and having to reschedule. [Added 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-14
1:221
§ 102-15. Emergency Action Plans. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No.
87-894; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
15. Inspections and certificates regarding smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide detectors are required for sale, lease or other occupancy
of any residential dwelling units not specified in P.L. 1991, c. 92 (C.
57:27D-192 et seq) and shall have a fee of $50.00 per dwelling unit
inspected if requested more than 10 business days before change
of occupant.
a. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid for any re-inspection required as a
result of a failed inspection under this requirement. [Added
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
b. Inspections requested to be scheduled 4 business days to 10
business days of change of occupant shall have a fee of $75.00.
[Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
c. Inspections requested to be scheduled less than 4 business
days from date of change of occupant shall have a fee of
$125.00. [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
d. A fee of $75.00 shall be paid for any inspection required as a
result of the failure of the party not being present for the first
scheduled time and having to reschedule. [Added 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
EXCEPTION: Use Group R-1, hotels and motels, residential units with
transient occupants.
C. Mall Promotions: A permit shall be required for a display or group of
displays and/or concessions occupying the mall common area if under
the direct control of single promoter who shall also be required to be
present for the inspection of such displays or promotions and will be
responsible for all required corrections, penalties, etc. (Fee $166.00)
EXCEPTION: If the displays and/or concessions are under individual
control each individual shall be responsible for their own permit as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a). [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. General: In addition to those required under N.J.A.C. 5:70 fire safety
evacuation and emergency action plans shall be prepared as set forth
where required by section § 102-15A, in use groups (as defined in the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23) listed below.
[Amended 12-20-04 by Ord. No. 04-21]
1. Occupant loads of 50 or more: All buildings with an occupant load
greater than 50.
2. Use group H: All use group H buildings.
3. Use group F: All use group F buildings.
§ 102-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-15
1:222
§ 102-16. Reporting. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894; amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
It shall be a violation of this code for any person or persons having
knowledge of same to fail to report to the fire department and/or the
appropriate Fire Official the activation of any fire protection system or
device; or to fail to report the occurrence of any fire or attempted arson;
or to fail to report the spill or leakage of any flammable or combustible
liquid or gas or of any hazardous material immediately upon gaining such
knowledge.
§ 102-17. Water Supplies. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894;
amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
4. Use group S: All use group S buildings.
5. Use group E: All use group E buildings.
B. Approval, Distribution: The fire safety evacuation and emergency action
plans shall be approved by the appropriate Fire Official and shall be
distributed by the owner to all tenants and employees. [Amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
C. Evacuation Plan: The evacuation plan shall be conspicuously posted on
every floor and in each tenant space for the occupants use.
D. Maintenance: The fire safety evacuation and emergency action plans
shall be maintained to reflect changes in the use and physical
arrangement of the building.
E. Training: If an emergency action plan assigns employees with specific
responsibilities in areas such as evacuation coordination, firefighting or
material leak and spill handling, the employer shall provide a minimum
of annual training sessions to prepare the employee for such activities.
F. Emergency Action Teams: Emergency action teams and fire brigades
assigned the responsibility of firefighting beyond the incipient stage
with hand extinguishers or assigned the responsibility of containing and
controlling hazardous material or flammable or combustible liquid
leaks and spills shall be approved by the appropriate Fire Official.
[Amended 12-20-04 by Ord. No. 04-21]
In submitting an application for such approval, information shall be
included listing the team members, their qualifications and selection
criteria utilized for membership.
G. Equipment and Training: Members of emergency action teams and fire
brigades as specified in § 102-15F shall be equipped, trained, and
maintained in conformance with U.S.O.S.H.A. regulations as a
minimum. Any equipment utilized shall be compatible with that of the
Fire District within which the facility is located.
§ 102-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-17
1:223
A. Private fire hydrants, connections, and appliances shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with this section, National Fire Protection
Association #24 and the regulations of the East Brunswick Department
of Public Works and Water Resources. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
B. Blocking Fire Hydrants or Connections: No person shall obscure from
view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant
or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire
suppression systems, including fire hydrants or fire department
connections that are located on public or private streets and access
lanes, or on private property. Minimum clearance to any fire hydrant or
connection shall be ten (10) feet in all directions. [Amended 3-27-06
by Ord. No. 06-11]
C. Use of Appliances: A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or
otherwise disturb any fire hydrant except under permit from the East
Brunswick Department of Public Works and Water Resources, or fire
appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of
this code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or
testing purposes, recharging, making necessary repairs, or when
permitted by the appropriate Fire Official. In all situations other than
fire extinguishment, notification and approval of the appropriate Fire
Official shall be required prior to such activity. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or
reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been
accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Official.
Use of hydrants for training by fire departments is exempt from this
section. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
D. Public Water Supply: The appropriate Fire Official shall inform the
Director of Public Works and Water Resources as to the location of any
apparent inadequacies of the water distribution system deemed
detrimental to fire protection in the provision of adequate fire flows and
distribution of hydrants. A fire hydrant shall not be removed from
service until notification to the appropriate Fire Official has been made.
The appropriate Fire Official will cooperate with the appropriate Fire
Chief in this matter to see that reasonable protection is maintained.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
E. Private Yard Systems: All new and existing oil storage plants, lumber
yards, amusement or exhibition parks, educational or institutional
complexes, residential, commercial, or industrial occupancies, or
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, or which have
lot depths greater than 150 feet from a public street or which require
flow delivery points beyond the public water distribution system shall
be provided with properly spaced fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall
be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the appropriate Fire
Official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with
fire protection and other applicable standards. The appropriate Fire
§ 102-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-17
1:224
Official shall designate and approve the number and placement of fire
hydrants with the cooperation of the Fire Departments. The appropriate
Fire Official shall require the installation of sufficient fire hose and
specialized firefighting equipment such as nozzles, deluge sets, foams,
etc. as he shall determine is necessary and shall require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved
requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the appropriate Fire Official.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
F. Fire Hydrants - Local Standards: Sections § 102-17F1 - § 102-17F4 shall
be considered minimum standards for the installation and placement of
public or private fire hydrants in newly constructed areas and shall be
used as a guide in upgrading existing areas already protected by fire
hydrants and water mains. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
1. Public Hydrants: Hydrants in detached single family residential
zones shall be spaced with a hydrant installed at each intersection
and one every 400 feet along the roadway(s) measured along the
roadway edge, or as approved by the appropriate Fire Official. Fire
hydrant placement shall be in accordance with Residential Site
Improvement Standards N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.4.
Hydrants in residential townhouse, condominium, cluster and
multi-family zones shall be spaced with a hydrant at each
intersection and one every 400 feet along the roadway(s) edge,
or as approved by the appropriate Fire Official. Fire hydrant
placement shall be in accordance with Residential Site
Improvement Standards N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.4.
Hydrants in business, commercial, and industrial zones shall be
spaced with a hydrant at each intersection and one every 300 feet
along the roadway(s) edge, or as approved by the appropriate Fire
Official.
2. Private Hydrants: Hydrants installed on private property shall be
located and spaced according to the occupancy and site design
requirements based on firefighting needs with § 102-17F1 utilized
as the MINIMUM standard requirement. The top bonnet of all
private hydrants shall be painted yellow to conform with the East
Brunswick Water Advisory Board standards.
3. Additional Requirements: All hydrants shall be equipped with
outlets of National Standard threads; be located within 24" of a
curb, roadway, fire lane or parking area; be provided with an
individual control valve; and shall be installed in accordance with
the standards of the American Water Works Association and NFPA
#24, the more stringent of the two to govern in any conflicting
areas. All hydrants shall meet the requirements of and be approved
for installation by the East Brunswick Department of Public Works
and Water Resources.
§ 102-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-17
1:225
§ 102-18. General Precautions. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894;
amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-19. Street Obstructions (Private Property). [Added 1-8-88 by
Ord. No. 87-894; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
4. Approval: The appropriate Fire Official shall approve the placement
of all fire hydrants prior to the commencement of the installation.
G. Fire Department Connections: All new fire department connections
shall be placed within 100 feet of a public fire hydrant on the front side
of the building being protected. Existing fire department connections
shall be brought into conformity with this section whenever there is a
change of use in the building or major work is done on the fire
protection systems.
H. Fire Department Connection Signage: All fire department connections
shall be provided with a two (2) foot by two (2) foot red sign with three
(3) inch white reflective letters. The sign shall state "FIRE
DEPARTMENT CONNECTION" and the type of system covered, for
example: AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS, STANDPIPES, etc. [Added
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. Equipment Rooms: No storage of any kind shall be permitted within any
mechanical equipment, electrical, furnace, or boiler room.
B. Barbecue Grills: Propane, natural gas, and charcoal barbecue grills
shall not be located for use within or upon any room or space of a
building, or upon any porch, balcony or any other portion of a building,
or within 5 feet laterally of any building wall or overhang. Barbecue
grills shall not be stored within five (5) feet laterally of any building wall
or overhang.
Exception: One and two family detached owner occupied dwellings.
1. Responsibility: Condominium Associations, Homeowner
Associations, Property Managers, and or Owners of residential
complexes and common areas shall be required to actively pursue
compliance with this requirement as part of their routine control
over such common areas through notices, newsletters, and
enforcement of their own rules and regulations. [Added 3-27-06
by Ord. No. 06-11]
C. Provisions for secondary containment of spills or leaks shall be
provided for all storage tanks, vessels, or containers containing
flammable, combustible, or other hazardous liquids exceeding five (5)
gallons in quantity within any building or on any premises. Containment
structure or device shall hold 115% of the capacity of the tank, vessel,
or container. Containment shall be constructed of materials that are
compatible to and impermeable by the liquid contained within the tank
or container. [Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-19
1:226
§ 102-20. Fire Lanes. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894; amended
7-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-81; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32; 11-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-46; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. Street Obstruction: A person or persons shall not erect, construct,
place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood
or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any private
street within the boundaries of the municipality without the written
consent of the appropriate Fire Official. The word "street" used in this
ordinance shall mean any roadway accessible for vehicular traffic,
including but not limited to, private streets or access lanes within the
boundaries of the municipality. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
B. Prior to the closing of any private street, notification shall be made to
the appropriate Fire Official and the fire company in whose area the
street is located. Such notice shall include why the street is to be
closed, when the street is expected to be closed, and how long such
closing is expected to last. Notification shall also be given upon the reopening
of the street. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. Requirement, designation: Fire lanes shall be designated as follows for
the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus, access for firefighting,
and/or the egress of occupants. [Amended 12-20-04 by Ord. No.
04-21]
1. Where needed: The Fire Official(s) of the local enforcing agencies
may establish fire areas on property devoted to public and private
use, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2(a)3, F-311.1, including,
but not by way of limitation, shopping centers, strip malls, bowling
alleys, drive-in theaters, houses of worship, swimming pools,
offices, warehouses, factories, restaurants, night clubs, etc., and
similar uses.
The number, location, width, length, and markings shall be at
the discretion of the appropriate Fire Official, when the markings
detailed in § 102.20B cannot be strictly complied with.
Consideration is to be given to the size, type and location of the
building or buildings, the number of persons using and occupying
the premises, existing means of egress and ingress, the total area
of the property including the size of parking lot or lots, and all other
relevant factors.
2. Concurrent Jurisdiction: The Township Division of Police shall have
the concurrent jurisdiction with the Local Enforcement Agencies to
enforce the provisions of this section for the designated fire lanes
approved by the Township Council. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-32; 12-20-04 by Ord. No. 04-21]
§ 102-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-20
1:227
3. Existing Fire Lanes: Any and all fire lanes created by prior
ordinance are hereby continued in effect and when repairs or
modifications are made to such fire lanes, they shall be brought
into conformity with this code, as much as shall be practical in the
appropriate Fire Official's judgement. The standard for exercise of
said judgment shall conform to those contained in section 1 above.
[Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32]
B. Markings: The owner shall, within thirty (30) days of being given a
notice to do so by the Fire Official, mark the lane(s) as follows
[Amended 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-46]:
1. Signs, with minimum dimensions of 12" x 18", constructed of metal
and with raised red letters a minimum of two (2) inches in size on a
white background shall be posted at a level of at least seven (7) feet
above grade, indicating "NO PARKING ANY TIME", "PARKING IN
DESIGNATED STALLS ONLY", or "NO STOPPING OR STANDING",
at the Fire Official's discretion after giving due consideration to the
needs of the fire service and the public. Immediately under these
signs shall be another sign, with minimum dimensions of 12" x 6",
saying "FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO ON-STREET PARKING".
Spacing of signs shall be even with a minimum of one (1) sign for
every one hundred (100) feet of fire lane or part thereof, or as
ordered by the appropriate Fire Official. All signs and markings
must be unobstructed and visible for a distance of at least one
hundred (100) feet when viewed from a position approximately five
(5) feet above the ground while in the fire lane. [Amended
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32; 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-46]
2. The area of a fire lane on improved areas shall be delineated along
its entire length with yellow lines eighteen (18) inches in width.
Between the yellow lines shall be marked "NO PARKING ANY
TIME" in yellow letters eighteen (18) inches in height. The number
of times this wording is to be repeated shall be at the discretion of
the appropriate Fire Official, with the recommended spacing to be
at one hundred (100) foot intervals and spaced so as to be between
and alternate with the metal signs required above. If the
designated fire lane abuts a curb, the curbing shall be yellow in
color where it abuts the fire lane. [Amended 7-22-91 by Ord. No.
91-81; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32]
3. Definitions: For the purposes of fire lane enforcement, the
following terms are defined [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32;
amended 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-46; 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
FIRE AREA — Shall mean the same as FIRE LANE.
FIRE LANE — Shall mean an area necessary to provide safety
for the public or to provide proper access for fire department
operations in the event of an emergency.
§ 102-20 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-20
1:228
NO ON-STREET PARKING — Shall mean that a vehicle may not be
parked along the street unless loading or unloading passengers, or
materials with a time limit of three (3) minutes.[Added 11-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-46]
NO PARKING ANY TIME — Shall mean that a vehicle may not
be parked within the designated area unless loading or unloading
passengers, or materials with a time limit of three (3)
minutes.[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
NO STOPPING OR STANDING — Shall mean that no vehicle may
be stopped or standing within the designated zone whether or not
attended or unattended, with or without the motor running, or
brakes set.
PARKING IN DESIGNATED STALLS ONLY — Shall mean that a
vehicle may only be parked within an area so designated for
parking.[Added 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-46]
C. Size: Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of eighteen (18)
feet in width or as approved by the appropriate Fire Official. Fire lanes
for egress of occupants shall be a minimum of at least the width of the
exit way served. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32]
D. Notification: Once a fire lane has been designated by the appropriate
Fire Official, approved as provided above and properly marked by the
owner of the premises, the appropriate Fire Official shall notify the
Police Department, Construction Code Agency and Municipal Court
Administrator in writing of the existence and location of the designated
Fire Lane(s). [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32; 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
E. Unpaved Areas: Unpaved fire lanes installed on public or private
property shall comply with the "Fire Lane Typical Details" installation
methods blueprint available from the East Brunswick Engineering
Department and be approved by the appropriate Fire Official. Selection
of a method to be used as per the typical details shall be subject to the
approval of the appropriate Fire Official. Signs and markings shall be
provided as required by the appropriate Fire Official and this code.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
F. Restricted Areas: Gates, chains or other approved methods utilized to
prevent unauthorized access to fire lanes shall be approved by the
appropriate Fire Official prior to installation, provided such restrictions
will not impede access by firefighting apparatus. The appropriate Fire
Official shall determine whether any changes or deviations from the
appropriate methods may be utilized. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-32; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
G. Installation, Maintenance: Fire lanes shall be installed and maintained
by the owner of the premises or a designee in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance. Fire lanes in existence prior to the
§ 102-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-20
1:229
enactment of this ordinance shall be required to conform to the
provisions herein at the discretion of the appropriate Fire Official. Fire
Lanes must be accessible for fire apparatus use at all time. [Amended
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
H. Parking, standing and obstruction prohibited [Amended 10-27-97 by
Ord. No. 97-32]:
1. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of snow and
obstructions, including vehicles, at all times. [Amended 10-27-97
by Ord. No. 97-32]
2. The appropriate Fire Official, his designee, or a police officer of the
Township of East Brunswick shall have the authority to remove or
have removed such obstructions or vehicles as may violate Section
102-20.H1 above, at the expense of the owner of the premises in
the case of obstructions or at the expense of the owner of the
vehicle. The presumption of ownership may be overcome by proof
furnished to the satisfaction of the Municipal Court or Superior
Court, Law Division, that some other person was the actual
offender. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32]
3. It shall be a separate violation of this code for any driver or
operator of any motor vehicle to fail to present a drivers license
and/or vehicle registration upon demand of any person authorized
to enforce this ordinance when requested as part of the
enforcement procedure. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32]
I. Notice of Violation: The appropriate Fire Official(s) or Fire Inspectors
may complete a Municipal Summons, or a Notice of Violations, and said
summons or Notice of Violations shall be issued to all offenders by
personally serving same upon any offender, or, if the offender is not
attendant to the vehicles, shall leave the notice under the windshield
wiper or otherwise attached to the vehicle in a manner reasonably
calculated to ensure that the offender received said notice upon his or
her return to the vehicle. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32;
amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
J. This Ordinance shall supersede any and all provisions of any other
ordinance promulgated for the enforcement of parking in fire lanes.
Enforcement shall only be done by personnel from either the
Department of Public Safety or the appropriate Local Enforcement
Agencies. Personnel enforcing these provisions shall be either
uniformed or carry appropriate identification. [Added 10-27-97 by
Ord. No. 97-32]
K. Exception of appeal procedure: Sections 102-20.H1 through 102-20H3
above shall be exceptions to the appeal procedures in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.11
and therefore, shall not be considered appealable under that section.
[Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-32; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
§ 102-20 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-21
1:230
§ 102-21. Construction Activities. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No.
87-894; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. General: All construction requiring a construction permit under N.J.A.C.
5:23, the Uniform Construction Code, shall comply with that code and
the Fire Prevention Code regarding site fire safety. The term
construction activities as used in this section shall refer to those
construction activities which require a permit under the Uniform
Construction Code.
B. Refuse Containers: All active construction sites and locations shall be
provided with non-combustible refuse container(s) in such numbers as
shall be necessary to contain all combustible refuse generated by the
construction activities.
All combustible refuse, rubbish and debris shall be cleaned up and
deposited in the container(s) on a daily basis. Refuse container(s) shall
be a minimum of twenty (20) feet away from any building, structure, lot
line or combustible material storage location.
C. Liquids and Gases: Flammable or combustible liquids and gases shall
be stored, handled, and/or used in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the latest standards of the
National Fire Protection Association.
D. Occupied Buildings: When construction activities take place in
occupied buildings special fire safety precautions shall be taken as
required by the appropriate Fire Official in accordance with the Fire
Prevention Code. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
E. Fire Protection Equipment: When fire suppression, detection or alarm
systems or devices are affected by construction activities, their down
time shall be kept to a minimum. When possible, isolation of system
components shall occur to ensure operation in unaffected areas.
Whenever fire protection systems or devices are removed from service,
the appropriate Fire Official is to be notified and a fire watch shall be
posted if deemed necessary by the appropriate Fire Official. When the
area affected is of a high hazard use, normal operations and occupancy
of the area may be required to be suspended by the appropriate Fire
Official until protection is restored. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-11]
F. Access: Temporary all-weather surface access roads, gravel or
equivalent, capable of supporting a thirty (30) ton emergency vehicle
shall be provided at all times for fire department vehicular access to all
structures under construction and storage of combustible construction
materials. Access to such locations shall be within one hundred (100)
unobstructed feet at all times.
Every dead-end roadway more than three hundred (300) feet in length
shall be provided at the closed end with a temporary turn around
§ 102-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-21
1:231
§ 102-22. Blocking of Hydrants and Fire Dept. Connections. [Added
1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-23. Open Burning. [Added 1-8-88 by Ord. No. 87-894;
amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
Open Burning for any reason is hereby prohibited except where permits
have been obtained from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Forest Fire Service, and the appropriate Local
Enforcing Agency Fire Official. Open burning is defined as the burning
of any material, in anything other than an approved device, or in an
uncontained manner. Upon the recommendation of the appropriate Fire
acceptable to the appropriate Fire Official. [Amended 3-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-11]
G. Water Supply: The fire protection water supply system, including
hydrants shown on the approved site plan, shall be installed and in
service prior to placing combustible building materials on the project
site or utilizing them in the construction of buildings or structures. If
phased construction is approved, coordinated phased installation of the
fire protection water system shall be permitted as approved by the
appropriate Fire Official with the following subsections as a minimum
requirement. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
1. One and Two Family Dwellings: In one and two family dwelling
developments, fire hydrant(s) shall be within three hundred (300)
feet of combustible construction material and accessible by
roadways as required in subsection F of this section.
2. Multi-Family Dwellings: In multi-family apartment, condominium
and townhouse development(s), fire hydrants shall be within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of combustible construction material and
accessible by roadways as required by subsection F of this section.
3. Industrial, Commercial and Business Sites: Industrial, commercial,
and business development sites shall be provided with fire hydrants
as required by the appropriate Fire Official on a case by case basis,
taking into consideration the planned construction activities and
site design, with the minimum requirement being the installation of
any required public water main(s) and/or fire hydrant(s) prior to
the introduction of combustible materials to the site. [Amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct, or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection
for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire
hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or
private streets and access lanes, or on private property. Minimum
clearance to any fire hydrant or connection shall be ten (10) feet in all
directions.
§ 102-21 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-23
1:232
Official and the approval of the Director of Public Safety, the local fire
departments may use open burning for training purposes only.
§ 102-24. Local Enforcing Agency for Fire District #1. [Added
12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-74; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 102-25. Buildings - Uniform System for Numbering. [Added
2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-5; 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
A. In accordance with the Uniform Fire Safety Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq. and the
Regulations for Fire Code Enforcement, N.J.A.C. 5:71-1.1 et seq., the
East Brunswick Township Council hereby designates the Fire
Commissioners of East Brunswick Township Fire District #1 as the
local enforcing agency within the limits of Fire District #1. This
designation shall be effective July 1, 1991. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
B. The Fire Official and such fire inspectors as may be necessary to
enforce the Uniform Fire Code shall be appointed by the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District #1. The Fire Commissioners of District
#1 shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required
by the Uniform Fire Code. All fees required for periodic inspections
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule incorporated in Chapter
102 of the East Brunswick Code. All Sections of Chapter 102 conflicting
with this ordinance with regard to Fire District #1 are hereby amended
accordingly.
C. The Commissioners of Fire District #1 shall be delegated the power and
authority to adopt rules and regulations by resolution to effectuate the
purposes of this ordinance, provided that no such resolution shall
conflict herewith. Whenever reference is made herein to the Fire
Commissioners of District #1, this is intended to mean the
Commissioners of Fire District #1.
A. Definitions:
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter 102-25:
BUILDING NUMBER — a number designation existent or assigned
to a dwelling unit, commercial property, or industrial building in the
Township.
AUXILIARY BUILDING NUMBER — A number designation for a cluster
of units sharing common walls within a subdivision or industrial
building or corporate complex, subdivided in order to accommodate
more than one (1) tenant.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — The Director of Planning and Engineering
or the Director of Public Safety, or the Fire Official of the appropriate
Local Enforcing Agency whichever is appropriate in accordance with
section B or section J of this Chapter 102-25.
§ 102-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-25
1:233
B. Uniform System for Building Numbering.
1. The Director of Planning and Engineering shall prepare, with the
concurrence of the Director of Public Safety, a property numbering
plan and program for the Township of East Brunswick.
2. The Director of Planning and Engineering is empowered to assign
building numbers and auxiliary building numbers for all existing
properties and all properties henceforth constructed in the
Township following the effective date of this Ordinance and to
assign auxiliary building numbers for those existing properties
without said numbers and to re-number properties within the
Township where deemed to be in the best interest of public safety.
C. Building Number Signs.
All required building number signs shall be displayed in a prominent
and legible manner, so as to be highly visible from said public or private
street on which the building fronts.
D. Auxiliary Building Number Signs.
Auxiliary building number signs shall be provided where deemed
necessary by the Director of Planning and Engineering or the Fire
Official of the appropriate Local Enforcing Agency. Said signs shall be
displayed along the public or private street from which access is gained
to the building. Said signs shall be highly visible from said public or
private street.
E. Multiple Dwelling Number Signs.
Building number and auxiliary building number signs required in
multiple dwelling projects, corporate parks and similar complex
developments, shall be installed in uniform locations, to the extent
possible.
F. Display of Signs.
Building number signs and auxiliary building number signs shall be
mounted on the building, except in those cases where it is deemed
necessary to post signs at curbside adjacent to the building entrance.
The Township shall reserve the right to require posting of signs at
both curbside and on the building where deemed necessary in the best
interest of public safety. Numbers may be placed on curbside mailboxes
provided they appear on each side of the mailbox and are at least two
(2") inches in height. All other numbers must be a least four (4") inches
in height and must be clearly visible from the street. If numbers are
painted, the color must contrast with the color of surrounding surfaces.
Numbers may be on house doors or screen doors if they are also on
another part of the building.
1. Each structure shall have one address in association with the
roadway it is accessed by.
§ 102-25 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-25
1:234
2. Unit subdivisions within a structure shall have auxiliary (suite)
numbers in association with the main structure address.
a) Residential - Building number with unit numbers; 101, 102,
103, 104, 201, 202, 203, 204, etc.
b) Commercial - Building number with suite numbers; 400
Anyplace Court, suite 1, suite 2, suite 3, or suite A, Suite B,
suite C, etc.
3. Looped roadways, courts, and private development addresses shall
be assigned with the ascending numbers running in the same
general direction as the road from which it is accessed or parallel
streets whenever possible.
4. Addresses of structures opposing each other along a roadway shall
be near each other in sequence even if some numbers must be
dropped.
5. All structures shall post the designated address on the building,
preferably over the main entrance when clearly visible from the
roadway the building faces on, or on a mailbox or driveway
entrance address sign.
6. Each unit subdivision shall prominently post the units address
alongside or immediately above the units entrance. For units with
doors that are always in the closed position the unit address may be
posted on the door.
7. Driveway entrance address signs shall be posted in addition to
those on the building when necessarily for visibility from the
roadway; clear delineation of the entrance; and when access to a
particular unit is limited to one of several driveway entrances.
8. Multi-tenant buildings shall have all doors to the exterior posted
with the individual unit address (front, rear, and sides), as well as
the business name on the sides and rear for other than residential
buildings.
9. All address designations and postings shall be determined in the
interest of the public safety responders quickly locating a building
or individual unit under emergency response conditions.
G. Buildings Having Multiple Entrances.
All buildings having multiple entrances shall have auxiliary signs posted
on the buildings, which signs shall bear a letter or number identifying
the entire building. Each dwelling unit in the building shall have its own
identifying number or letter. All signs must be clearly visible from the
street.
H. Maintenance.
§ 102-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-25
1:235
§ 102-26. Local Enforcing Agency for Fire District #2. [Added
12-14-98 by Ord. No. 98-30; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11;
3-18-13 by Ord. No. 13-05]
Building number signs and auxiliary number signs as required by this
article shall be periodically maintained as needed to provide continued
high visibility. The property owner shall be responsible for said
maintenance.
I. Notification of Postal Authorities.
The Director of Planning and Engineering shall be responsible for
providing a copy of written notification establishing building numbers
or auxiliary building numbers to the U.S. Post Master responsible for
the areas in which property is located.
J. Enforcement. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
1. Any owner, agency, or a person or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a penalty to be
determined by the appropriate Fire Official. The effective date of
the Enforcement provisions set forth in this Section shall be twelve
(12) months for existing structures and twenty (20) days from the
passage of this amendment for new structures.
2. The Fire Official of the appropriate Local Enforcing Agency shall be
responsible to enforce this article as an amendment to N.J.A.C. 5:70
et seq., and penalties may be assessed as provided in the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 3-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-11]
3. The maximum penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be $1,000.00.
4. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this
chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
5. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state
an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all may be
appropriate for a particular case or violation.
A. In accordance with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., and the
Regulations for Fire Code Enforcement, N.J.A.C. 5:18A-1.1 et seq., the
East Brunswick Township Council hereby designates the Fire
Commissioners of East Brunswick Township Fire District #2 as the
Local Enforcing Agency within the limits of Fire District #2. [Amended
3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11; 3-18-13 by Ord. No. 13-05]
§ 102-25 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-26
1:236
§ 102-27. Local Enforcing Agency for Fire District #3. [Added
12-14-98 by Ord. No. 98-31; amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11;
3-18-13 by Ord. No. 13-05]
B. The Fire Commissioners of Fire District #2 shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code. All
fees required for periodic inspections shall be in accordance with the
fee schedule incorporated and amended from time to time in Chapter
102 of the East Brunswick Code. All sections of Chapter 102 conflicting
with this ordinance with regard to Fire District #2 are hereby amended
accordingly.
C. The Commissioners of Fire District #2 shall be delegated the power and
authority to adopt rules and regulations by resolution to effectuate the
purposes of this ordinance, provided that no such resolution shall
conflict herewith. Whenever reference is made herein to the Fire
Commissioners of District #2, this is intended to mean the
Commissioners of Fire District #2.
A. In accordance with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., and the
Regulations for Fire Code Enforcement, N.J.A.C. 5:18A-1.1 et seq., the
East Brunswick Township Council hereby designates the Fire
Commissioners of East Brunswick Township Fire District #1 as the
Local Enforcing Agency within the limits of Fire District #3. In
accordance with this designation, the Commissioners of Fire District #3
shall discontinue their Interlocal Agreement with the Commissioners of
Fire District #2 to provide all services of the LEA, and shall enter into a
Shared Services Agreement as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq.
with Fire District #1, pursuant to which Fire District #1 shall provide
the services of the LEA. The Commissioners of Fire District #3 retain
the right to maintain, discontinue, or modify the Shared Services
Agreement with the Commissioners of Fire District #1 at any time.
[Amended 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11; 3-18-13 by Ord. No. 13-05]
B. The Fire Commissioners of Fire District #1 shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code. All
fees required for periodic inspections shall be in accordance with the
fee schedule incorporated and amended from time to time in Chapter
102 of the East Brunswick Code. All sections of Chapter 102 that
conflict with this ordinance with regard to Fire District #1 are hereby
amended accordingly. [Amended 3-18-13 by Ord. No. 13-05]
C. The Commissioners of Fire District #3 shall be delegated the power and
authority to adopt rules and regulations by resolution to effectuate the
purposes of this ordinance, provided that no such resolution shall
conflict herewith. Whenever reference is made herein to the Fire
Commissioners of District #3 this is intended to mean the
Commissioners of Fire District #3.
§ 102-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-28
1:237
§ 102-28. Fire Watch and Fire Department Fire Safety Stand-by.
[Added 3-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-11]
Editor's Note: The Appendix to Local Amendments Table is included
as an attachment to this chapter.
A. Whenever the appropriate Fire Marshal shall determine that on-site fire
inspector(s) or firefighting personnel shall be required for fire watch as
a result of fire protection system failure or deficiencies, or fire safety at
any occupancy or event to insure the safety of the public or emergency
responders, the owner or occupant responsible shall obtain a permit for
the use or event.
1. The Fire Marshal shall determine the number of inspectors and/or
firefighting personnel required.
2. The Fire Marshal shall determine the hours that the fire
inspector(s) and/or firefighting personnel will be on duty.
3. The permit fee shall cover the expenses incurred by the Local
Enforcing Agency.
4. The fee for the permit shall include:
a. Compensation for fire inspector(s) at $25.00 per hour Monday
through Friday 8:00 AM to 4:00 PM, $37.50 per hour for
Holidays, Saturdays, Sundays, and from 4:00 PM to 8:00 AM
weekdays.
b. The rate for use of vehicles shall be $25.00 per hour.
c. Reimbursement rates for other related services, equipment, or
expenses shall be provided to the owner by the Fire Marshal
prior to the scheduled use or event.
5. Fire Marshal or designee(s) shall have the right of access to the
premises and area surrounding it without interference from the
property owner.
6. Failure to secure a permit shall be punishable by a penalty equal to
amount of the permit plus $100.00 for the first offense, amount of
the permit plus $250.00 for the second offense, amount of the
permit plus $500.00 for the third and each subsequent offense.
7. Permit shall be required for each separate event or date of the
activity requiring such a permit.
8. Any occupancy or event requiring fire apparatus and fire fighting
personnel on site to insure the safety of the public and/or other
occupants, and/or to insure the safety of any building and/or
exposures shall reimburse the appropriate fire district. Fees shall
be $150.00 per required fire apparatus unit per occurrence and
$20.00 per hour per firefighter manning apparatus.
§ 102-28 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 102-28
1:238
Chapter 107
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
§ 107-1. Standard code adopted by reference.
A Code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; and authorizing inspection of vending machines and
operations connected therewith, is hereby established pursuant to N.J.R.S.
26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 107-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)."
§ 107-3. Copies of Code on File.
Three (3) copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk
and will remain on file there for use and examination by the public.
§ 107-4. Required permits and licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for anybody corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to:
A. Engage in the operation of one (1) or more machines or devices offered
for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by any
other means dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk
or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Department of Health and Welfare to do so and without
complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by
the Township Council.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality, one (1) or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by any other means
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Department of Health and
Welfare and without complying with any and all of the provisions of the
§ 102-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-4
1:239
§ 107-5. Permit and license fees; expiration; purpose of fee.
[Amended 8-12-68 by Ord. No. 68-112; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-34]
§ 107-6. Application and issuance procedure; exempt machines.
[Amended 1-22-68 by Ord. No. 68-97-A; 8-12-68 by Ord. No. 68-112]
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 107-5 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Food and
Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or
amended by the Township Council. Such permits and licenses are not
transferable. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained
the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as
adopted by the Township of East Brunswick, shall apply to vending
machines which dispense milk and milk products, but shall not apply to
vending machines which dispense soft drinks or similar beverages in sealed
bottles, cans or similar containers and penny gumball machines.
Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as
adopted or amended by the Township Council.
A. The annual fee for any license required by § 107-4 shall be as follows:
(1) Milk vending machines: fifty dollars ($50.) per machine.
(2) All other vending machines involving heating, refrigeration or
freezing equipment: fifty dollars ($50.) for the first machine
operated by each person, firm or corporation at each location and
ten dollars ($10.) for each additional machine operated by the same
person, firm or corporation at the same location. [Amended
1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV]
(3) All other vending machines requiring a permit or license under this
chapter: fifty dollars ($50.) for the first machine operated by each
person, firm or corporation at each location and ten dollars ($10.)
for each additional machine operated by the same person, firm or
corporation at the same location. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
7-1-VV]
B. The license fee referred to above shall include the fee for any permit or
permits required under the terms of this chapter and the code adopted
herein.
C. All permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall
expire on the 30th day of June of each year.
D. Permits and license fees shall be paid to the Township of East
Brunswick and are levied for the purpose of covering the cost of
regulation and control.
§ 107-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 107-7
1:240
§ 107-7. Suspension, revocation and reinstatement of license.
Permits and licenses issued under the authority of this chapter may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Department of Health and Welfare
pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code
of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by the Township Council.
§ 107-8. Nonapplicability.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
Chapter 109
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 107-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-8
1:241

ARTICLE I
Retail Establishments
[Adopted 3-28-66 as Ord. No. 66-45]
§ 109-1. Adoption of standard code by reference.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violation is hereby established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69 to 3-69.6. A copy
of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion
of the text herein.
§ 109-2. Title of code.
A code established and adopted by this Article shall be commonly known as
the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)."
§ 109-3. Copies of code on file.
Three (3) copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965) have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and will
remain on file there for use and examination by the public.
§ 109-4. License required for employees. [Amended 6-24-74 by Ord.
No. 74-14-J]
A. Commencing July 1, 1974, no person responsible for the preparation or
handling of potentially hazardous food or responsible for the cleaning of
utensils and equipment, including management personnel directly
responsible for overall day-to-day operations, shall be permitted to
work in a retail food establishment unless he or she shall have applied
for a license, on or before July 1 of the licensing year, and shall have
completed within the licensing year a four-hour training course in "Safe
Food Preparation, Storage and Service Practices," to be offered by the
Township of East Brunswick, or its equivalent, as determined by the
Director of Health, Environment and Welfare. Persons who have
completed the course for the first licensing year are required to take a
two-hour course in each succeeding year, provided that new material is
available. [Amended 10-29-74 by Ord. No. 74-14-K; 3-10-75 by
Ord. No. 75-122-H]
B. Those persons employed subsequent to July 1, 1974, shall within one (1)
month from the date of their employment register for the above-named
course of instruction. [Amended 10-29-74 by Ord. No. 74-14-K]
C. "Potentially hazardous food" shall mean any perishable food which
consists in whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat,
poultry, fish, shellfish or other ingredients capable of supporting rapid
and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
D. A fee of two dollars ($2.) shall be charged to each person registering for
the four-hour training course and two dollars ($2.) for the two-hour
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-4
1:243
§ 109-5. Care of food.
§ 109-6. Fees. [Amended 1-27-69 by Ord. No. 69-14-B; 12-23-74 by
Ord. No. 74-122-G; 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 5-8-89 by Ord. No.
89-19; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-34]
refresher course. [Amended 3-10-75 by Ord. No. 75-122-H;
1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV]
A. All licensees who sell or deliver or display for sale food and produce
from vehicles which are wholly or partly open on any side shall at all
times keep the food and produce completely screened or covered with
satisfactory materials in order to prevent flies or other insects from
alighting around or upon any merchandise.
B. All licensees selling, delivering or displaying for sale seafood, meats,
poultry or dairy products shall transport them only in refrigerated
vehicles. The products shall remain in the refrigerated portion of the
vehicle until the time of sale or delivery. The refrigerated portion of the
vehicle, while in use, shall be maintained at a temperature low enough
to completely safeguard all of the products from a health and sanitary
standpoint.
C. No licensee shall at any time permit any waste products, materials or
parts of produce or other merchandise to remain in or upon any street,
roadway, curb or walk, but shall remove any debris that may have fallen
from his vehicle and place it immediately in leakproof metal containers.
D. All food or produce sold by any licensee shall at the time of delivery be
placed in bags or other suitable containers when it is handed to the
customer.
E. No licensee shall permit any debris, waste material, rotting produce or
similar matter to remain in or upon his vehicle unless it is contained in a
leakproof metal container having a properly fitted metal cover.
F. Before a licensee selling food or produce uses a vehicle in connection
with his business, the vehicle shall be submitted to the Director of
Health, Environment and Welfare for inspection and shall be approved
relative to compliance with this section. Whenever requested during
the term of the license, the licensee shall submit his vehicle for
reasonable reinspection. No vehicle shall be used by a licensee unless it
has been approved for use by the Director of Health, Environment and
Welfare. A certificate of written approval shall remain in the vehicle at
all times and shall be shown by the operator to any member of the
Division of Police or any other official of the township who may request
to see it.
A. The annual fee for a license for an establishment which does not
process food shall be fifty dollars ($50.).
§ 109-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-6
1:244
B. The annual fee for an establishment which process food shall be as set
forth in the schedule below:
RETAIL FOOD STORES BY SQUARE FOOTAGE
Over 10,001 Sq. Ft. $500.00 (8 hours)*
5,001 to 10,000 Sq. Ft. $400.00 (6 hours)
1,001 to 5,000 Sq. Ft. $325.00 (4 hours)
0 to 1,000 Sq. Ft. $250.00
*These are the approximate hours needs annually providing there are
no necessary re-inspections. Burdened salary is estimated at $35.00 an
hour.
RESTAURANTS BY SEATING CAPACITY
100 or over $350.00 (8 hours)
50 to 99 $250.00 (5 hours)
1 to 49 $150.00 (4 hours)
Miscellaneous-
Convenience Store, Camps,
Schools, Bar, Tavern, etc.
$150.00 (3 hours)
OTHER
Mobile Truck/Ice Cream
Truck
$150.00 (3 hours)
Catering Truck $150.00 (3 hours)
Re-Inspections $100.00 (1.5 hours)
(Fee for each re-inspection after being placed on conditional or
unsatisfactory)
(1) For the purposes of this subsection "process" shall include the
following operations, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive:
(a) Cooking, baking or frying food for consumption on or off the
premises.
(b) Preparing sandwiches or salads.
(c) Smoking, curing, pickling or otherwise preparing raw meat or
fish for consumption or for further processing.
(d) Prepacking of preserved or raw meats.
(e) The manufacture of frozen desserts, candy, sausages and
cheese.
(f) The roasting of meats, poultry, nuts and coffee or other beans.
§ 109-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-6
1:245
§ 109-7. Term of license.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall expire, annually, on
June 30 of each year. Licenses issued between January 1 and June 30 may
be obtained at half the usual fee.
§ 109-8. Inspections and penalties. [Added 3-24-75 by Ord. No.
75-14-M; amended 4-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-240]
(g) Catering and preparation of box lunches.
(2) The manufacturing or processing of fresh milk or cream shall not
be considered food processing for the purposes of this subsection.
C. There shall be an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.) for each permit or
renewal of an existing permit for each itinerant retail food-handling
vehicle. Payment of the fee provided for in this subsection shall not
entitle the vendor to a license required under Chapter 135, Article III,
of this Code, but a separate application and fee shall be made under
that Article.
D. The above annual license fees are based on administrative costs, plus
the maximum of two (2) inspections per year required of establishments
that continue to remain in a satisfactory condition. Those
establishments requiring more than two (2) inspections per year as a
result of citizen complaints which are deemed by the Director of Health
to be legitimate or reinspections needed to obtain compliance will be
subject to a reinspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.) for each
such reinspection.
E. Temporary License for Food Vendors at Middlesex County Fair. All food
vendors at the Middlesex County Fair shall be required to obtain a
license from East Brunswick Township at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.) for
1 to 2 days and one hundred dollars ($100.) for 3 days or greater.
[Added 9-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-392]
A. The Director of the Department of Health, Environment and Welfare or
his representative shall have the power to conduct all inspections under
this Article.
B. The Director of Health, Environment and Welfare, in his discretion,
instead of prosecuting a licensee for violations of the State Sanitary
Code, may cause an order to be served on such person commanding
him to discontinue or abate the violation or to make such improvement
as may be necessary to abate the violation within a reasonable time.
The person receiving the order shall have the right to be heard either in
person or by attorney by the Director of Health Environment and
Welfare. [Amended 4-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-240]
§ 109-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-8
1:246
ARTICLE II
Wholesale Establishments
[Adopted 9-13-71 as Ord. No. 71-14-F]
§ 109-9. Establishments subject to Article.
Wholesale food establishments refer to:
§ 109-10. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to conduct, manage or
operate a wholesale food establishment without a license first having been
issued by the Director of Health, Environment and Welfare. The
requirement of such a license does not apply, however, to the manufacture
of alcoholic beverages.
§ 109-11. Type of establishment to be specified on license.
Every wholesale food establishment license shall specify the type of
establishment for which it is issued.
§ 109-12. Fee.
There shall be an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.) for each license for a
wholesale food establishment.
§ 109-13. Term of license.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall expire, annually, on
June 30 of each year. Licenses issued between January 1 and June 30 may
be obtained at half the usual fee.
A. Establishments which manufacture food for sale or which sell food
otherwise than directly to the consumer.
B. Establishments which manufacture food to be distributed, resold,
repackaged or further processed before direct sale.
C. Establishments operated in conjunction with one (1) or more retail
stores or outlets located at other premises and where food is
manufactured, held or stored for distribution to such stores or outlets,
such as commissaries.
D. Establishments which prepare, process or otherwise produce
substances which are used in the manufacture of food, including but not
limited to spices, condiments, additives, flavors, thickeners, aromatics,
preservatives, stabilizers, etc.
E. Establishments which hold, distribute and resell food or food products
to retail establishments, such as warehouses, depots, etc.
§ 109-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-13
1:247

ARTICLE III
Reporting of Contaminated Food
[Adopted 12-27-67 as Ord. No. 67-99]
§ 109-14. Reporting required.
Any person knowing of any thing being offered for sale as food for human
consumption which he has reason to believe is spoiled, contaminated or
otherwise unfit for human consumption shall immediately report such fact
to the Department of Health, Environment and Welfare or to one of its
officers or inspectors.
§ 109-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-14
1:249

ARTICLE IV
Food Packaging
[Adopted 4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-32]; [Amended 8-26-91 by Ord. No.
91-88]
§ 109-15. Food Packaging.
The East Brunswick Township Council finds that discarded packaging of
food is a significant source of litter and municipal waste disposal. The
chemical composition and ability of a substance to degrade are useful
criteria in establishing a policy of solid waste and litter control. Polystyrene
foam is not biodegradable. Retail food establishments in East Brunswick
are the points of origin for polystyrene foam. Their use of polystyrene
foam poses a threat to the environment by taking up landfill space and
by the possible introduction of carbon dioxide and ash when completely
combusted. There is no economically viable market for recycling
polystyrene foam. Other plastic and/or paper products are available as
substitutes. Plastics constitute 6% of all roadside litter, according to a
study commissioned by the Federal Highway Commission. The disposal of
polystyrene foam at sea has a very serious negative effect on marine life.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are chemical compounds used as an expansion
agent in polystyrene foam food service products. When released into the
atmosphere, CFCs rise to the stratosphere where they break down and
release chlorine. The chlorine then acts to reduce the stratospheric ozone
layer causing an increase in the amount of ultraviolet radiation reaching
the earth. The Township Council, by enacting this ordinance, is seeking to
reduce the non-recyclable, non-degradable food packaging products and the
Council is also seeking to reduce the amount of litter adversely affecting the
air, land and waters of the Township of East Brunswick.
This ordinance will serve the public interest by reducing the quantity of nonbiodegradable
waste in landfills serving East Brunswick. A portion of any
substitute packaging will be composed of products that are biodegradable
in whole or in part.
Polystyrene foam packaging takes up more space in landfills than many
other packaging materials, because of the comparatively low density of
Polystyrene foam and its present popularity as a packaging material. Siting
and developing landfills is an increasingly expensive undertaking, and these
costs place an economic burden on the residents or the Township of East
Brunswick, Maximizing the operating life of landfill facilities therefore
promotes the public interest, and this interest will be served by reducing
the amount of Polystyrene foam deposited in landfills.
The Council recognizes that other commonly used food packaging materials
are also non-biodegradable and contribute to litter and landfill problems;
nevertheless, the Council finds that it is appropriate to regulate Polystyrene
foam food packaging while not regulating other types of food packaging at
this time for the following reasons:
§ 109-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-15
1:251
§ 109-16. Definitions. [Amended 8-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-88]
A. To minimize disruption in the food services industry, the Council should
avoid banning a wide range of packaging materials at one time. It might
be appropriate to ban other packaging materials in the future, but an
incremental approach to eliminating undesirable packaging materials
will cause less disruption and allow the Township of East Brunswick to
handle enforcement proceedings in more manageable stages.
B. Polystyrene foam is the least dense commonly used food packaging
material, and therefore is more wasteful of landfill space than any other
category of food packaging material. It is therefore appropriate to start
with Polystyrene foam as the Township of East Brunswick begins to
address the issues of litter and inappropriate utilization of landfill
space.
C. Ingestion of Polystyrene foam particles has been identified as a hazard
to wildlife, while this problem has not been associated with other food
packaging materials.
a. "Biodegradable Packaging" shall mean packaging made of cellulose
based substances or other substances which are capable of being
readily attacked, decomposed, assimilated, and/or otherwise
completely oxidized or broken down into its constituent parts by
bacteria, natural biological organisms, carbonaceous soil material,
water, carbon dioxide; or in the alternative capable of otherwise
degrading when exposed to ultraviolet light or other natural processes
beginning within a twelve month period from the date of manufacture
or exposure to the environment.
b. "Packaging" shall mean all food-related wrappings including but not
limited to bags, sacks, wrappings, containers, bowls, plates, trays,
cartons, cups or drinking utensils intended for use within the Township
of East Brunswick.
c. "Prepared food" means food or beverages which are served on the
vendor's premises without preparation, or are prepared on the vendor's
premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, brewing, freezing or
squeezing. "Prepared food" does not include any raw uncooked meat,
fish, poultry or eggs. Prepared food may be eaten either on or off
premises. [Amended 8-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-88]
d. "Retail Food Vendor" shall mean all sales outlets, stores, shops,
restaurants, or other places of business located within the Township of
East Brunswick, which receive more than twenty (20%) percent of their
revenues through the sales or conveyances of foods directly to the
ultimate consumer, which foods are predominantly contained, wrapped
or held in or on packaging. "Retail Food Vendors" shall include, but not
be limited, to any establishment where food is prepared, mixed, cooked,
baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored,
manufactured, and sold or offered for sale, including but not limited to
§ 109-15 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-16
1:252
§ 109-17. Prohibited Packaging. [Amended 8-26-91 by Ord. No.
91-88]
§ 109-18. Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Public
Works and Water Resources (or his/her designee).
§ 109-19. Township of East Brunswick Purchases Prohibited.
§ 109-20. Involvement of Environmental Commission.
The Township recognizes that total elimination of Polystyrene foam and
other disposable plastic products as a way to reduce litter and reduce the
amount of solid wastes deposited in landfills is a long term community goal.
any fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, coffee ship, cafeteria, shortorder
cage, fast food outlet, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich
shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, inn,
roadside stand, take out prepared food place, industrial feeding
establishment, catering kitchen, grocery store, public food market, food
stand, or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for
service on the premises or elsewhere and any other establishment or
operation including homes, where food is processed, prepared, stored,
served, or provided to the public for charge, provided said vendor shall
derive more than twenty (20%) percent of its gross revenues from the
sale of said food or drink.
a. No retail food vendor located and doing business in the Township of
East Brunswick shall sell or convey prepared food directly to the
ultimate consumer within the Township of East Brunswick if the
packaging for such food consists of polystyrene foam or products in
which Pentane gas, Hydrocarbons, Fluorocarbons or similar gases are
utilized during manufacture. For the purposes of this section,
conclusion of the sales transaction shall be the point of time at which
the possession of the food product passes from the retail food vendor to
the ultimate consumer, and the conclusion of the sales transaction need
not require the actual payment of consideration for such food product,
provided however payment is expected from the ultimate consumer
prior to the consumer exiting the premises of the retail food vendor.
b. (Reserved) [Deleted 8-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-88]
a. The Township of East Brunswick shall not purchase any food packaging
which contains polystyrene foam and will discontinue the use of
polystyrene foam in connection with the packaging of food. The
Township shall not sponsor any event which utilizes such packaging.
b. The Township Clerk shall be directed to exclusively advertise for the
receipt of bids for biodegradable materials whenever said bids are
required by the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 109-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-20
1:253
Total elimination will require substantial financial commitments and should
include public education. To these ends, the Township Council hereby
directs the East Brunswick Environmental Commission to make
recommendations to the Township Council for reduction of disposable
plastic products in landfills and in the litter stream. The Environmental
Commission should consider the following in their recommendations:
§ 109-21. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Article shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding One thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars. In
addition to the aforesaid fines, a person found guilty of violating this Article
may be subject to up to 45 (forty-five) hours of community service. Each
day upon which a violation is committed shall be considered a separate
violation.
§ 109-22. Exemptions.
The Township Council may exempt a food vendor or food packager from
the requirements of this ordinance for a one year period, upon a showing
by the applicant that the conditions of this ordinance would cause undue
hardship. The phrase "undue hardship" shall be construed to include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Public Education and Promotion
(b) Alternative Product Recycling/Energy Conversion
(c) Financial Assistance
(d) Alternative Products Research (e.g., photo-degradable and
biodegradable additives)
The Environmental Commission will prepare a report to be submitted
to the Township Council within one year of the effective date of this
ordinance. The report shall assess the success of the efforts to reduce
litter and solid waste and make appropriate recommendations for
improvement and continuation of such efforts.
1. Situations where there are no acceptable alternatives to Polystyrene
food packaging for reasons which are unique to vendor, packager, or
provider;
2. Situations where compliance with the requirements of this ordinance
would deprive a person of a legally protected right. If a request for
exemption is based upon a claim that a legally protected right would be
denied if compliance were required and such request for exemption is
denied, review of the denial shall only be to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, and not otherwise.
§ 109-20 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-22
1:254
Chapter 112
GAMES ON SUNDAY
§ 112-1. Legalized games of chance permitted on Sunday.
The conduct of legalized games of chance on Sundays by properly
registered and licensed organizations is hereby permitted.
Chapter 114
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES
§ 114-1. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-16; 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25; 07-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-17;
3-27-17 by Ord. No. 17-14; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given hereafter. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely discretionary.
B. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AERIAL LUMINARY LANTERN — Any device designed to be airborne
upon release into the environment, regardless of fuel source, including
sky lanterns.[Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-27]
ASHES — The residual from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Assistant Director
of Parks and Public Works for the Township of East
Brunswick.[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
BAGS — Plastic or fiber sacks designed to store solid waste with
sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the
top. Total weight of a bag shall not exceed 50 pounds. If a bag breaks
while being lifted, such bag shall not be considered of appropriate
strength as to be used for containment of solid waste.
BALLOON — A bag made of thin rubber or other light material inflated
with air or with some lighter-than-air gas.[Added 10-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-27]
BUILDING MATERIALS — Any material, such as lumber, brick, plaster,
gutters, roofing shingles or other substances, accumulated as a result
of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new
buildings or demolition of existing structures.
BULKY WASTE — Large items such as concrete, tree stumps, heavy
wood items, iron and steel.
BUNDLES — Normally loose items shall be collected if organized into
bundles of not more than four feet in length and tied with heavy
§ 109-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:255
twine. Bundles shall be organized as to be conveniently handled by one
person. No bundle shall exceed 50 pounds in weight.
BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND
PROFESSIONAL PROPERTIES — Any retail, manufacturing, wholesale,
governmental, educational or other nonresidential establishment,
location or premises.
BUSINESS TRASH — Any waste accumulation of dirt, dust, food, paper,
cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations other than household
trash, which is usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices or
similar businesses.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of East
Brunswick or their designee.[Added 3-27-17 by Ord. No. 17-14]
CHLOROFLUOROCARBON (CFC) — Also known as
hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) and registered as Freon A family of
chemical substances used as solvents, accelerants, blowing or
refrigerant agent used in cooling appliances, refrigerators and air
conditioners. CFC/HCFC's are not allowed to leak into the air or
atmosphere but are required to be contained, cleansed and recycled
as of July 1, 1992 under Federal Regulations and N.J.A.C. 7:26A
Subchapter 5; because CFC/HCFC's are widely believed to be
associated with depletion of Earth's ozone layer. Therefore, before any
of the appliances utilizing CFC/HCFC can be recycled as white goods
the refrigerant shall be removed or its removal has to be attested to by
appropriate certification.
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Yard trimmings, rags, waste wood or
cardboard and all other combustible waste solids of a nonvolatile and
nonexplosive nature.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations, performed
by a resident which is placed at the curb in a Bag, Bundle or Container
as defined herein.
CONTAINER — See also Receptacle and please note terms are
interchangeable.
CONTAINER RECYCLING — A capacity of greater than five (5)
gallons but not more than thirty-two (32) gallons, molded plastic,
bright yellow colored container with East Brunswick recycling
logo, of sufficient volume, strength and durability to store and
place for collection commingled materials. Such as, food and
beverage containers made from aluminum, glass, plastic (PET and
HDPE), steel, tin or combination of metals and alloys. [Amended
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
A.
CONTAINER SOLID WASTE — A receptacle with capacity of
greater than 20 gallons but less than 35 gallons constructed of
plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for
lifting and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance
B.
§ 114-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-1
1:256
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from
spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.[Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-16]
CONTRACTOR — The person, corporation, or partnership performing
solid waste and recycling collection through disposal services under
contract.
COORDINATOR — The Solid Waste, Recycling and Clean Community
Coordinator for the Township of East Brunswick.
DEAD ANIMALS — Animals or portions thereof that have expired from
any cause, except deer which shall be removed by Township personnel.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Township of East Brunswick,
Department of Public Works.[Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-16;
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance for the Township
of East Brunswick.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works for the
Township of East Brunswick.[Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-16;
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and/or vegetative waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, consumption or cooking of food, and shall
include any fecal waste from any animal or bird (when fecal matter
has been separated from other waste and is double bagged prior to
placement for collection).
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes which
pose a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms
or the environment, including, but not limited to, waste material that
is toxic, carcinogenic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, biologically
infectious, explosive, flammable or radioactive and any waste so
designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) or the New Jersey Commissioner of Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEP).[Amended 11-19-07
by Ord. No. 07-25]
HOSPITAL/RED BAG WASTE — Including but not limited to all
instruments, supplies, containers, bandages, tubing, gloves, etc. used
by health care practitioners and facilities as described in the New
Jersey Department of Health regulations and New Jersey law, Section
306 of the Manual of Standards for Hospital Facilities, and N.J.S.A.
2A:170-25.17.[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
into the container by animals. The mouth of the Container shall
have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. The
weight of the Container including its contents shall not exceed fifty
(50) pounds.
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:257
HOUSEHOLD TRASH — Every waste accumulation of paper,
sweepings, dirt, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind,
other than garbage which is usually attendant to housekeeping.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES — Any non-taxable (exempt) property
whether they be religious, educational, or service organizations (i.e.
VFW, VA etc.)
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any
garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn
or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper
containers or other packaging or construction material but does not
include the waste of primary processes of mining or other extraction
processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing (Section 6d;
all citations are from P.L. 1986, c. 187. - See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-94d. Chapter
187 of the laws of 1986 amended various sections of the Clean
Communities and Recycling Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq.).
MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNIT — Any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto containing two (2) or more living units.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING COMPLEX — Any building or structure and
land appurtenant thereto containing more than two (2) living units,
such as townhouses, condominiums, and apartment houses.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township
of East Brunswick or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.[Added 07-20-09 by Ord. No.
09-17]
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All solid waste material which does not
burn.
OWNER — The person or entity having ownership of the roll-off
container.[Added 3-27-17 by Ord. 17-14]
POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYL (PCBs) — A pathogenic and
teratogenic industrial compound used as a heat-transfer agent. A PCB
may accumulate in human or animal tissue and are normally found
in household appliances and underground fuel storage tanks that are
sometimes processed for disposal.[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind. Includes all individuals,
partnerships, corporations, owners, tenants, lessees, occupants,
associations, organizations, residing or owning, operating, managing
§ 114-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-1
1:258
leasing, occupying any premises or business, commercial or industrial,
within the Township of East Brunswick.
PRODUCER — An occupant of a residential unit, public school
buildings/facilities and/or municipal office/activity that generates solid
waste and recyclables.
PUBLIC WORKS SERVICE DISTRICT (PWSD) — Designated areas
wherein the Department of Public Works personnel perform scheduled
services.[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord.
No. 18-43]
RECEPTACLE — A container constructed of such material and in such
a manner as to hold solid waste and trash and other such items without
breaking or collapsing. "Receptacles" shall have handles and covers
so that contents therein are not exposed to the weather, animals, and
vermin. A disposable plastic bag shall constitute a "receptacle" if it is of
sufficient strength to hold its contents without breaking when collected.
The "receptacle" shall be of such a design and weight as to be able to
be conveniently handled by one (1) person. No "container" shall exceed
a weight of more than fifty (50) pounds when loaded. Commercial
garbage receptacles and 55 gallon drums are not acceptable as
containers. Receptacles which, in the opinion of the Department, are
badly broken or fail to meet the requirements of this chapter may be
classified as "garbage".
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — All waste materials which have the ability
to be returned, through processing, to their former or alternate use.
Following are examples, but not necessarily limited to these:[Amended
11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]:
ALUMINUM CANS — Includes such beverage or food containers
constructed or fabricated of aluminum or its alloys.
A.
AEROSOL CANS (empty) — defined as any metal container which
contained non-toxic liquid or powdered particles which were
dispersed by compressed air or gas. Such as: hair spray, fat or oil
spray, tonics etc.
B.
BATTERY (BATTERIES) — Includes all types of batteries from,
flashlights, radios, appliances, automobiles, cameras, etc. whether
rechargeable or not. Rechargeable batteries are defined as: Nickel
Cadmium (Ni-Cd), Nickel Metal Hydride (Ni-MH), Lithium Ion (Li-
Ion) and Small Sealed Lead (Pb). [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord.
No. 07-25]
C.
BIMETAL FOOD CONTAINERS — Food and beverage containers
which are made up of a mixture of various metals (aluminum, steel,
tin).
D.
CARDBOARD/CORRUGATED PAPER — Includes kraft corrugated
which has a brown liner made from kraft paper and regular
E.
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:259
corrugated which is gray or tan and is made from other types of
paper such as newspaper.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Includes all waste
materials as a result of construction and/or demolition of buildings
and facilities and made up of mixed wastes such as metals, wood,
cement, asphalt, block, cinder, brick and concrete. [Amended
11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
F.
GLASS — Includes all products made from silica or sand, soda
ash and lime, the product being transparent or translucent and
being used as packaging and commonly known as "glass". Food and
beverage containers commonly known as jars, bottles in the colors
of clear, brown and green.
G.
MIXED PAPERS — glossy inserts, magazines, telephone books,
junk mail, colored paper, computer paper, office paper, paperboard
(chipboard and press board), non-metallic wrapping paper, soft
cover books, hard cover books with covers removed and fine paper.
[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
H.
BULKY ITEMS/WASTE — Large items such as concrete, tree
stumps, heavy wood items, iron and steel. Includes, but is not
limited to furniture, bedding, mattresses, and so on, which may
be constructed of several types and mix of materials which may
be rebuilt, reconstructed or segregated into reusable and/or
reclaimable materials. [Added 10-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-100];
[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
I.
NEWSPAPERS — Includes papers of the type commonly referred
to as "newsprint" and distributed at periodic intervals, usually
daily or weekly. The term used newspaper is interchangeable with
newspapers. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
J.
PLASTICS — Includes all beverage containers which are
constructed of polyethylene teraphthalate (PET) with recycling
logo <1>, is characterized by its clarity, toughness and barrier
(ability to resist permeation of carbon dioxide). PET is primarily
used for soft drink soda containers; or, high density polyethylene
(HDPE) with recycling logo <2>, is characterized by its stiffness,
low cost, ease of forming and resistance to breakage. HDPE has
a variety of uses such as: cooking oil, cleaning products, milk,
water and juice beverage containers. All colors are considered
acceptable. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
K.
TEXTILES — Includes all rags, clothes, fabric and woven materials
that were formerly used as clothing and/or covering. [Amended
11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
L.
TIN CANS — Includes all food and beverage containers which are
constructed of tin and/or steel sides, tops and bottoms. [Amended
11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
M.
§ 114-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-1
1:260
RECYCLING CENTER (RC) — A designated location within multifamily
and apartment complexes where containers for recyclable placement
are located. These recycling centers (RCs) are also where the
mechanical collection services are accomplished.
RECYCLING DISTRICT (RD) — A designated area of the Township
wherein recyclables are collected at curbside from each residential
dwelling or unit.
REFUSE — Whether it consists of combustible or noncombustible solid
waste, all miscellaneous materials, such as soiled or used rags, paper
products, leather goods, rubber, crockery or other material not defined
as recyclable or white goods.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.[Added 07-20-09 by Ord. No.
09-17]
REGULATIONS — Includes such rules, schedules or times promulgated
by the Director of Parks and Public Works and adopted by the Township
Council to carry out the intent of this chapter.[Amended 7-25-05 by
Ord. No. 05-16]
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A dwelling within the corporate limits of the
Township of East Brunswick occupied by a person or group of persons.
A "residential unit" shall be deemed occupied when either water or
domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. Note:
"Residential unit" definition shall also include all public schools,
municipal offices, activities and properties, and official/quasi-official
USED TIRES — Includes bias, belted and polyester of which rubber
is the main material in manufacturing. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25]
N.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Grass clippings, grass cuttings, plant
residue and leaves. See also "yard waste." [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25]
O.
WASTE OIL — Includes used oil drained from automobiles,
motorcycles and lawn mowers, etc. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord.
No. 07-25]
P.
WAXED PAPER — Includes all milk and juice cartons, also known
as aseptic (bacteria-free/sterile/nontoxic/sunlight-free) packaging.
These types of packages are used for beverages, milk, dairy, and
light-sensitive food products or additives. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25]
Q.
WHITE GOODS — Washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, air
conditioners. [Added 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
R.
YARD WASTE — Includes leaves, grass clippings, plant residue,
tree limbs, branches and trunks. See also "vegetative waste."
S.
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:261
municipal service activities (such as fire, first aid) located in the
Township of East Brunswick, where solid waste and recyclables can be
safely placed at the curb in containers, bags and bundles as may be
appropriate and not exceeding five items per collection day.
REUSABLE RECEPTACLE — Any container which meets the definition
of "receptacle" and is constructed of wood, metal, plastic or other
natural or synthetic materials, used for containment and placement for
collection of solid waste and recyclables.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER — The type of container or dumpster usually
associated with a vehicle containing hydraulic or mechanical
capabilities to lift a prefabricated container from the ground onto the
truck for transport purposes or to lift and dump the material contained
therein into the body of said truck, the contents of which container
is solid waste containing the refuse, rubbish and other debris.[Added
3-27-17 by Ord. No. 17-14]
RUBBISH — All materials generated by residential units consisting
of materials other than food waste items not included in the current
recycling/recyclable list.
SINGLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any dwelling place occupied by one
family.
SKY LANTERN — An airborne paper lantern that is constructed of oiled
rice paper on a bamboo frame and contains a small candle or fuel cell
composed of a waxy flammable material.[Added 10-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-27]
SOLID WASTE — All garbage, rubbish, refuse and waste matter usually
disposed of and normally generated by the occupants of residential
and other property, disposed of by private and/or public collection, and
defined as "solid waste" by the New Jersey Solid Waste Management
Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-3). Items classified as recyclables shall be prohibited
from being commingled with solid waste. The Township of East
Brunswick is licensed by solid waste permit to collect three types of
waste:
Type 10, Municipal Waste - Residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within a community.
A.
Type 13, Bulky Waste - Large items of solid waste which, because
of their size or weight, require handling other than normally used
for municipal waste. Bulky waste includes, but is not limited to,
such items as tree trunks, parts of auto bodies, demolition or
construction material, appliances, furniture and drums.
B.
Type 23, Vegetative Waste - Includes, but is not limited to, tree
limbs, branches, leaves, grass clippings, plants and flower residue,
etc.
C.
§ 114-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-1
1:262
§ 114-1.2. Permit Required. [Added 3-27-17 by Ord. 17-14]
No person shall place or permit a roll-off container/dumpster to be placed
upon any street or municipally owned parking lot within the Township
without first obtaining a permit therefore in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 114-1.3. Application for permit; fee; refusal of permit. [Added
3-27-17 by Ord. 17-14]
SOLID WASTE DISTRICT (SWD) — A designated area of the Township
wherein solid waste and/or recyclables are collected at curbside from
each residential dwelling or unit.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.[Added
07-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-17]
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or
other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street
lines.[Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-16]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Brunswick.
USER/PERMIT HOLDER — The person or entity using the roll-off
container either as an owner or lessee thereof.[Added 3-27-17 by
Ord. No. 17-14]
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
YARD WASTE — Any waste accumulations of grass, leaves or shrubbery
cuttings or clippings, tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes,
shrubbery or other material usually created by yard maintenance. Yard
waste shall be free of dirt, rocks, and other bulky and noncombustible
materials and shall be separated for purposes of collection into, grass
clippings, leaves and other materials.
A. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for the use of a roll-off container/
dumpster as a temporary street obstruction prior to the placement
thereof, upon satisfactory written application by either the owner or the
user/permit holder, as follows:
1. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance, either from the owner or the user/permit holder,
evidencing public liability coverage insuring the Township in an
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1.3
1:263
§ 114-1.4. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Added 3-27-17 by Ord. 17-14]
amount not less than $500,000 for injuries, including accidental
death for any one person, and subject to the same limit for each
person in an amount not less than $1,000,000 on account of each
occurrence; and a certificate of insurance either from the owner
or the user/permit holder evidencing property damage coverage
insuring the Township in an amount not less than $100,000 on
account of any occurrence and in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 on account of all occurrences. All policies shall be
so written that the Township shall be notified of cancellation or
restrictive amendment at least 15 days prior to the effective date of
such cancellation or amendment.
2. Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the Chief of Police, or their
designee, shall determine that the proposed use of the roll-off
container/dumpster shall not constitute a traffic and/or safety
hazard.
3. A roll-off container/dumpster shall not be located on any public
street less than 30 feet wide from curb to curb.
4. The roll-off container/dumpster can be effectively placed parallel to
the curb with the street side of the container not more than eight
feet six inches from the adjacent curb.
5. The roll-off container/dumpster shall be equipped with and display
markers consisting of all-yellow, reflective, diamond-shaped panels
having a minimum size of 18 inches by 18 inches. These panels
shall be mounted at the edge of the dumpster or container at both
ends nearest the path of passing vehicles and facing the direction
of oncoming traffic. These markers shall have a minimum mounting
height of three feet from the bottom of the panels to the surface of
the roadway in accordance with N.J.S.A. 27-5I-1.
6. The roll-off container/dumpster shall not obstruct any part of the
sidewalk or the sidewalk areas adjacent to the street.
7. Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable filing fee of $25 or such other fee as may be fixed
from time to time by resolution of the Council of the Township of
East Brunswick.
8. Each permit shall be of 14 days' duration and shall require a
written application to extend the duration of the permit for an
additional 14 days. This permit shall be conspicuously posted at the
job site location.
A. During all times when the roll-off container/dumpster is not actively in
use, a tarpaulin or other suitable tight cover shall be placed over the
roll-off container/dumpster in order to protect the contents from being
§ 114-1.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-1.4
1:264
§ 114-2. Registration required for collection. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
No person or persons or corporation shall engage in the business of yard/
lot/facility maintenance, collecting or transporting solid waste (garbage,
refuse, or recyclables) in the Township of East Brunswick without first
registering with the Director of Public Works or their designee of said
township.
§ 114-3. Registration expiration date. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord.
No. 07-25]
Registrations shall expire on July 1 of the year following the year in which
the registration was granted. Applications for renewal of registration shall
be made no later than June 15 of each year.
§ 114-4. Application for registration; fees. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
All Applications for registrations to collect and/or transport garbage or
refuse shall be made in writing, addressed to the Director of Public Works of
said township. The registration fee shall be as promulgated by the Director
of Finance and the Director of Public Works, and approved by the Township
Council under separate cover entitled "Schedule of Fees for Solid Waste
Services" and paid per vehicle.
§ 114-4.1. Refuse Containers/Dumpsters. [Added 7-20-09 by Ord.
No. 09-17]
Dumpsters and other refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to
stormwater shall be covered at all times and the spilling, dumping, leaking,
or otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers
to the municipal separate storm sewer system and/or the waters of the State
shall be prohibited so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.
displaced and/or causing litter on public or private property or creating
dust, offensive odors or health hazards.
B. The contents of the roll-off container/dumpster shall be emptied and
disposed of upon reaching the waterline of the roll-off container/
dumpster.
C. The user/permit holder shall be responsible for the repair of any street,
sidewalk and curb damage caused by the placement, movement or
removal of the roll-off container/dumpster.
D. The insurance required in § 114.1-3(A).1 hereof shall continue in full
force and effect during the term of the permit license.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 114-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-4.1
1:265
§ 114-5. Requirements for vehicles used for collection and
transport of solid wastes. [Amended 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
§ 114-6. Solid waste hauler reports. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
All registered solid waste haulers servicing residential, commercial and/
or institutional premises located within the boundaries of the Township of
East Brunswick shall be required to complete and submit tonnage reports
of solid waste and recyclables collected within the Township, on a quarterly
basis to the Department of Public Works.
§ 114-7. Scheduling of collection. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
C. Exceptions to prohibition:
a. Permitted temporary demolition container;
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit;
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup)
A. Every person, persons or corporation who shall transport solid waste/
recyclable materials through or along any street in the Township shall
use a properly constructed and furnished vehicle. Vehicles used for the
purpose of collection and transport of solid waste materials shall be
loaded in a manner that will prevent any of the contents from spilling,
falling or leaking from the vehicle. Each vehicle used for garbage shall
be provided with adequate and sufficiently tight covering so as to
prevent the spillage of contents.
B. No such vehicles shall stand in the streets or other public places at any
time except when being loaded. Vehicles shall also be in compliance
with appropriate noise level and abatement requirements and
standards. It is further provided herein that solid waste collection
vehicles may operate from 7:00 AM to Sundown, Monday through
Saturday.
§ 114-4.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-7
1:266
§ 114-8. Solid waste disposal service.
Property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants who
wish to have their solid waste disposed by the Township shall:
A. Collection sectors, together with the dates of collection, shall be
established by regulation of the Department of Public Works. In the
event of emergent situations, and inclement weather such as ice and
snow storms, high winds and/or heavy rains, the Department may
suspend, restrict or otherwise modify the provisions of this chapter.
Should any of the above situations occur, collection for the service
which was suspended will resume on the next regularly scheduled
collection day.
B. The following shall constitute holidays on which collections will not be
made:
New Year's Day Labor Day
Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day
A. Place solid waste from their unit in appropriate containers, receptacles,
and/or bundles as specified at the street curb if one exists or adjacent to
but not on the street pavement if there is no curb. The number of
containers shall not exceed five (5) per dwelling on a single collection
day. If residents plan to exceed five (5) items or put out items that are
over four (4) feet in length or weigh over fifty (50) pounds, they must
call the Department (or its designee) between the hours of 8:00 AM and
5:00 PM, at least one working day prior to their published collection
day. They must describe the number of items placed out for collection,
its volume, and provide their address. The Department (or its designee)
shall reserve the right of decision in determining the maximum capacity
per truck and therefore the right to limit the number of special
collections according to volume per route.
B. Receptacles may be placed beginning at dusk of the night preceding the
scheduled collection day. All containers with solid waste shall be placed
out by 7:00 A.M. of the collection day, and those placed after said hour
may not be collected if said collection activity has already taken place.
Solid waste receptacles shall be removed from the curb or pavement
edge by the evening of the collection day.
C. Properties shall be permitted to place solid waste for collection
pursuant to this chapter and regulations issued by the Department.
Said regulations shall as a minimum, state the type and number of
receptacles and shall provide for regular and special pickup, subject to
limitations of the municipal budget of the Township of East Brunswick.
D. The Department may permit additional receptacles to be placed at
curbside, provided that special prior arrangements have been made
with the Department.
§ 114-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-8
1:267
§ 114-9. Exceptions to solid waste disposal services.
E. No collection of solid waste shall be accomplished on property outside
of the dedicated public rights-of-way.
F. Owner and occupants to supply receptacles in all cases as follows:
1. The owner, lessee, tenant occupant or agent of every premises
where solid waste and recyclables accumulate shall provide
receptacles for receiving and holding solid waste and recyclables.
At least one (1) receptacle shall be provided for each residential
unit.
2. All receptacles shall be constructed of metal or plastic and shall be
watertight and fitted with tight-fitting covering which shall prevent
spilling or leakage of contents. For single family residences each
container shall have the capacity of not more than thirty-five (35)
gallons for garbage and not more than thirty-two (32) gallons for
recycling and both shall be equipped with at least one handle for
pulling and lifting. In no case will the weight of the container and
its contents be allowed to exceed fifty (50) pounds. [Amended
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
3. Reusable containers made of wood, plastic or metal may be used
for newspaper containment prior to placement at the curb for
collection, provided that littering (blowing paper) will not occur
prior to collection and the total weight of container and
newspapers do not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
4. All owners and tenants of property at which recyclable food and
beverage containers are sold, dispensed or vending machines are
located, the owners or tenants shall provide separate solid waste
and recycling containers for use and disposal of solid waste and
recyclables as defined herein.
A. Solid waste and recycling collection or disposal service shall not be
provided to any commercial, industrial or institutional properties unless
they are a part of the municipal government of the Township of East
Brunswick.
B. Solid waste and recycling collection or disposal service shall not be
provided to governmental properties (Federal, State, and/or County
unless they are a part of the municipal government of the Township of
East Brunswick), or to multiple dwelling complexes or medical facilities
or offices except offices located in a residential structure which qualify
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, or any development (as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4) wherein the developer in securing municipal approval
agreed to provide private garbage service as set forth in an offering
statement or in a resolution approving such development.
§ 114-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-10
1:268
§ 114-10. Prohibited materials. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25]
The following items are prohibited from being placed for collection:
§ 114-11. Bulky items from residential use. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25]
A. Construction materials, including but not limited to bulk roof shingles,
dimensional framing lumber, bulk or sheets of plywood, paneling,
plasterboard, sheetrock, etc.
B. Bulk tree trimmings and tree stumps above fifty (50) pounds (lbs).
C. Metals, wood, cement, asphalt, block, cinder, brick and concrete.
[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
D. Industrial waste, including but not limited to processed scrap materials,
packing materials and certain hazardous and dangerous materials,
such as acids, paints, fluorescent tubes, bulk amounts of glass, toxic
materials and highly volatile or explosive matter, either in liquid,
gaseous, or solid form.
E. Bulk automotive parts, including but not limited to transmissions,
engines, rear ends, rims, tires, wheels, mufflers, and other bulk items
normally produced in quantity by vehicular repair operations.
F. Dead animals, animal waste and animal droppings, unless they are
double bagged for collection, in 10 millimeter plastic heavy duty bags.
[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
G. Surgical dressings, syringes, and disposable hospital-type waste items,
also known as red bag waste. Note: Health care providers and residents
who producing and/or are creating red bag waste components in
conducting daily activities or are maintaining their health shall be
required to make appropriate arrangements with their suppliers to
correctly contain and process for disposal their red bag waste
materials.
H. New and used motor oils, petroleum based products, or antifreeze.
I. Hazardous waste classified pursuant to regulations issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE),
adopted under authority of N.J.S.A. 13:1D-9 and 13:1E-6, as amended.
Toxic chemicals commonly known as "commercial hazardous waste"
and "household hazardous waste" would be excluded.
A. Domestic or household bulky items, such as air conditioners, washing
machines, dryers, refrigerators, hot water heaters, sinks, stoves,
garbage disposals/compactors, household appliances, metal fencing
and poles (without cement attached), leaders and gutters, metal doors,
pool fixtures, sheds, swings and other household furnishings, such as
chairs, sofas, rugs, padding, etc., shall not be placed at the curb for
§ 114-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-11
1:269
§ 114-12. Branches. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
Provided that special arrangements have first been made with the
Department of Parks and Public Works, branches, bulky tree limbs and tree
trunks will be collected pursuant to the collection calendar, as amended
from time to time, provided that these items are deposited at street side,
and not on the street pavement. Branches, bulky tree limbs and tree trunks
may be placed at the curb in appropriately sized piles prior to the scheduled
collection day.
§ 114-13. Leaves. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
§ 114-14. Grass clippings. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
collection unless special arrangements have been made with the
Township, meeting the published collection schedule. No bulky items
shall be of a weight or be of a size greater than can be conveniently
handled by two (2) persons. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to leave outside of any property, building or
dwelling, any icebox, refrigerator, freezer or dishwasher or any other
item which has an airtight door, without first removing said airtight
door.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to conduct a repair or salvage operation and
use the services of the Township for solid waste collection.
A. The service listed under the nomenclature of "yard waste" in the annual
Township schedule shall, during the months of October, November, and
December, consist of strictly leaf collection. During this time, leaves
may be placed in neat piles at the curb or pavement edge for collection,
provided that the piles do not constitute a traffic hazard. Residents may
also place leaves for collection in Biodegradable bags during the
months of October, November, and December which are collected on
the normal recycling collection day. The Biodegradable bag shall not
exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, be neatly placed untied at the curb
and be separated from solid waste and recycling containers by a
minimum of a foot (12 inches) distance.
B. If an appropriate registration has been secured and fees paid the
collected leaves of these contract operations can be disposed of legally
and properly at the Department regulated location as published under
separate cover.
C. Leaf bags shall be placed at the curb. Residents may place these bags at
the curb no earlier than 6:00 P.M. on the evening prior to collection.
§ 114-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-14
1:270
§ 114-14.1. Yard Waste Collection. [Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-16]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that in not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven (7) days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this ordinance.
§ 114-15. Fees for non-compliance. [Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-16; 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
Property owners of record shall be responsible for the placement of
materials for collection as specified herein. The Director of Finance,
Director of Parks and Public Works and the Recycling Coordinator shall
be empowered to fix fees by regulation, subject to the approval by the
Township Council, for the removal of materials not placed in accordance
with the terms of this chapter. The payment of applicable fees shall be the
responsibility of the property owner of record.
§ 114-16. Township held harmless.
The Township reserves the right to seek reimbursement and indemnification
from all property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other
A. Residents are encouraged to recycle their grass clippings by cutting
and leaving. For those individuals who cut-and-bag their grass clippings
the following procedures shall govern:
1. Grass clippings shall not be commingled with other yard waste.
2. Grass clippings shall be placed at the curb in reusable containers
with tops off or in untied plastic bags placed curbside. Neither the
reusable container or the plastic bags shall exceed fifty (50) pounds
including the contents within the container.
3. Reusable containers or bags shall be placed at curb side on
normally scheduled solid waste collection days separate from
garbage or refuse also placed for collection.
4. Any grass clippings placed at the curb or pavement edge during the
months of leaf collection need not be contained but can be
commingled with leaves placed for collection.
5. Grass bags shall be placed at the curb. Residents/contractors may
place these bags at the curb no earlier than 6:00 P.M. on the
evening prior to scheduled collection.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any resident or private
contractor to place loose grass clippings at the curb or pavement.
§ 114-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-16
1:271
occupants who violate any section of this ordinance in the placement of
materials for collection.
§ 114-17. Special collection fees. [Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-16; 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
A schedule of fees shall be established by the Director of Finance and
Director of Public Works, subject to the approval by the Township Council
for services provided under Section 114-9 and Section 114-10, defining
solid waste collection. The approved fees may be charged for household
containers and/or containerized receptacles, including but not limited to
normal service, and recollection if collection activities are unable to be
performed due to violation of this chapter.
§ 114-18. Collection of assessed fees.
Fees not paid within thirty (30) days of assessment by the Department shall
constitute a lien against the property which shall be collected via an action
of law, and services shall cease until full restitution has occurred.
§ 114-19. Enforcement. [Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-16;
11-19-07 by Ord. No 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
This chapter shall be enforced in Municipal Court upon a complaint signed
by the Recycling Coordinator, Code Enforcement Officer, the Board of
Health, the Department of Public Works or the Department of Public Safety
of the Township of East Brunswick. Further, if a complaint has been signed
and issued, and the Township prevails against the violator, the responsibility
for solid waste disposal shall lie with the violator. If the violator does not
correct the violation the Township shall take action to protect the general
health of the public and the cost of such actions shall be processed as a lien
against the property and in accordance with law.
§ 114-20. Exceptions for physically handicapped individuals.
[Deleted 11-19-07 By Ord. No. 07-25]
§ 114-21. Disposal of solid waste. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
The Department of Public Works shall forthwith transmit all solid waste
collected pursuant to this chapter to lawfully licensed facilities designated
by the County of Middlesex in the Middlesex County Solid Waste Plan and/
or the State of New Jersey. If permitted by said Solid Waste Plan and if
said users and markets exist on a positive-cost-benefit-ratio basis to the
municipality, then the Township may elect to dispose of said solid waste or a
portion thereof in an alternative manner pursuant to statute and regulation.
§ 114-22. Ownership. [Deleted 11-19-07 By Ord. No. 07-25]
§ 114-16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-23
1:272
§ 114-23. Appointment of solid waste officials. [Amended 11-19-07
by Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
The Township Council shall appoint a Clean Communities Coordinator, Solid
Waste and Certified Recycling Coordinator and an Alternate selected from
among the Department of Public Works executive management personnel
required to act as liaison with Middlesex County and State of New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Solid Waste/Recycling
and Clean Communities officials, keep records apply for grants/aid and
perform the annual/recurring applications and updating process.
§ 114-24. Designation of recyclable materials and services.
[Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
A. Upon classification of an item or material as recyclable, residential and
other property owners, shall cause themselves or their agents, lessees,
tenants or their occupants to separate said item or materials separately
for collection, whether said collection is performed by a municipal
agency or private contractor.
B. On or after the date fixed in the regulations and in accordance with the
terms thereof, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
lessors, renters or occupants of residential dwellings and commercial,
industrial and institutional properties in the Township of East
Brunswick to separate recyclable materials from all other solid waste
generated.
C. Commercial, industrial and institutional properties are required to
negotiate with a private hauler/contractor in accordance with the
provisions of the Middlesex County District Recycling Plan.
D. At the present time, the materials to be recycled by New Jersey State
mandate and designated as recyclable by the Township of East
Brunswick are
1. For residential (including multi-family), commercial, industrial and
institutional, governments and office parks:
a. Masonry/paving material: asphalt, block, brick, cinder, and
concrete
b. Rechargeable batteries: Nickel Cadmium (Ni-Cd), Nickel Metal
Hydride (Ni-MH), Lithium Ion (Li-Ion) and Small Sealed Lead
(Pb)
c. Tires: rubber-based scrap automotive, truck, and equipment
tires
d. White goods: washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, air
conditioners (Note: all devices that contain CFC's must be
properly evacuated by licensed individuals and all CFC's
recovered must be sent to an EPA approved reclaimer)
§ 114-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-24
1:273
2. For commercial, industrial and institutional, governments and
office parks:
a. Electronics, televisions, CPU's, monitors, laptops, and
mercury-containing devices
b. Fluorescent bulbs: lamps that contain mercury-containing
devices
c. Plastic film: stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags - only
for warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with
25 or more employees
d. Wood scrap: unfinished lumber from new construction projects
including pallets. Unfinished shall mean non-chemically
treated (not pressure treated, impregnated with preservatives,
insecticides, fungicides, creosote, or other chemicals, and not
painted, resin coated or otherwise surface treated, and not
laminated or bonded; and not similarly altered from its natural
condition) - only for new construction sites.
3. The following recyclables are mandatory source separated for all
sectors
a. Aluminum cans and containers.
b. Glass food and beverage containers, all colors.
c. Steel (tin) and Bimetal food and beverage containers.
d. Plastic containers: milk, water, beverage, laundry containers
e. Paper (waxed milk and juice cartons also known as aseptic
(bacteria free/sterile/non-toxic/sunlight free) packaging.
f. Aerosol cans (empty) is defined as any metal container which
contained non-toxic liquid or powdered particles which were
dispersed by compressed air or gas.
g. Cardboard/corrugated paper, bundled 2' x 2' x 1'.
h. Mixed paper - refer to Section 114-1, bundled 2' x 2' x 1'.
i. Cooking oil - brought to recycling center.
j. White goods, metals, bulky items.
k. Textiles.
l. Used tires.
m. Yard wastes - leaves, grass clippings, branches, vegetative
waste.
§ 114-24 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-24
1:274
§ 114-25. Municipal drop-off center. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
The Department of Public Works shall, by regulation, designate a municipal
recycling center. Said center shall accept, as a minimum, newspaper,
corrugated paper, junk mail, aluminum, metal, bimetal, glass, and plastics
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11.1 et seq., as well as many items classified as
recyclable by regulation of the Department of Public Works. The Director
upon written request may allow business, commercial, industrial,
institutional and/or professional property owners to drop off source
separated materials at the Recycling Center for processing provided that
recycling collection or processing costs are not accrued to the Township.
§ 114-25.1. Storage of Recyclable Items. [Added 11-19-07 by Ord.
No. 07-25]
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review all Recycling Plans
submitted in conjunction with all applications to the planning board or
zoning board for subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to § 132-30. The
recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient location and contain
other attributes (i.e. signage, lighting, etc.) as may be determined by the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 114-26. Disposal of recyclable items. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord.
No. 07-25]
Materials classified as recyclable shall only be disposed of by:
n. Construction and Demolition wastes - metals, wood, cement,
asphalt, block, cinder, brick and concrete.
o. Brush.
p. Motor oil.
Note: Additional recyclable materials shall be added in
accordance with the New Jersey Source Separation and
Recycling Act: S-1476/A-1781 and the Middlesex County
District Recycling Plan. The Department of Public Works shall
issue regulations classifying recyclables and providing for the
method and manner of collection. Said classification shall be
dependent upon the existence of lawful disposal, users or
markets for said recyclables.
A. Placing them for collection by the municipality pursuant to the terms of
this chapter and regulations issued by Department in accordance with
the provisions set forth by the Township Council.
B. Giving, donating or selling them or permitting them to be collected by
any person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or
not, provided that the material shall:
§ 114-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-26
1:275
§ 114-27. Business, Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and/or
Professional Recycling Exemptions. [Deleted 11-19-07 By Ord. No.
07-25]
§ 114-28. Promulgations and Regulations. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate such reasonable regulations as to the manner, days, times, fees,
etc., for the collection of recyclables in accordance with the terms hereof
and shall forward such regulations to the Township Council for adoption by
resolution. Such regulations may be amended from time to time as needed
to encourage the operation of the collection program.
§ 114-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-19-07 by Ord. No.
07-25]
1. Be recycled.
2. Be collected from a point other than the curbside in districts with
municipal collection of recyclable items or materials or at a
municipal drop-off center, with the permission of the Township of
East Brunswick.
3. Be reported to the municipality by both the generator and the
receiver of the recyclable items or materials in accordance with
regulations of the Department of Public Works, the County of
Middlesex and the State of New Jersey. [Amended 11-19-07 by
Ord. No. 07-25; 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-43]
C. Recycling documentation in the form and format espoused by the
Department backed up by, weight slips or a signed business form letter
shall be required from all those who market, collect, haul and/or
generate recyclable materials, whether they be residential, business,
commercial, industrial, institutional and/or professional premises
located within the boundaries of the Township of East Brunswick, as
required by the Middlesex County District Recycling Plan. These
records and reports shall be submitted to the East Brunswick Township
Recycling Coordinator on a quarterly basis, specifically, not later than
close of business January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of a given
year and beginning as of the effective date of this ordinance.
D. Used tires - Depending upon the availability of markets or other
disposal means for used tires, the Department may, at its discretion,
provide for the disposal of used tires by the residents. The Township
Council shall be empowered to fix fees by regulation for the disposal of
used tires; and the disposal method shall be established by regulation of
the Department.
§ 114-26 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 114-29
1:276
§ 114-30. Repealer. [Deleted 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
§ 114-31. When effective. [Deleted 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
§ 114-32. Purpose and intent. [Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-27]
These §§ 114-32 through 114-32.2 are adopted in order to protect the
environment, particularly the wildlife, and the health, safety and wellbeing
of persons and property by prohibiting the release of aerial luminary
lanterns and helium balloons into the atmosphere, the balloons including
latex and Mylar, as it has been determined that the release of aerial
luminary lanterns and balloons inflated with lighter-than-air gases pose a
danger and nuisance to the environment, particularly to wildlife and marine
animals, so as to constitute a public nuisance and may pose a threat to the
safety of inhabitants and their property.
§ 114-32.1. Prohibited releases. [Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-27]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to intentionally
release, organize the release of, or intentionally cause to be released any
untethered sky lantern, aerial luminary lantern or similar device or balloons
inflated with a gas that is lighter than air within the Township of East
Brunswick limits, except for:
§ 114-32.2. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-27]
Any person found in violation is guilty of a noncriminal infraction punishable
by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.
A. Each such collection in violation of this chapter and each day a violation
or neglect is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and be punishable as such.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or directive
promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction
thereof, by a fine not to exceed $2,000 or by up to 90 days in jail, or
both. If permitted by general law, a convicted person may be ordered to
perform community service.
A. Balloons released by a person on behalf of a governmental agency or
pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological
purposes.
B. Hot-air balloons that are recovered after launching.
C. Balloons released indoors.
§ 114-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-32.2
1:277
Chapter 118
HANDBILLS
§ 118-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to implement valid time, place, and manner
restrictions on those handing out commercial and non-commercial handbills
to ensure the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of its citizenry.
The purpose of this article is not to restrict any citizens' First Amendment
rights. The Township of East Brunswick does not have a desire to interfere
with an individual or an entity's First Amendment or free speech rights,
open dialogue, and the free exchange of opinions.
§ 118-2. Application.
This Article shall not apply to solicitors, peddlers, canvassers, vendors,
or itinerant vendors. This article does not change or apply to Article III,
Peddlers, Solicitors, and Itinerant Vendors.
§ 118-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written matter,
sample of goods or merchandise or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter or literature, except newspapers, magazines and periodicals
of general circulation, and mail matter, which:
§ 118-4. Permits.
No permit or license shall be required for any individual or representative of
an entity that wishes to hand out commercial or noncommercial handbills.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
B. Directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of promoting the
interest thereof by sales; or
C. Directs attention to or advertises any show, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for
the purpose of private gain or profit.
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes or causes the
distribution of commercial handbills.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter not
included in the definition of commercial handbill and not a newspaper,
magazine, periodical of general circulation or mail matter.
§ 114-32.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 118-5
1:278
§ 118-5. Restrictions on the allowable time, place, and manner of
handing out commercial and noncommercial handbills.
Chapter 121
HEALTH DEPARTMENT LICENSES
§ 121-1. Information required on applications.
Applications for all licenses issued by the Department of Health and Welfare
shall be on forms provided for by the Department and shall contain the
following information:
A. No person, or representative of an entity shall serve or cause to be
served any commercial or noncommercial handbill before 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. any day of the week. This subsection shall not apply to
persons who are expressly invited by residents of the Township to come
to their homes at a different times.
B. No person, or representative of an entity shall serve or cause to be
served any commercial or noncommercial handbill at any uninhabited
dwelling or dwellings where there is posted in a conspicuous place near
the entrance a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers
or Agents," "No Advertising," or words of similar import. All handbills
distributed on private property shall be securely placed at each
dwelling so as not to be blown away by the wind.
C. Noncommercial handbills may be distributed in both public and private
places, provided that such handbills shall not be attached to, deposited
or placed in or upon motor vehicles unless occupied and the occupant
expressly accepts the same.
D. No person, or representative of an entity shall serve or cause to be
served any commercial handbill that does not have printed upon it the
name and address of the organization or person sponsoring the
handbill.
E. No person, or representative of an entity shall serve or cause to be
served any handbill that is false, deceptive, misleading, or which
proposes illegal transactions.
F. No person, or representative of an entity shall circulate a commercial
handbill in or upon any public place or outdoor area that is open to the
public.
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. If the licenses activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and full description of the premises.
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number.
§ 118-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-1
1:279
§ 121-2. Investigation; decision on issuance.
The Department of Health and Welfare shall institute any investigation
which it deems necessary to protect the public and shall, within a
reasonable time, grant or deny the application.
§ 121-3. Display of licenses.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a particular premises or from
a vehicle, the license shall be prominently displayed on the premises of
vehicle.
§ 121-4. Licenses not transferable.
Every license shall apply only to the person, firm or corporation to whom it
was issued and shall not be transferable.
§ 121-5. Revocation and suspension.
Licenses issued under this chapter may be denied, revoked or suspended for
the reasons and according to the procedure set forth in § 135-8 of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick, and the hearing provided for therein
shall be before the Director of Health and Welfare, and he shall have the
power to revoke or suspend the license.
Chapter 124
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Antidiscrimination in Housing
Ordinance of the Township of East Brunswick."
D. A description of the nature of the business.
E. A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its employees or
agents have ever been convicted of the violation of any statute or
municipal ordinance having to do with the protection of public health
and, if so, the date and place of the conviction, the nature of the offense
and the punishment or penalty imposed.
F. Applications by partnerships shall contain all of the information
required by this section for each partner, and applications by
corporations shall contain all of the information required by this section
for each officer of the corporation and the employee or agent actually in
charge of the licensed activity in East Brunswick. Applications by
partnerships shall be signed by at least one (1) partner; and
applications by corporations shall be signed by a corporate officer,
attested to by the secretary, and shall bear the seal of the corporation.
§ 121-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 124-2
1:280
§ 124-2. Policy.
The Township Council hereby declares it to be the public policy of the
Township of East Brunswick to eliminate and prevent discrimination and
involuntary segregation based on race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status and to safeguard the
right of every person to sell, purchase, lease, sublease, assign, rent or
obtain financing for the purchase, lease, sublease or assignment of housing
accommodations without regard to race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status and to prohibit
discrimination practices and the inciting of unrest, tension and fear with
respect to real estate transactions in the Township of East Brunswick.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
§ 124-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
BLOCK BUSTING — The practice of inducing owners of real property to sell
or list real property for sale because of the actual or rumored advent into
the neighborhood of a member of a racial, religious or ethnic group.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Any real property permitted for human
habitation within the township.
PERSON — Includes one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, organizations, legal representatives, employees, agents,
anyone acting for or on behalf of any person or other legal entities.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Includes those unlawful practices and
acts specified herein.
§ 124-4. Prohibited actions.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease or otherwise deny
any housing accommodation to any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry, ethnic origin,
sex or marital status.
(2) To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rent, lease, assignment or
sublease of any housing accommodation to any person or persons
because of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry,
ethnic origin, sex or marital status.
(3) To represent that any housing accommodation is not available for
inspection, sale, lease, sublease, assignment or rent or to withhold
§ 124-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-4
1:281
information about any housing accommodation which is, in fact,
available for inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rent or assignment or
to otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation to any
person or persons because of race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status.
(4) To discriminate against any person or persons because of race,
color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or
marital status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale,
rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any housing
accommodation.
(5) To directly or indirectly advertise that the purchase or rental by
persons of any particular race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status is unwelcome,
objectionable, unacceptable or not solicited.
(6) To use any form of application for purchase, rental, lease,
assignment, sublease or financing of any housing accommodation
which inquiries into the race, color, religion, creed, national origin,
ancestry or ethnic origin of any person.
(7) To engage in the practice of block busting, including but not limited
to the following:
(a) To induce directly or indirectly or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that an adverse change has occurred or will or
may occur with respect to the racial, religious or ethnic
composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the
property is located.
(b) To induce directly or indirectly or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of
persons of any particular race, religion or national origin in the
area will or may result in:
[1] The lowering of property values.
[2] An increase in the criminal or antisocial behavior in the
area.
[3] A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
(c) To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale
or the anticipated listing for sale, or the sale of real property in
the area for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce
the sale or listing for sale of real property.
(d) To make any representation to any prospective purchaser that
any block, neighborhood or area has, will or might undergo an
adverse change with respect to the religious, racial or ethnic
§ 124-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 124-4
1:282
§ 124-5. Complaints; hearing.
composition of the block, neighborhood or area for the purpose
of discouraging the purchase of property in a particular area.
(e) To place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is
not in fact offered for sale.
(f) To advertise for sale or rental property which is nonexistent or
which is not actually for sale or rental.
(g) To engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or
activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce,
cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear with the
purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing
for sale of real property.
(h) To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of
intimidation against any person because that person has filed a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in
any investigation, proceeding or conference under the terms of
this chapter.
(i) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in
any of the practices forbidden by this chapter; or to obstruct or
prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No person, bank or lending institution shall discriminate against any
applicant because of race, religion or ethnic background of such
applicant or the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodation in the granting, extending or renewing the rates, terms
of conditions of any such loan.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) The rental of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, one (1)
unit of which, at the time, is occupied by the owner as his residence
or the household of his family.
(2) Any religious institution or organization or any organization
operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization in the sale, lease or rent of real property, for limiting
admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or
denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by
such organization to promote the religious principles for which it is
established or maintained.
A. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair
practice within this township may, by himself or his attorney, make, sign
and file a written complaint with the Clerk of the Municipal Court of the
§ 124-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-5
1:283
§ 124-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 124-7. Posting notices on premises; temporary injunction and
restraining order.
township, which complaint shall set forth the basis thereof and specify
those sections of the chapter violated.
B. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall cause to be served the complaint
upon the defendant pursuant to the rules of the Court and set the
matter down for hearing within fifteen (15) days of the service of the
complaint.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 124-4 shall, for
each and every offense, be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code, see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
B. Any person who sells or rents the housing accommodation in question
to anyone other than the complainant after notice that a complaint of
discrimination has been filed against such person shall, upon conviction
of a violation under such a complaint, be subject to the penalties
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code, see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
C. Upon conviction of a violation under this chapter, a violator may, after
application to a court of competent jurisdiction, be ordered to make
available to the complainant the premises involved.
A. In order to prevent the involvement of innocent third parties in the
rental or sale of housing accommodations or land in the period after the
complaint is filed, but before an order or injunction is obtained, the
township may post for fifteen (15) days a notice on the said housing
premises or land unless the person or persons charged with
discrimination agree in writing not to sell or rent during the pendency
of the action or proceeding against such persons.
B. Any person who removes, covers or defaces the posted notice shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code, see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
C. In order to prevent the rental or sale of the housing accommodation or
land in violation of this chapter, the legal representative of the
complainant may seek from a court of competent jurisdiction a
§ 124-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 124-7
1:284
§ 124-8. Statutory remedies available.
In no instance shall any complainant hereunder be precluded from pursuing
his lawful remedies under the New Jersey Fair Housing Law, N.J.R.S.
18:25-4 et seq. or any other similar New Jersey statute.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 18:25-4 was renumbered in 1968 to be N.J.R.S.
10-5-4.
Chapter 130
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 130, Landscape Design, was repealed and rescinded
11-12-91 by Ordinance No. 91-112.]
Chapter 132
LAND USE PROCEDURES
temporary injunction or restraining order to prevent the disposition of
the premises to other than the complainant during the pendency of the
complaint alleging discrimination.
§ 124-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-8
1:285

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 132-1. Short Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "East Brunswick Township
Land Use Procedures Ordinance."
§ 132-2. Purposes.
It is the intent and purpose of this act:
A. To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use and
development of lands in the township in a manner which will promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. To ensure that development of the Township of East Brunswick does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of its neighboring
municipalities, the County of Middlesex and the State of New Jersey as
a whole;
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and communities and the preservation of the
environment;
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements, in order to meet the needs of all citizens;
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic, while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight;
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the Township of
East Brunswick and prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
K. To encourage planned development which incorporates the best
features of design and relates the type, design and layout of residential,
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-2
1:287
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site;
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
M. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development, with a view to lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of the land; and
N. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
O. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan
goals and to complement municipal recycling programs.
§ 132-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-2
1:288
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 132-3. Definitions. [Amended 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-111;
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19; 4-22-96 by Ord. No. 96-8; 1-25-99 by
Ord. No. 99-4; 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06; 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05;
4-9-12 by Ord. No. 12-02]
For the purposes of this Ordinance, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and
the term "may" indicates a permissive action. The singular shall also mean
the plural and person(s) shall also mean other legal entities. All definitions
in Chapter 228, Zoning, shall also apply to this Ordinance.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of Planning & Engineering or
Designee unless a different township official or officials are designated by
this chapter as defined elsewhere or by state statute.[Amended 1-25-99
by Ord. No. 99-4]
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required of an applicant by ordinance for
approval of a subdivision, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Township of East
Brunswick, unless a different agency is designated by this chapter, when
acting pursuant to the authority of this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to Section 56
of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law. Also known as the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
a major construction project.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited
to, a site plan or subdivision plat; provided that the municipal agency may
require such additional information not specified in the ordinance or any
revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:289
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for any lack of such additional information
or any revisions in accompanying documents so required by municipal
agencies. An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon
the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in the rules
and regulations of the municipal agency, and shall be deemed completed as
of the day it is so certified by the Director of Planning & Engineering or
designee for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action
by the municipal agency.[Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-4]
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL — Includes all testimony, other agency
approvals, bonds and all requirements stated in the resolution of approval.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord.
No. 11-05]
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS — Those that are used by heavy-duty
traffic and which permit no access from abutting property.[Added 5-9-11
by Ord. No. 11-05]
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development or
cluster development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of Middlesex County with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter, adopted by the County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40:27-2 and N.J.R.S. 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Middlesex County Planning Board.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DESIGNATED OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water, within the site designated for a
planned unit residential development or cluster development and designed
or intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the planned
unit residential development or cluster development. Designated open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of
the planned unit residential development or cluster development.
DESIGNEE — The person appointed by the Director of Planning &
Engineering to perform a specified function or duty assigned to such
administrative officer by this chapter.[Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No.
99-4; 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
§ 132-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-3
1:290
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted and filed pursuant to law.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.[Added 2-27-06 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The East Brunswick Environmental
Commission appointed by the Mayor pursuant to Chapter 3-94.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved development plan after all conditions, engineering
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:291
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the
required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted
for their completion, or an approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guarantees.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings
or structures compared to the total area of the site.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council of the Township of East
Brunswick.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Real property, man-made structures, natural object or
configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A created surface that prevents or impedes the
absorption of stormwater into the ground, including but not limited to brick,
stone, concrete, asphalt or building rooftops, placed on the land to occupy,
facilitate passage, recreation or decoration. Retaining walls are included
as an impervious surface.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06; amended
4-9-12 by Ord. No. 12-02]
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
INTERESTED PARTY —
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
LOCAL STREETS — Those used to provide access to abutting property and
to discourage through traffic.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Wherever this phrase is used,
it includes but is not limited to housing at the least or lowest cost possible
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey.
(1)
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter
or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter
or under any other law of this state or of the United States has been
denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.
(2)
§ 132-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-3
1:292
and feasible, conforming to state and federal definitions for low-and
moderate-income housing, consistent with minimum standards of health
and safety.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
chapter, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit, and
cash.[Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for heavy
local and through traffic.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major thoroughfares, including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" or "redevelopment" that
provides for disturbance of one quarter (1/4) or more acres of land.
Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious
surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARGINAL SERVICE STREETS — Those which are parallel or adjacent
to controlled access highways or arterials and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.[Added 5-9-11 by
Ord. No. 11-05]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one (1) or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the Township of East Brunswick.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS — Those with signals at important
intersections and stop signs at side streets, and which collects and
distributes traffic to and from collector streets.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-05]
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for
access to the abutting properties.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which (1)
proposes new development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; (2) does not involve planned
development, any new street or extension of any off tract improvement
which is to be prorated pursuant to this code; and (3) contains the
information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by ordinance for
approval of a minor site plan have been met.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-05]
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:293
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of not more
than 3 lots; provided that such subdivision does not involve (1) a planned
development, (2) any new street; or (3) the extension of any off tract
improvement the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to this code.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The East Brunswick Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Township Council when acting pursuant to this
chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of East Brunswick.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of Middlesex County pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40:27-5.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or the closest half of the street or right-of-way
abutting the property of which the lot is a part.[Amended 2-27-06 by Ord.
No. 06-06]
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of an abutting street or
right-of-way.[Amended 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street
or right-of-way.[Amended 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on the closest half of an abutting street or right-ofway.[
Amended 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land and/or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of land.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by a
municipality, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit and
cash.[Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, East Brunswick Township, or political subdivision of this State
§ 132-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-3
1:294
subject to municipal jurisdiction to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous size,
as specified by ordinance to be planned and developed as a single entity
according to a plan, containing one (1) or more residential clusters or
planned unit residential developments and one (1) or more public, quasipublic,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of
nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified in the Zoning
Ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance to be planned and developed as
a single entity according to a plan, containing one (1) or more residential
clusters, which may include appropriate commercial, public or quasi-public
uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The East Brunswick Planning Board established
pursuant to this chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
the applicable sections of this chapter, prior to final approval, after specific
elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the proper
reviewing authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings, prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC AREA —
(1) Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
(2) Other public open spaces.
(3) Scenic and historic sites.
(4) Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:295
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity,
according to a plan, containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESUBDIVISION —
SEDIMENT — A solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
ice, wind or gravity as a product of erosion.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06]
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SITE — The Lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one (1) or more lots on which is shown:
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
(1)
The alteration of any streets or establishment of any new streets within
any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine existing lots
by deed or other instrument.
(2)
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; a narrative statement signed by the applicant and
sworn to before a notary public or attorney of the State of New Jersey,
setting forth the intended use of the property; and
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
(3)
§ 132-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-3
1:296
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way:
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter if no new streets are created:[Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No.
99-4]
(1) Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
(2) Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
(3) Which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter;
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulder, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
(4)
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size;
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:297
THIS CHAPTER — When used herein, shall be construed to refer to all
Articles and sections of the East Brunswick Township Land Use Ordinance,
together with those sections of Chapters 132, 192, 228 and 49 which have
not been specifically repealed by the enactment of this chapter, unless
otherwise specified.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest
within a watershed.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas: (1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes; (2)
Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes; (3) Designated as Urban
Enterprise Zones; and (4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council
Empowerment Neighborhoods.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance which may be granted pursuant to this chapter.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.[Added 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-06]
WETLAND(S) — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
All definitions contained in this chapter which are contrary to or
inconsistent with the foregoing definitions are hereby repealed.
Divisions of property upon court order including, but not limited to,
judgment of foreclosure;
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
(4)
The conveyance of one (1) or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all which are found
and certified by the Director of Planning & Engineering or designee
to conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map of this
township. The term "subdivision" shall also include the terms
"resubdivision" and "reverse subdivision." [Amended 1-25-99 by Ord.
No. 99-4]
(5)
§ 132-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-3
1:298
ARTICLE III
Planning Board
§ 132-4. Establishment.
There is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq in the Township of East Brunswick, a Planning Board of nine (9)
members.
§ 132-5. Membership. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one (1) of the officials of the municipality, other than a member
of the Township Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is an Environmental Commission, a member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there are both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the Township Council, to be appointed by the
Township Council.
D. Class IV: six (6) Class IV members who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, position
or employment, except that one (1) member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or historic preservation commission. No
member of the board of education may be a Class IV member of the
planning board, except that in the case of a nine-member board one
Class IV member may be a member of the board of education. If there is
a municipal environmental commission, the member of the
environmental commission who is also a member of the planning board,
is required by section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 245 (C. 40:56A-1) shall be
deemed to be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless there be
among the Class IV or alternate members of the planning board both a
member of the zoning board of adjustment or historic preservation
commission and a member of the board of education, in which case the
member common to the planning board and municipal environmental
commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the planning board.
For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of municipal office.
E. Alternate Members.
There shall be two (2) alternate members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1. The alternate members shall
meet the qualifications of class IV members and shall be designated at
the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". The
§ 132-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:299
§ 132-6. Terms of Office.
terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. No alternate
member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has either
directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Any alternate
member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be removed by
the governing body for cause. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
F. Lack of Quorum.
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by subsection b of section 14 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-23) or section 13 of P.L. 1979, c. 291 (C.
40:55D-23.1) from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or
financial interests therein, regular members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary
members of the Planning Board in order of seniority of continuous
service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the minimum number
of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter
without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or
indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular members of equal
seniority, the chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall make the
choice.
A. The term of the Mayor shall correspond to his official tenure.
B. The terms of the members comprising the Class II and Class III
members of the Planning Board shall be for one (1) year or shall
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission.
C. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three (3) years or shall
terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
D. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
E. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
§ 132-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-6
1:300
§ 132-7. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided,
for the unexpired term. Any member other than a Class I member, after a
public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the Township Council
for cause.
§ 132-8. Organization.
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four (4) years after the appointment; provided, however, that no term
of any member shall exceed four (4) years and provided further that
nothing herein shall affect the terms of any citizen members of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV
members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, except as
otherwise hereinabove provided.
F. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except
that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of
not more than one alternate shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two (2) years A vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for
the unexpired term only.
A. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from
the members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee and create and
fill such other offices as may be established by the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Board may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
C. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the powers granted to it by this chapter.
D. Minor Site Plan Committee
The minor site plan committee shall be appointed by the Chairperson
of the Planning Board and shall consist of three (3) Class IV members
of the Planning Board. The Director of the Department of Planning and
Engineering or his/her designee shall serve on the Committee as its
staff liaison and consultant, without vote. The Committee shall meet
at such times as shall be required by the submission of development
applications for its review.
§ 132-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:301
§ 132-9. Powers.
The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), and shall perform the following functions and duties:
The Committee shall recommend approval or disapproval to the
Planning Board upon such terms and conditions as may be necessary
or appropriate and shall issue a report of its recommendation to the
Planning Board. Such report shall be considered at the next regularly
scheduled action meeting of the Planning Board at which time the
Planning Board shall vote to approve, to disapprove or to modify the
report of the Minor Site Plan Committee. If approved by the Planning
Board, the recommendations of the Minor Site Plan Committee shall
constitute the decision of the Planning Board on each applications
contained in the report, and no further site plan or subdivision approval
shall be required or any application therein.
Any Planning Board member may require the Planning Board to
consider separately from the report of the Committee any application
contained in such report upon request made to the Chairperson of the
Planning Board. Such application shall thereupon be considered by the
Planning Board and voted upon separately.
A. Prepare and, after public hearing, adopt and from time to time amend a
master plan or component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands
within the township in a manner which protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare and which is otherwise
consistent with the purposes of this chapter, as set forth in Article I
hereof, and with N.J.R.S. 40:55D-28.
B. Review and approve, modify or deny, with or without conditions, site
plans, subdivisions and conditional uses and, in doing so, administer the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law, c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by state or federal law or regulations.
D. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. Prepare, annually, a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of six (6) years, and amendments thereto and
recommend same to the Township Council.
F. Consider and report to the Township Council, within thirty five (35)
days after referral to the Planning Board, as to any proposed
development regulation or revision or amendment thereto and the
Zoning Ordinance and any amendment or revision thereto submitted to
it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:55D-26a and consider and
pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by
the Township Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:55D-26b.
§ 132-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-9
1:302
§ 132-10. Conceptual Review (Workshop).
At the request of an applicant, the Planning Board may informally review a
concept plan for a development. The applicant and Planning Board shall not
be bound by any concept plan for which review is requested.
§ 132-11. Additional Reference to Planning Board.
Any municipal body, including the Township Council, or any township
department director or division manager having final authority over the
matters within his particular jurisdiction, before taking final action on any
matter before him relating to land use and development, may refer such
matter to the Planning Board for its recommendations, except for any
matter under the jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment. Such reference
shall not extend the time for action by the referring body or official, if any
is applicable, whether or not the Planning Board has submitted its report.
Whenever the Planning Board shall make a recommendation under this
subsection, such recommendation shall be followed by the municipal body
or official unless, in the case of a municipal body, the recommendation is
rejected or modified by a majority of the full authorized membership of such
body.
§ 132-12. Citizen Advisory Committees.
The Mayor may appoint one (1) or more persons as citizens' advisory
committees to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties,
but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 132-13. Submissions of Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the township
G. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c from lot area, lot
dimensional, setback and yard requirements.
2. Direction pursuant to Article IX of this chapter for the issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
H. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the Township Council for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or township officials.
I. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of all township ordinances
related to the powers, functions and duties generally performed by the
Planning Board, other than the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 132-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:303
(Natural Resources Inventory), the Planning Board shall make available to
the Environmental Commission an information copy of every application
for development submitted to the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning
Board to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 132-14. Certificates of Subdivision.
The Secretary of the Planning Board is designated as the official who shall
prepare and issue certificates as to the approval of a subdivision of land,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 132-15. Notice for Rezoning. [Amended 12-11-95 by Ord. No.
95-43]
Notice by personal service or certified mail and regular mail shall be
made by the East Brunswick Township Clerk to all property owners whose
land is the subject of an ordinance to rezone, subject to the remaining
provisions of this section. Notice will be given to all property owners
within 200 feet of the property to be rezoned no later than ten (10) days
prior to Township Council Public hearing. If any adjacent property owner
is a member of a homeowners association, notice shall be given to the
homeowners association and not to the individual owners of homes whose
members belong to the homeowners association. If more than 50 properties
are the subject of the proposed rezoning, the Township Clerk shall take a
block advertisement in a newspaper advising of the rezoning and referring
to the streets which are affected. All notice shall be given prior to the public
hearing on the ordinance. Notice shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an identification
of the affected zoning districts and proposed boundary changes, if any,
by street names, common names or other identifiable landmarks, and by
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate
in the municipal tax assessor's office. The municipal clerk shall execute
affidavits of proof of service of the notices required by this section, and shall
keep the affidavits on file along with the proof of publication of the notice
of the required public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance change.
Costs of the notice provision shall be the responsibility of the proponent of
the amendment.
§ 132-13 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-15
1:304
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board
§ 132-16. Establishment.
There is hereby established, pursuant to Section 57, P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.R.S. 40:55D-69a), a Zoning Board of Adjustment, also known as the
"Zoning Board" or the "Board of Adjustment".
§ 132-17. Membership. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19; 3-7-05
by Ord. No. 05-03]
The Board shall consist of seven (7) members and not more than four
(4) alternate members who shall be residents of the Township of East
Brunswick. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of authority
appointing them as "Alternate No. 1", "Alternate No. 2, Alternate 3" and
Alternate 4" as appropriate.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings, but
may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the size
of the zoning board of adjustment established by ordinance of the governing
body pursuant to section 56 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40.55D-69). A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, alternate members shall vote in the order of
their numerical designations.
If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular
or alternate members is prohibited by section 56 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(C. 40:55D-69) from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or
financial interest therein, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be
called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the
Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall
be called upon to serve in order of seniority of continuous service to the
Planning Board until there are the minimum number of members necessary
to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or
financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be
made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the chairman of the
Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 132-18. Terms of Office. [Amended 3-7-05 by Ord. No. 05-03]
The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the
Township Council. The terms of the members first appointed under this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular
members, evenly over the first four (4) years after their appointment, and
in the case of alternate members, evenly over the first two years after their
appointment; provided that the initial term of no regular members shall
exceed four years and that the initial term of no alternate member shall
§ 132-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-18
1:305
exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be four (4)
years; and the term of each alternate member shall be two years. The terms
of not more than two alternate members shall expire in any one year.
§ 132-19. Vacancies. [Amended 3-7-05 by Ord. No. 05-03]
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. A member may, after public hearing if he requests
it, be removed by the Township Council for cause.
§ 132-20. Organization.
§ 132-21. Powers. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
A. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
B. The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry into effect the powers granted to it by this
chapter.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the
Director of Planning and Engineering or his designee, based on or made
in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized to pass by the Zoning Ordinance or
Official Map ordinance in accordance with this act.
C. 1. Where (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property; or (b) by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property; or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant upon an application or an appeal
§ 132-18 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-21
1:306
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of
such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship;
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this act would be advanced by a deviation
from the zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62 et seq; provided; however, that no variance from those
departures enumerated in subsection d of this section shall be
granted under this subsection; and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the planning
board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction
with which the planning board has power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. C. 40:55D-60a.
D. In particular cases and for special reasons grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62-68, to
permit (1)a use or principal structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure, (2) an expansion of a nonconforming
use, (3) deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to C.
40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a conditional use, (4) an increase in the
permitted floor area ratio as defined in C. 40:55D-4, (5) an increase in
the permitted density as defined in C. 40:55D-4 except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit
buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots
resulting from a minor subdivision or (6) a height of a principal
structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height
permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance under this
subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five
members.
If an application for development requests one or more variances but
not a variance for a purpose enumerated in subsection d of this section,
the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered
under subsection c of this section.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning
ordinance. In respect of any airport hazard area delineated under
the "Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S. 6:1-80", no
variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Section
permitting the creation or establishment of a non-conforming use which
would be prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant to
that Act except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of
Transportation. An application under this Section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
§ 132-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-21
1:307
§ 132-22. Appeal of Administrative Decision.
§ 132-23. Appeal to Township Council. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord.
No. 92-19; deleted in its entirety 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04]
E. Grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to this
chapter or conditional use approval pursuant to this chapter whenever
the Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a
use variance pursuant to Subsection (d) above.
F. Render advisory opinions regarding the interpretation, application and
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance upon request of the Planning
Board, the Director of Planning and Engineering or his designee or
other township officials.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of the Director of the Department of Planning
and Engineering or his designee(s) or the Zoning Officer of the
Township of East Brunswick, based on or made in the enforcement of
the Zoning Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20)
days by filing a notice of appeal with the Director of the Department of
Planning and Engineering or his designee(s), specifying the grounds of
such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Manager of the Department of Planning and
Engineering, from whose action the appeal is taken, certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior
Court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
upon due cause shown.
C. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and, to that end, have all the powers of
the Director of the Department of Planning and Engineering or his
designee(s), from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 132-21 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-23
1:308
ARTICLE V
Provisions Applicable to Both Boards
§ 132-24. Rules and Regulations (by laws).
The Boards shall adopt such rules, regulations and by-laws as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this Ordinance.
§ 132-25. Attorney, Experts and Staff.
Each Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal
counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Council for its use.
§ 132-26. Financial/Personal Interest.
No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
§ 132-27. Site Plan Approval. [Amended 6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-69;
11-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-107; 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
The applicable Board pursuant to 40:55D-1 et seq. shall approve subdivision
plats as a condition for the filing of such plats with the County Recording
Officer. The applicable Board pursuant to 40:55D-1 et seq. shall also
approve of site plans as a condition for the issuance of a permit for
construction of all new buildings and additions to all existing buildings,
except for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings and accessory
agricultural buildings not exceeding 12,500 square feet to support existing
agricultural uses on-site.
The Director of Planning & Engineering or designee may waive the site plan
approval requirement if the new construction, addition or change in use or
occupancy does not have a substantive effect on factors such as existing
site circulation, stormwater runoff, landscaping, lighting, parking and other
typical considerations of site plan review.
§ 132-28. Pre-Application Meetings.
Before filing a formal application in accordance with the procedure set
forth in this Article, applicants are encouraged to meet with the Township's
technical personnel, including the Planning Management staff, Township
Engineer, Construction Official, and Fire, Police and Health Departments,
where appropriate, prior to submitting a formal application for
development. The purpose of the informal meeting is to make the applicant
aware of the specific requirements applicable to the area, or type of
development being considered.
§ 132-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-29
1:309
§ 132-29. Application Submittal. [Amended 4-20-09 by Ord. No.
09-11]
An application for the development of land shall be submitted with the
required fees, and all required submissions as set forth under checklists
below to the Director of Planning and Engineering or his designee. The
Director of Planning and Engineering, or his designee shall (a) review
the application to determine its completeness; (b) determine the type of
development action required; and (c) forward the application to the proper
board or agency for subsequent action.
A. Incomplete Application
If found to be incomplete, the application shall be returned to the
applicant within forty five(45) days of submission with information as to
what is lacking.
B. Complete Application
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the Director of Planning and Engineering
or his designee. In the event that the Director of Planning and
Engineering or designee does not certify the application to be complete
within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be
deemed complete upon the expiration of the 45 day period for purposes
of commencing the applicable time period.
C. Within the required time period the completed application and site plan
shall be set down for hearing before the Planning Board which shall
review the site plan to ensure that it complies with the following
standards and regulations [Added 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]:
(1) The application and site plan contain all of the items and
information required under ordinances of the Township of East
Brunswick.
(2) The proposed buildings, structures and use are in accordance with
the standards of this chapter and all ordinances of the Township of
East Brunswick, including the Master Plan of the Township of East
Brunswick as may be in existence at the time of the application.
(3) The application and site plan provide a storm water management
proposal meeting the goals and objectives of Township Ordinances.
(4) Adequate provisions are made to screen all playgrounds and
parking, service and storage areas from the view of adjacent
properties and streets, during all seasons of the year, whenever the
Planning Board shall determine that such screening is necessary to
protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
§ 132-29 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-29
1:310
§ 132-30. Checklists.7 [Amended 7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-82; 8-23-93
by Ord. No. 93-48; 10-15-01 by Ord. No. 01-33; 2-27-06 by Ord. No.
06-06; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
§ 132-31. Environmental Impact Ordinance.
Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to require developers to evaluate and
assess the impacts on the environment generated by land development
projects and to enable the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to
review such environmental analysis in order to reduce the adverse impact
of development on the environment.
Requirements.
(5) The location, intensity and direction of all outdoor lighting is such
that it will not have an adverse effect upon the existing or future
use of adjoining properties.
(6) Bikeways are installed or easements therefor granted to the
township, in accordance with the provisions of § 192-27 of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick. [Added 2-9-76 by Ord. No.
76-8-AAA]
(7) Sidewalks are installed, wherever so required by the Planning
Board, in accordance with the provisions of § 192-19 of the Code of
the Township of East Brunswick and that ramp access of a type
approved by the Planning Board is provided to allow access to all
public buildings by the physically handicapped.
A. An environmental impact evaluation of the site (hereafter "the study")
shall be submitted by the applicant as required by the checklists.
B. The environmental impact assessment shall be prepared by a person or
persons having appropriate experience and background, and shall
identify all relevant sources of information used in its preparation, and
shall consider the topography, surface water bodies, energy, air quality,
noise, surface water quality, aquatic biota, soils, geology, subsurface
water, unique scenic or historic features, vegetation, wildlife and
archaeological features of the entire site proposed for development.
Forest vegetation shall be classified by type and age class. Map scales
shall be no larger than l inch equals 100 feet, or as required by the
Board.
1. Topography — The study shall provide a topographic survey
showing one foot contour intervals within the proposed areas of
intended use and in the areas within the perimeter of disturbance.
The study shall also include a relief map, showing areas of common
elevation.
7. Editor's Note: The Checklists are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 132-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-31
1:311
2. Surface water bodies — Describe existing water courses and water
bodies that abut, impact or are partially or totally on the site and
their relationship to the area of land disturbance. Calculate
existing surface runoff from the site. When the natural drainage
pattern will be significantly altered, an analysis shall be conducted
which will investigate flow, depth, capacity and water quality of the
receiving waters. When required, floodplain areas shall be mapped
in consultation with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. Existing drainage structures shall be mapped and the
capacity of the drainage network shall be determined.
3. Energy — Describe the proposed energy sources for all elements of
the project, and identify alternative conservation measures that
may be utilized.
4. Air quality — Describe each contamination source, its location, the
quantity and nature of materials to be emitted from any furnace or
other device in which coal, fuel, oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene,
wood or other combustible material will be burned or if any other
source of air pollutants, including vehicles attracted by the facility,
will be present on the site during or after construction. If a state or
federal emission permit is required, a copy of the permit and all
resource data submitted with the application for the permit shall
accompany the environmental assessment.
5. Noise — Description of all noise generating equipment, both during
construction and after construction shall be identified. The decibel
level shall be measured and new sources supplied. Compliance
shall be made with the East Brunswick noise ordinance.
6. Surface water quality — Water quality analysis examining existing
water quality conditions and protecting project impacts, with
complete water testing according to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to be performed by a New Jersey State
Certified Laboratory.
7. Aquatic biota — Describe and identify fish and plant life that may
be associated with surface water bodies.
8. Soils — Soils of the proposed area of land disturbance shall be
mapped. List and describe each soil type located on the site,
relative to the project proposed, including percolation data, depth
to seasonal high water table (as indicated by the shallowest depth
to soil mottling), erosion potential, aquifer recharge area and other
factors related to soil as per the soil survey from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
9. Geology — Describe the geologic formations, including surficial
deposits associated with the site, relative to the project proposed.
10. Subsurface water — Describe subsurface water conditions on the
site in terms of depth to ground water and water supply capabilities
§ 132-31 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-31
1:312
on the site. Where existing conditions warrant, provide information
regarding existing wells within 500 feet of the site relative to
depth, capacity and water quality. Detail the water supply
capabilities of the adjacent areas and the recharge capabilities of
the site.
11. Unique scenic or historic features — Describe and map those
portions of the site that can be considered to have unusual scenic
and/or historic qualities and have unusual scenic and/or historic
qualities and attributes.
12. Vegetation — Describe existing vegetation on the site. A map shall
be prepared showing the location of major vegetated groupings,
such as woodlands, open fields and wetlands. Where woodlands are
delineated, the forest types shall be indicated (for example: upland
deciduous, lowland deciduous, etc.). Specimen trees are to be
identified as to location and species.
13. Wildlife — Identify and describe any protected species and
habitats. Evaluate additions and losses to species and habitat
areas.
C. The environmental impact assessment should describe, with
appropriate maps, the proposed project. The assessment shall
summarize, rather than duplicate, the site plan and building plan. The
assessment shall include a survey and description of the environmental
features of the property. The scope and detail of the impact assessment
will be determined by the Township staff, in consultation with the
Environmental Commission.
D. In the review of an applicant's plan, the Board shall consider both the
potential adverse and the positive environmental impacts of any
proposed project as major factors in its findings and shall make
findings. The object shall be to reduce, minimize or eliminate adverse
environmental factors caused by the proposed development.
Critical Impacts.
Plans shall include any area, condition or feature which is
environmentally sensitive or which, if disturbed during construction,
would adversely affect the physical, social or historic environment of
the area.
A. Critical impact areas include, but are not limited to, stream
corridors, streams, wetlands, estuaries, slopes greater than 20
percent, high acid or high erodible soils, areas of high water table,
mature stands of native vegetation, aquifer recharge areas and
archaeologically sensitive areas.
B. A statement of impact upon critical areas and a listing of adverse
impacts which cannot be avoided shall be included.
§ 132-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-31
1:313
§ 132-32. Fees. [Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-16; 5-13-91 by
Ord. No. 91-48; 3-27-95 by Ord. No. 95-10]
Fees for application or for the rendering of any service by the Boards or any
members of their administrative staffs shall be as follows:
TYPE OF
APPLICATION FILING FEE
$1,500 for first 10,000 SF of tract area
and
$100 for each additional 5,000 SF or
portion thereof plus
$700 for each 1,000 SF of floor area up
to 10,000 SF and
Preliminary/Final Site
$100 for each 10,000 SF of floor area
over 10,000 SF
Site Plan Modification $1,500
Minor Site Plan $200
Conditional Use $500
Minor Subdivision $500 plus $375 per lot
Preliminary Subdivision $1,100 plus $375 per lot
Final Subdivision $1,300 plus $175 per lot
C. Proposed measures intended by the developer to minimize damage
to critical impact areas shall be indicated, both for the construction
period and post construction period.
D. A list of all licenses, permits, and other approvals that are required
by municipal, county, regional, or state law and a status of each
shall be included.
Approval.
No application for development shall be approved unless the
application has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the municipal
agency, through the study and such other information as the
application may provide, that the development:
1. Will not result in a significant adverse impact on the environment.
2. Has been conceived and designed in such a manner that it will not
significantly impair natural processes.
3. Will not place disproportionate or excessive demand upon the total
resources available to the project site or to the impact area.
Waiver.
The appropriate Board may waive any provision of this ordinance if
deemed not applicable.
§ 132-31 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32
1:314
TYPE OF
APPLICATION FILING FEE
Deed Review $150 per deed/description
$100 per variance in residential zones
when exempt from site plan
review
$300 per variance in residential zones
when site plan or subdivision
required
Bulk Variance
$375 per variance in all other zones
Use Variance $1,500
$8,500 for first 40 acres or any part
thereof, and
$100 for each additional acre over 40
acres or any part thereof, and
$100 per unit of residential
development, and
P.U.R.D. (Preliminary)
$0.20 per square foot of commercial
development
$4,000 plus $50 per unit (residential
development) and
P.U.R.D. (Final)
$0.20 per square foot of commercial
development
Request for Extension
of Time
$300
Zoning Board $250 residential zones
Interpretation of
Ordinance and Map $450 all other zones
Subdivision Certificate $10
Property Owners
Within 200 feet Radius
$0.25 per name or $10.00 whichever is
greater
Permit for Structure on $150 residential zones
Lot Not Related to a
Street $250 all other zones
Appeal to Township
Council
$200
Pre-Application Review $150 per request
§ 132-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32
1:315
TYPE OF
APPLICATION FILING FEE
Review of Homeowners
Documents
$550 for initial submission, plus $150
per addition to the initial
document in order to expand the
originally approved coverage of
the Homeowner's Declaration of
Covenants to add sections to the
development
Review of Revised
Plans in Accordance
with Resolutions of
Approval beyond
applicant's initial
resubmission
$300 per resubmittal
Review of As-Built
Drawings
$375 per request
Zoning Board, Appeal
of
$125 residential zones
Decision $375 all other zones
Review of Application
for completeness
beyond initial
submission
$75 per submittal
Conversion of Final
Plat to CAD Format
$25 plus $10 per lot
Where an applicant seeks more than one approval in an Application for
Development, applicant shall pay an aggregate fee equal to the total of all
separate fees payable for each approval requested in the Application for
Development. For purposes of this section separate fees shall be payable for
use variances and for bulk variances.
No fee shall be required for a bulk variance from the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance where it involves a pre-existing condition.
Whenever an application is made for site plan approval or a use variance
with regard to a pre-existing undersized lot or parcel, the fee for bulk
variances shall not exceed $375.00, regardless of the number of new bulk
variances required.
Refunds-Application fees involving site plan, subdivision and variance
applications which are withdrawn prior to one week preceding the first
scheduled public hearing are entitled to a refund in accordance with the
following schedule:
1. Prior to certification that application is complete - 90%.
§ 132-32 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32
1:316
§ 132-32.1. Mandatory Development Fees. [Added 10-13-97 by Ord.
No. 97-28; amended 2-23-98 by Ord. No. 98-8; 4-18-05 by Ord. No.
05-06; 4-24-6 by Ord. No. 06-15; 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19;
Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
2. After certification but prior to one week preceding the first scheduled
public hearing - 50%.
Revised Plans-Each additional review of revised plans in accordance
with Resolutions of approval adopted by the Planning or Zoning Board
for approval compliance - $50.00 for minor and modified subdivisions
and site plans, and $200.00 for major site plan and subdivision
compliance review beyond the applicant's initial resubmission of plans.
A. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121
N.J. 550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of
1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of
rules. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH was authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or a Court of competent jurisdiction and
have an approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
residential and non-residential development.
This ordinance establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations
and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees
collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This ordinance shall
be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development
fees.
B. Basic Requirements. [Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; amended
3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
1. This ordinance shall not be effective until approved by the Court as
part of the grant of a Judgement of Compliance and Repose.
2. The Township of East Brunswick shall not spend development fees
until the Court has approved a plan for spending such fees as part
of the grant of a Judgement of Compliance and Repose.
C. Residential Development Fees. All developers of residential
developments for which minor or major subdivision or site plan
approval are required shall pay a development fee of one and one half
(1.5) percent of the equalized assessed value for each residential unit
§ 132-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32.1
1:317
constructed. When an increase in residential density pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) (known as a Ad@ variance) has been permitted,
developers shall be required to pay a development fee of six percent
(6%) of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit approved.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application, the density for the
purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the
filing of the variance application. [Amended 4-18-05 by Ord. No.
05-06; 4-24-06 by Ord. No. 06-15; 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
D. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Developments.
1. Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from the payment of development
fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be exempt
from the payment of development fees, unless the developer seeks
a substantial change in the original approval. Where site plan
approval is not applicable, the issuance of a Zoning Permit and/or
Construction Permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final
site plan approval for the purpose of determining the right to an
exemption. In all cases, the applicable fee percentage shall be
determined based upon the Development Fee Ordinance in effect
on the date that the Construction Permit is issued.
3. Improvements or additions to existing one and two-family dwellings
on individual lots shall not be required to pay a development fee,
but a development fee shall be charged for any new dwelling
constructed as a replacement for a previously existing dwelling on
the same lot that was or will be demolished, unless the owner
resided in the previous dwelling for a period of one year or more
prior to obtaining a demolition permit. Where a development fee is
charged for a replacement dwelling, the development fee shall be
calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
new structure as compared to the previous structure.
4. Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster (such as a fire or
flood) shall be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
E. Nonresidential Development Fees. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential
developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to two and
one-half (2.5) percent of the equalized assessed value of the land and
improvements, for all new non-residential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots. Non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall also
§ 132-32.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32.1
1:318
pay a fee equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the increase
in equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for non-residential purposes
Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of two and
a half percent (2.5%) shall be calculated on the difference between the
equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvement and
the equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If
the calculation required under this section results in a negative number,
the non-residential development fee shall be zero. [Amended 9-14-09
by Ord. No. 09-19]
F. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for nonresidential
development:
1) The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the two and a half (2.5)
percent development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
2) The two and a half percent (2.5% development fee shall not apply to
an increase in equalized assessed value resulting from alterations,
change in use within the existing footprint, reconstruction,
renovations and repairs.
3) Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF A State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption@ Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4) A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the
non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the non-residential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination
of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development
fees under these circumstances may be enforceable by the
Township of East Brunswick as a lien against the real property of
the owner
G. Collection of Fees. [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
§ 132-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32.1
1:319
1. An estimated development fee shall be calculated by the certified
financial officer or designee, utilizing estimates for equalized
assessed value, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
2. Developers shall pay the estimated development fee in full to the
Township of East Brunswick at the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Such development fees shall be deposited into an
escrow account and held until: (1) the tax assessor officially
calculates the equalized assessed value in conjunction with the
annual added assessment list, and (2) the final development fee
using the equalized assessed value is calculated by the certified
financial officer or designee. The developer shall be responsible for
paying any difference between the amount paid at the time of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the final development
fee. The Township shall be required to refund any monies paid at
the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in excess of
the final development fee.
3. Collection procedures. [Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19;
amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval, for a development, the applicable approving
authority shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official
or designee responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
b. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also
be provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Non-Residential Development Certification/Exemption" or its
successor to be completed as per the instructions provided.
The developer of a non-residential development shall complete
Form N-RDF as per the instructions provided. The
Construction Official or designee shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the
instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor
shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final
assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
[Added 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
c. The Construction Official or designee shall notify the Tax
Assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a
development which is subject to a development fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Tax Assessor, based
on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy or designee notifies the Tax Assessor
§ 132-32.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32.1
1:320
of any and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection
on property which is subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a
final inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify
the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the
improvements of the development; calculate the development
fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the
fee.
g. Should East Brunswick Township fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10
business days of the request for final inspection, the developer
may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount
consistent with the dispute process set forth in subsection b of
section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Appeal of development fees. [Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by East Brunswick
Township. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by East Brunswick Township. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
I. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No.
09-19; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
1. There is hereby created an interest bearing housing trust fund for
the purpose of receiving development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls. All development fees paid by developers
pursuant to this ordinance shall be deposited in this fund. No
money shall be expended from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by
§ 132-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32.1
1:321
COAH or the Court, as applicable. The following additional funds
shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall
at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
b. Developer contributed funds to make ten percent (10%) of the
adaptable entrances in a townhouse or other multistory
attached development accessible;
c. Rental income from municipally operated units;
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
e. Recapture funds;
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
g. Any other funds collected in connection with East Brunswick
Township's affordable housing program.
2. If COAH or the Court determines that the Township of East
Brunswick is not in conformance with COAH's rules on
development fees, the State of New Jersey shall be authorized to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant
to this ordinance shall be expended. Such authorization is pursuant
to: this ordinance, COAH's rules on development fees, and the
written authorization from the Township Council to the bank in
which the housing trust fund is located.
J. Use of Funds. [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; 3-6-17 by Ord.
No. 17-12]
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address East
Brunswick Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are
not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose
of maintaining or implementing affordability controls,
rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and
related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity
permitted by the Court as specified in the approved spending plan.
§ 132-32.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32.1
1:322
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of East
Brunswick for past housing activities.
3. At least 30 percent of all development fees collected and interest
earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30 percent or
less of median income by region.
4. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, utility payment assistance, security deposit assistance,
low interest loans, rental assistance, assistance with homeowners
association or condominium fees and special assessments, and
assistance with emergency repairs.
5. Affordability assistance to households earning 30 percent or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30 percent or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner may entitle the
Township of East Brunswick to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.7.
6. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
7. The Township of East Brunswick may contract with a private or
public entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance,
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
8. No more than 20 percent of all revenues collected from
development fees annually, may be expended on administration,
including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal
employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a
new construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a
rehabilitation program, no more than 20 percent of the annual
revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used
for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of
sale and rental units, and compliance with the Court's monitoring
requirements. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing
affordable housing sites or objecting to the Court's or COAH's
requirements or regulations and/or actions are not eligible uses of
the affordable housing trust fund. [Amended 11-28-16 by Ord.
16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
§ 132-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32.1
1:323
K. Monitoring.
On the first anniversary of the entry of the Order granting East
Brunswick a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of the Repose period, the
Township shall provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust
Fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government Services, or other
entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided
to Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the municipal website,
using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of
all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and
amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which any
funds have been expended. [Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19;
amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21]
L. Expiration of Ordinance.
The ability for East Brunswick Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of its Judgement of
Compliance and Repose unless East Brunswick Township has, prior to
that expiration, filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
with the Court or COAH, or other authorized agency duly empowered
to grant substantive certification or its equivalent, has petitioned for a
new Judgement of Compliance and Repose or substantive certification,
and has received approval of its development fee ordinance from the
applicable entity. If East Brunswick Township fails to renew its ability
to impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of its
Judgement of Compliance and Repose, it may be subject to forfeiture
of any or all funds remaining within its housing trust fund. Any funds
so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C.
52:27D-320). East Brunswick Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development, nor shall East Brunswick Township
retroactively impose a residential development fee on a development,
nor shall East Brunswick Township expend development fees after the
expiration of its Judgement of Compliance and Repose. [Amended
9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
M. Definitions. [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; 11-28-16 by
Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
1. "Affordable Housing Development" means a development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes but is not
limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100 percent affordable development. [Added 9-14-09
by Ord. No. 09-19]
§ 132-32.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-32.1
1:324
§ 132-33. Escrow. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-23; 10/2/95 by
Ord. No. 95-34; 10-15-01 by Ord. No. 01-33]
Escrow shall be deposited with the Township to cover the cost of any
professional services rendered to the municipality or approving authority
for review of applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes under the
provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
Prior to an application being ruled complete, the following sum(s) shall be
submitted to be held in escrow:
2. "COAH" or the "Council" means the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing established under the Fair Housing Act given
as primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing
obligations in the State or any subsequent entity assigned primary
jurisdiction for the administration of affordable housing.
[Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; 11-28-16 by Ord.
16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
3. "Developer" means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
[Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
4. "Development fees" means money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted by law. [Amended 9-14-09
by Ord. No. 09-19; 3-6-17 by Ord. 17-12]
5. "Equalized assessed value" means the assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C.
54:1-35a through C. 54:1-35c.). [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No.
09-19]
6. "Green Building Strategies" means those strategies that minimize
the impact of development on the environment, and enhance the
health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making
optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
[Added 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19]
7. "Judgment of Compliance and Repose" means a judgment issued by
the Superior Court approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair
share obligation. [Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-19; 3-6-17
by Ord. No. 17-12]
§ 132-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-33
1:325
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(Subdivisions, P.U.R.D.'s)
ESCROW TO BE POSTED
0-25 Units/Lots $2,000.00
26-100 Units/Lots $2,500.00
101+ Units/Lots $4,999.00
NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(Subdivision)
NOT INVOLVING STRUCTURES
LOTS
0-3 $3,500.00
3+ $4,999.00
NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(Site Plans)
INVOLVING STRUCTURES/
PAVEMENT
TOTAL FLOOR PLAN
1,250-2,500 square feet $1,000.00
2,501-20,000 square feet $2,000.00
20,000+ square feet $4,999.00
USE VARIANCE [Added 10-15-01 by
Ord. No. 01-33]
$1,000.00
Escrow shall be posted with the Township in cash, Certified Check or Money
Order.
All funds shall be deposited by the Finance Officer in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements shall
be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the
application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection
with an application for development presently pending before the approving
authority or upon review of compliance with conditions of approval, or
review of requests for modification or amendment made by the applicant.
A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by any
State governmental agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to
the extent consultation with a State agency is necessary due to the effect of
State approvals in the subdivision or site plan.
If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development, application
review, or inspection of improvements, the municipality shall be responsible
for all time and expenses of the new professional to become familiar with
the application or the project, and the municipality shall not bill the
applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
§ 132-33 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-33.1
1:326
§ 132-33.1. Reimbursement. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-23;
amended 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34]
The municipality shall be reimbursed for all payments to independent
consultants in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. If the salary, staff
support and overhead for a municipal professional are provided by the
municipality, the charge shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the products
resulting from multiplying (1) the hourly base salary, which shall be
established annually by ordinance, of each of the professionals by (2) the
number of hours spent by the respective professional upon review of the
application for development or inspection of the developer's improvements,
as the case may be. For other professionals the charge shall be at the
same rate as all other work of the same nature by the professional for
the municipality when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants or developers.
§ 132-33.2. Definition of Professional. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No.
93-23]
All escrow funds shall be utilized by the appropriate Board to pay the cost
of any professional fees incurred by the Board for review and/or testimony.
The term "professional", as used herein, shall include the services of a duly
licensed engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney, appraiser or other expert
who would provide professional services to insure that an application
complies with the standards set forth in Township ordinances and experts
whose testimony may be solicited to give further information to the
Approving Board in any area addressed by any of applicant's experts.
§ 132-33.3. Refund of Escrow. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-23;
amended 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34]
The following close-out procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow
accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1
et seq.) and shall commence after the approving authority has granted
final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have
been approved as provided in section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-53),
in the case of improvement inspection escrows and deposits. The applicant
shall send written notice by certified mail to the chief financial officer of
the municipality and the approving authority, and to the relevant municipal
professional, that the application or the improvements, as the case may be
are completed. After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render
a final bill to the chief financial officer of the municipality within 30 days,
and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The chief financial
officer of the municipality shall render a written final accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of
receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow
account, including interest in accordance with section 1 of P.L. 1985, c. 315
(C. 40:55D-53.1), shall be refunded to the developer along with the final
accounting.
§ 132-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-33.3
1:327
NOTE: To facilitate the release of escrow, applicants are requested to
submit a signed escrow release voucher with the development application.
§ 132-33.4. Reimbursement for Services. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord.
No. 93-23]
No subdivision plat or deed, or site plan, shall be signed, nor shall any
zoning permits, based upon variances or interpretations of the Zoning
Ordinance, building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other types of
permits be issued with respect to any approved application for development
until:
§ 132-33.5. Charge for Services. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-23;
amended 2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
§ 132-33.6. Payments. [Added 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34]
The Chief Financial Officer of a municipality shall make all of the payments
to professionals for services rendered to the municipality or approving
authority for review of applications for development, review and
preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes
under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Such
fees or charges shall be based upon a schedule established by resolution.
Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of document and inspection of improvements shall be
(a) All bills for reimbursable services have been received by the
municipality from professional persons rendering services in
connection with such application;
(b) The applicant has reimbursed the municipality the excess by which the
amount of the bills exceeds the amount escrowed. The applicant shall
place on the record its agreement to be bound by the provisions of the
Township's escrow ordinances.
A. No professional personnel submitting bills to the Township under this
chapter shall charge for any of the services referred to therein at any
higher rate or in any different manner from that which would normally
be charged to the municipality for similar work. Payment of any bill
rendered by a professional to the municipality with respect to any
service for which the municipality is entitled to reimbursement shall in
no way be contingent upon receipt of reimbursement by the applicant,
nor shall any payment for service be delayed pending reimbursement of
the Township by an applicant.
B. Charges for professionals who are employees of the municipality may
not exceed 200% of the sum of the products resulting from multiplying
the hourly base salary (established by ordinance, as aforesaid) by the
number of hours spent by the professional in reviewing the application
for development, including all meetings and site visits.
§ 132-33.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-33.6
1:328
pursuant to a voucher from the professional, which voucher shall identify
the personnel performing the service, and for each date the services
performed, the hours spent to one-quarter hour increments, the hourly rate
and the expenses incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality on a monthly basis in accordance
with schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality. If the services are provided by a municipal employee,
the municipal employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality a statement containing the same information as
required on a voucher, on a monthly basis. The professional shall send an
informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the applicant. The
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall prepare and send to the
applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of funds, listing
all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and the cumulative balance
of the escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly
basis if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly
charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient
funds to enable the municipality or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality shall provide the applicant with a notice of the
insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on
the development or the application, the applicant shall, within a reasonable
time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed upon
by the municipality or approving authority and the applicant. In the interim,
any required health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back
against the replenishment of funds.
§ 132-33.7. Dispute of Charges. [Added 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34]
A. An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body, with copies to
the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional, whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a
professional for service rendered to the municipality in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements, or other charges made pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). The governing
body, or its designee, shall, within a reasonable time period, attempt to
remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved to the
satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the County
Construction Board of Appeals established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975,
c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127) any charge to an escrow account or a
deposit by any municipal professional or consultant, or the cost of the
installation of improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer
pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). An
applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to
the County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his
authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the
municipality, approving authority, and any professional whose charge is
the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an appeal within 45
§ 132-33.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-33.7
1:329
days from receipt of the informational copy of the professional's
voucher required by Subsection c of Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53-2), except that if the professional has not supplied
the applicant with an informational copy of the professional's voucher,
then the applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt
of the municipal statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by Subsection c of Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53-2). An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing
series of charges by a professional during a period not exceeding six
months to demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need not
appeal each charge individually.
B. The County Construction Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal, render
a decision thereon, and file its decision with a statement of the reasons
therefor with the municipality or approving authority not later than 10
business days following the submission of the appeal, unless such
period of time has been extended with the consent of the applicant. The
decision may approve, disapprove, or modify the professional charges
appealed from. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded by certified or
registered mail to the party making the appeal, the municipality, the
approving authority, and the professional involved in the appeal. Failure
by the Board to hear an appeal and render and file a decision thereon
within the time limits prescribed in this subsection shall be deemed a
denial of the appeal for purposes of a complaint, application, or appeal
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. The county construction board of appeals shall provide rules for its
procedure in accordance with this section. The board shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, and
the provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigation Law," P.L.
1953, c. 38 (C. 2A:6AA-1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. During the pendence of any appeal, the municipality or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear, and decide the application for
development, and to inspect the development in the normal course, and
shall not withhold, delay, or deny reviews, inspections, signing of
subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release of
performance or maintenance guarantees, the issuance of construction
permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this subsection.
The chief financial officer of the municipality may pay charges out of the
appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal has been
filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the chief financial officer
of the municipality shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the
amount of any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the
applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or
consultant who is not an employee of the municipality, the professional
§ 132-33.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-33.7
1:330
§ 132-34. Submissions of Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board and to the Board of Adjustment an index of the natural
resources of the Township (Natural Resources Inventory), the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment shall make available to the Environmental
Commission an information copy of every application for development
submitted to either Board. Failure of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 132-35. Notice Requirements.
Notices pursuant to this ordinance shall state the time and place of the
hearing; the nature of the matters to be considered; and in, the case of
notices pursuant to N.J.S.A. C. 40:55D-12, identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot
and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal
Tax Assessor's Office, and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.R.S. 40:55D-1 et seq.), the applicant shall give
notice as follows:
or consultant shall reimburse the municipality in the amount of any
such disallowed charge.
A. Notice shall be given by the applicant not less than ten (10) days prior
to the date of the hearing.
B. Public notice of a hearing on all applications for development and for
appeals, except for minor site plans, and final subdivision, shall be
given by the applicant. Public notice shall be given by publication in one
of the official newspapers of the township.
C. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection B of
this section shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown
on the current tax duplicate, located in the State and within two
hundred (200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject
of such hearing; provided that this requirement shall be deemed
satisfied by notice to the (1) condominium association, in the case of
any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or (2) horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an
apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the property owner as shown on said current tax duplicate,
or his agent in charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on said
current tax duplicate. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other person
§ 132-33.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-35
1:331
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property
regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because of its
ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners,
or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
D. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Director of Planning and
Engineering or his designee shall, within seven (7) days, make and
certify a list from said current tax duplicates of names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
Subsection C of this section. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon
the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A
sum not to exceed $.25 per name, or $10.00, whichever is greater, shall
be charged for such list.
E. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal
boundary. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the
application for development which has been filed with the East
Brunswick Director of Planning and Engineering or his designee(s), and
by three (3) full sets of all supporting documents. The copy of the
foregoing application and documents which are delivered to the
Middlesex County Planning Board shall bear the "received" stamp of
the East Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway, as it affects
access, drainage and utilities. Such notice shall be accompanied by a
copy of the application for development which has been filed with the
East Brunswick Director of Planning and Engineering, or his designee,
and by six (6) full sets of all supporting documents. The copy of the
foregoing application and documents which are delivered to the
Commissioner of Transportation shall bear the "received" stamp of the
East Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering.
H. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceed one hundred fifty (150) acres or
§ 132-35 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-35
1:332
§ 132-36. Notices Complete Upon Mailing.
Any notice made by certified mail shall be complete upon mailing.
five hundred (500) dwelling units. Such notice shall be accompanied
by a copy of the application for development which has been filed
with the East Brunswick Director of Planning and Engineering, or his
designee, and by one (1) copy of all supporting documents. The copy
of the foregoing application and documents which are delivered to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, shall bear the "received" stamp of
the East Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering.
I. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
appropriate official of the United States Soil Conservation Service
district office of an application for development which exceeds five
thousand (5,000) square feet of soil disturbance in accordance with the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.R.S. 4:24 39 et seq. Such
notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the application for
development which has been filed with the East Brunswick Director of
Planning and Engineering, or his designee, and by three (3) full sets of
the soil erosion and sedimentation control plans submitted with such
application. The copy of the foregoing application and documents which
are delivered to the United States Soil Conservation district office shall
bear the "received" stamp of the East Brunswick Department of
Planning and Engineering.
J. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey, of any
application for development of property which involves a stream
encroachment, as defined by N.J.R.S. 58:1 et seq., and of any
application for development of property involving a floodway as
designated by the State of New Jersey. Such notice shall be
accompanied by a copy of the application for development which has
been filed with the East Brunswick Director of Planning and
Engineering, or his designee, and by five (5) full sets of the plans
submitted with each application. The copy of the foregoing application
and documents which are delivered to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection shall bear the "received" stamp of the East
Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering.
K. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service of all of the
aforesaid notices required for the applicant's particular application
with the township agency holding the hearing on the application for
development, in the event that the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to this section.
§ 132-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-37
1:333
§ 132-37. Completion of Prior Conditions.
No application for development will be granted unless all conditions
imposed on prior approved applications for the same site have been
completed.
§ 132-38. Payment of Taxes. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-24]
Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D 39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D 65,
every application for development submitted shall be accompanied by proof
that no taxes or assessments for local improvements or fines, penalties or
any monies are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of
such application; or, if it is shown that taxes, assessments, fines, penalties
or any monies are delinquent on said property, no deliberations or action
shall be taken by any Township agency or Board. At the time of Board action
or deliberation on an application, proof shall be submitted that no taxes or
assessments, as of that date, for local improvements are due or delinquent.
§ 132-39. Appearance Required.
The applicant or his agent shall appear at all regular meetings of the Board
whenever the application is being considered. Failure to appear shall give
the Board the right to postpone action on the application if the applicant or
the agent's absence deprives the Board of information necessary to make a
decision.
§ 132-40. Meetings.
§ 132-41. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the township agency
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the township
A. Meetings of each Board shall be scheduled at least once a month,
unless cancelled for lack of applications.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two (2) Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
municipal agency present except as otherwise required by Sections of
this chapter.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4 6, et seq.).
§ 132-37 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-41
1:334
agency, the findings if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Director of the Department of Planning
and Engineering. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee as established by this chapter for reproduction of the
minutes for his use.
§ 132-42. Hearings.
A. The municipal agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development or adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
B. The municipal agency shall make the rules governing the conduct of
hearings which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D 1, et seq) or of this ordinance.
C. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least ten (10) days
before the date of the hearing, during normal business hours, in the
office of the Director of the Department of Planning and Engineering.
The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at
the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed
maps and documents.
D. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c.
38, (c. 2A:67A-1 et seq), shall apply.
E. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
F. All representations, commitments and agreements made by the
applicant or his representatives at the hearing or contained in any
document, plat or submission delivered to the Board at any time,
including notes contained on any development plans, unless modified
by the Board, shall be considered as conditions of approval of the
application for development and shall be incorporated by reference in
the resolution of approval.
G. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Chairperson of the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
§ 132-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-42
1:335
§ 132-43. Decisions.
H. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recordings
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense, as set
forth in 3 114 of the Code provided that the cost shall not exceed the
maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15.
I. When any hearing before a Board shall carry over two (2) or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one (1) or more of
the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the
hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one (1) or
more of the previous meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him a transcript or recording from the
meetings from which he was absent and certifies in writing to the Board
that he has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
J. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
A. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide
the findings and conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by the municipal agency on the
application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. (C. 40:55D-9) (resulting from the
failure of a motion to approve an application) shall be memorialized
by resolution as provided above, with those members voting
against the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote
on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution
shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the
municipal agency and not to be an action of the municipal agency;
however, the date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute
the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and
publication required by subsections h and I of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. If
§ 132-42 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-43
1:336
§ 132-44. Time Limit for Decision. [Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No.
99-4]
the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing
resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply
to Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling
the municipal agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to
writing with a stated time and the cost of the application, including
attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
B. Copies of the decision shall be mailed by the Secretary of the Board
within ten (10) days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if
represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and to all
who request a copy of the decision, for a fee as specified in this chapter.
A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the township agency in the
office of the Township Clerk or the Director of the Department of
Planning and Engineering, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party for a fee as specified in this chapter
and available for public inspection at his or her office during township
business hours.
C. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the township. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Township Clerk or the Director of the Department of Planning and
Engineering or his designee, provided that the applicant may in any
case provide for publication of the decision. The applicant shall pay a
fee as designated by this chapter for publication of said notice;
provided, however, that if the applicant furnished proof of publication of
the notice of decision to the designated municipal officer within ten (10)
days from the date of decision, the township shall refund the fee paid by
the applicant to cover the cost of publication. The period of time in
which an appeal of decision may be made shall run from the first
publication of the decision, whether arranged by the township or the
applicant.
A. Site Plan (10 acres or less)
Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves ten (10) acres of land or less, and ten (10) dwelling units or
less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny site plan approval within
forty five (45) days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer, otherwise the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the site
plan.
B. Site Plan (more than 10 acres)
Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves more than ten (10) acres, or more than ten (10) dwelling units
the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval within ninety five (95)
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
§ 132-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-44
1:337
be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall
be deemed to have granted approval of the site plan.
C. Minor Subdivisions
Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within forty
five (45) days of the date of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate of the Director
of the Department of Planning and Engineering as to the failure of
the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant;
and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required, and shall be accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing the subdivision. Minor
subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Planning Board, provided that the Planning Board
may condition such approval on terms ensuring the provisions of
improvements pursuant to § 132 30 of this Article.
D. Preliminary Subdivision (10 or fewer lots)
Upon the submission of a complete application for a subdivision of ten
(10) or fewer lots, or a request for review pursuant to T.C. 132 7G the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within forty
five (45) days of the date of such submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer.
E. Preliminary Subdivision (more than 10 lots)
Upon the submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more
than ten (10) lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within ninety five (95) days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
F. Final Subdivision
Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty five (45) days
after submission of a complete application, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval and a
certificate of the Director of Planning & Engineering or designee as to
the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement
or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted
by the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
[Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-4]
G. Variances
§ 132-44 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-44
1:338
§ 132-45. Expiration of Variances.
Any variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance hereafter granted
by the Board of Adjustment, permitting the creation or alteration of any
structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any structure or any
property in a district restricted against such use, shall expire by limitation
unless construction or alteration or use shall have been actively commenced
as permitted by such variance within three (3) years from the date of
adoption of the resolution by the Zoning Board, except as otherwise
provided for by the granting authority; provided, however, that the Zoning
Board is hereby granted the authority to grant a one year extension,
provided that the applicant for such extension shall give prior notice of
this application requesting such extension to those persons entitled thereto
pursuant to Section 11 of this chapter; provided, however, that such period
of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of appeal of the
decision to any court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any
manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 132-46. Authorized Exceptions and Waivers.
The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the
decision of the Director of Planning & Engineering or designee or (2)
the submission of a complete application for development to the Board
of Adjustment. Failure of the Zoning Board to render a decision within
such one hundred twenty day period or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to
the applicant. [Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-4]
A. The Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision approval or preliminary site plan or modification of such
approvals previously granted, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the provisions of subdivision and site plan
review and approval, if literal enforcement of one (1) or more provisions
of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
B. Where an applicant desires the Board to waive any requirements of
subdivision or site plan approval, the applicant shall, at the time when it
files its application for development, in writing, designate such
requirement waivers thereof with respect to its particular applications.
The Director of Planning and Engineering or his designee shall review
such request and shall report thereon to the Board with
recommendations. The Board shall review and determine such request
at a public meeting.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Board from granting any
exceptions as described herein at the hearing on the application despite
§ 132-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-46
1:339
§ 132-47. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Amended 6-10-92 By Ord.
No. 92-19]
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291
(C. 40:55D 48) or of a site plan pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D 46)
shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three year period
from the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted.
the applicant's failure to request such waivers in its application for
development.
D. Nothing contained herein shall relieve the applicant from following all
procedures necessary for the granting of a bulk or use variance, where
applicable.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off tract improvements; and, in
the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 C. 40:55D-41; except, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the municipality from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or section or sections
of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be.
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one (1) year, but not to exceed a total extension of two (2) years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance,
such revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of fifty (50) acres
or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections A, B and C above for such period of time, longer than three
(3) years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development: provided that if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
§ 132-46 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-47
1:340
§ 132-48. Effect of Final Approval. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No.
92-19]
E. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to subsection C or D of this section and preliminary
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted,
the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added 6-10-92 by Ord.
No. 92-19]
F. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for
the extension before (1) what would otherwise be the expiration date of
preliminary approval or (2) the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an
extension pursuant to subsection C and D of this section. [Added
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
A. Site Plan or Major Subdivision.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D 49), whether conditionally
or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years
after the date on which the resolution of final approval is adopted;
provided that, in the case of a major subdivision, the rights
conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided in section 42 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291 (C. 40:55D 54). If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval and, in the case of a subdivision, has
duly recorded the plat as required in section 42 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(C. 40:55D 54), the Planning Board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one (1) year but not to exceed three (3)
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval pursuant to section 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C.
40:55D 49) for the section granted final approval. [Amended
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit
development or planned unit residential development or residential
§ 132-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-48
1:341
cluster of fifty (50) acres or more or conventional subdivision or
site plan for one hundred fifty (150) acres or more, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this
section for such period of time, longer that two (2) years, as shall
be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under final approval, (2) economic conditions
and (3) the comprehensiveness of the development. The developer
may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter
grant an extension of final approval for such additional period of
time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, (2) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining
to be developed, (3) economic conditions and (4) the
comprehensiveness of the development.
3. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to subsection 1 or 2 of this section and final approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
4. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from
what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
these approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before
(1) what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval or
(2) the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever
occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall
not preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to subsection 1 or 2 of this section. [Added 6-10-92 by
Ord. No. 92-19]
B. Minor Subdivision. [Added 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
1. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
on which the resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless
within such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the "Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et
seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision
is filed by the developer with the county recording officer, the
municipal engineer and the municipal tax assessor. Any such plat or
§ 132-48 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-48
1:342
§ 132-48.1. Submission of Final Plat. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No.
91-111; amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
Upon final approval, the final plat shall be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board, provided that the subdivider has submitted
a final plat reflecting compliance with all conditions and requirements
of final subdivision approval set forth by the Planning Board and further
provided that submission of the final plat for signature by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board is made within ninety (90) days of the date
of Planning Board approval.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The Planning
Board may for good cause shown extend the period for recording for an
additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the
deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
chairman and secretary of the Planning Board.
2. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of 2 years
after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision
approval is adopted; provided the approved minor subdivision shall
have been duly recorded as provided in this chapter.
3. The Board may extend the 190-day period for filing a minor
subdivision plat or deed pursuant to this section if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board (1) that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and (2)
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals, as determined by the Board. The developer
may apply for the extension either before or after what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
4. The Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision approval
for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year
from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before (1) what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or (2) the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
§ 132-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-48.1
1:343
plat. The Planning Board may extend the 95-day or 190-day period if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board (1)
that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities and (2) that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The
length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the
wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board. The
developer may apply for an extension either before or after the original
expiration date.
After filing the plat with the County the subdivider shall submit a signed and
sealed translucent tracing and a signed and sealed cloth copy of the plat to
the Department of Planning and Engineering.
At the time the Final Plat is submitted for signatures of Municipal Officials,
the applicant shall submit a CAD-generated data file(s), directly translatable
into an identical image of the File Map, conforming to the following:
Media: The file(s) shall be submitted upon diskette(s), either
5.25"/1.2MG or 3.50"/1.44Mb, formatted for DOS Version 3.31
or later based IBM PC's and PC compatibles. [Amended
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
Format: The file shall be either:
a. An AutoCAD drawing file (i.e., a "DWG" Extension file)
compatible with AutoCAD Release 11 or later; [Amended
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
b. An ACSII Drawing Interchange File (i.e. a ".DXF" Extension
file) compatible with AutoCAD Release 11 or later.
[Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
At the discretion of the applicant, Department of Planning & Engineering
staff can be requested to do the required conversion to CAD at a fee
in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule contained in Town Code
Section 132-32.
§ 132-49. Compensation for Reserved Lands.
Whenever the East Brunswick Planning or Zoning Board shall reserve the
location and extent of such street, ways, basins or areas shown on a plat
submitted for subdivision or site plan approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-44, the developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual
loss found to be caused by the temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. Unless a lesser amount has previously been mutually agreed upon,
just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair market value of an option
to purchase land reserved for the period of reservation, including but not
limited to the real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall be compensated
for the reasonable increased costs of legal, engineering or other
professional services incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision
§ 132-48.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-49
1:344
approval or site plan approval, as the case may be, caused by the
reservation. The township shall obtain an appraisal of the value of the
option from a licensed real estate appraiser and shall disclose the fair
market value of the option to the developer, provided that the developer
shall also obtain a fair market value of the option and disclose the same to
the township. The township shall require verification of increased costs of
legal, engineering or other professional services incurred by the developer.
In the event that the land which is reserved shall be the subject of an
application for state or federal funding, all applicable state and federal laws
and regulations shall govern the timetable which shall be implemented by
the township.
§ 132-50. Conditional Approvals.
§ 132-51. Suspension of Periods of Approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval, by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval under
this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 132-52. Common Open Space Requirements.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or any other party to protect the public health and welfare
or be a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the municipal agency shall process such application
for development in accordance with this chapter, and, if such
application for development complies with the requirements of this
chapter, the approving authority shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the approving authority, the approving authority shall, in
appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent
approval of such governmental agency, provided that the approving
authority shall make a decision on any application for development
within the time period provided in this chapter or within an extension of
such period as has been agreed to by the applicant, unless the
approving authority is prevented or relieved from so acting by the
operation of law.
§ 132-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-52
1:345
A. Public Ownership.
Common open space shall remain in private ownership, unless the
appropriate Board determines that public ownership is desirable and
unless the subdivider agrees to the necessary land donation, in which
case ownership shall be in the Township of East Brunswick, or in
such other public body as shall be deemed appropriate, provided that
the township or such other public body shall approve such public
ownership. In the event that the Board shall determine that there
shall be public ownership of common open space but the subdivider or
the public body shall not agree to the same or in the event that the
Board shall not approve the form of private ownership of common open
space, the Board may disapprove the application for subdivision with
the reduction in lot area provisions of Article III of the Zoning Chapter.
Standards for the Board determination as to public ownership shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. The need for public open space or recreational facilities in the
areas determined by the Township Master Plan.
2. The potential for an open space connection between two (2) public
open space areas.
3. The desirability of public access due to the peculiar physical
characteristics of the area which make it suitable for public open
space uses not otherwise available in that area.
4. Soil or vegetation characteristics of the area that provide a
desirable public wildlife refuge.
All common open space shown on a preliminary plat shall be
included in the first section submitted for final approval. However,
in the case of a subdivision to be developed over a period of years,
the Board may permit the total area proposed for common open
space to be divided among the sections submitted for final plat
approval, in which case the common open space appurtenant to
each such section shall comply with the minimum common open
space requirements as applied to each section.
B. Failure to maintain common open space. In the event that the
organization established to own and maintain common open space, or
any successor organization, shall at any time after its formation fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the approval granted by the Planning Board, the
municipality may serve written notice upon such organization or upon
the residents and owners of the cluster subdivision setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common
space in reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that
such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof and
shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon, which hearing shall
be held within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing, the municipality
may modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and
§ 132-52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-52
1:346
§ 132-53. Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. [Amended
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19; 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-21; 10-2-95 by
Ord. No. 95-34; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-36]
may give an extension of time within which they shall be cured. If
the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications
thereof shall not be cured within 30 days or any extension thereof, the
municipality, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties
within the cluster subdivision and to prevent the common open space
from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open
space and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry
and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the residents and owners. Before the expiration of said
year, the municipality shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of
the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization or to the residents and owners of the cluster subdivision,
to be held by the Health Officer, at which hearing such organization or
the residents and owners of the cluster subdivision shall show cause
why such maintenance by the municipality shall not, at the election of
the municipality, continue for a succeeding year. If the Health Officer
shall determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the municipality
may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said common open space
during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing
and determination, in each year thereafter. The decision of the Health
Officer in any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision
subject to judicial review. The cost of such maintenance by the
municipality shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the
cluster subdivision that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space and shall become a tax lien on said properties. The municipality,
at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose
of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the County
Clerk upon the properties affected by such lien within the cluster
subdivision.
A. Before recording final subdivision plats or recording of minor
subdivision deeds or as a condition of a final site plan approval or as a
condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, the Township may require and shall accept, in accordance
with the standards adopted herein, for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of certain on-tract public improvements:
(1) Performance guarantee required.
(a) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the
Township of East Brunswick in an amount equal to 120% of the
cost of only those improvements required by an approval or
developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be
§ 132-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-53
1:347
dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the developer
and approved by the Municipal Engineer, according to the
method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for
the following improvements as shown on the approved plans
or plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown
on the final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L.
1960, c. 141,8 water mains, sanitary sewers, community septic
systems, drainage structures, public improvements of open
space, and any grading necessitated by the preceding
improvements.
(b) The performance guarantee may also be required to include, at
the discretion of the Township, a guarantee for the installation
of privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping. A separate
performance guarantee, if required, shall be posted for the
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping or may be
included in the performance guarantee for the bonded public
improvements. The developer shall prepare an itemized cost
estimate of the improvements covered by the performance
guarantee for review and approval by the Municipal Engineer,
which improvements shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
(2) The furnishing of a safety and stabilization guarantee in favor of
the Township of East Brunswick to ensure that the Township has an
adequate guarantee to return the property that has been disturbed
to a safe and stable condition or otherwise implement measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition.
The Township shall be permitted to access the guarantee when site
disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure, and work has not recommenced within 30 days following
the provision of written notice by the Township to the developer of
the Township's intent to claim payment under the guarantee. At the
developer's option, the safety and stabilization guarantee may be
included as a line item for safety and stabilization in the
performance guarantee rather than in the form of a separate
guarantee. The amount of the safety and stabilization guarantee
shall be calculated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as follows:
(a) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs;
plus
(b) 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $100,000 up to
$1,000,000; plus
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26b-1 et seq.
§ 132-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-53
1:348
(c) 1% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
B. Form of guarantee.
(1) The performance guarantees shall consist of cash or a certified
check for not more than 10% of the estimated cost of the
improvements, and the balance of the cost shall be evidenced by a
corporate surety performance bond issued by a corporation
authorized to issue bonds in the State of New Jersey. If the
developer chooses, the entire amount may be posted with the
Township in cash.
(2) The approving authority shall, for the purposes of Section 41 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a), accept a performance
guarantee or maintenance guarantee which is an irrevocable letter
of credit if it:
(a) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the municipality for an express initial period
of time in the amount determined pursuant to Section 41 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53);
(b) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do
and doing business in this state with an AA rating;
(c) Is for a period of time of at least one year; and
(d) Permits the municipality to draw upon the letter of credit by
certifying abandonment (default) of the project by passing of a
resolution of the governing body or if the obligor fails to
furnish another letter of credit which complies with the
provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance of the
expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in
advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
(3) The performance guarantees shall be approved by the Municipal
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. The letter of credit
shall be approved by the Township Finance Officer.
C. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined by the developer and approved by
the Municipal Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
D. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may,
§ 132-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-53
1:349
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements.
E. Approved bonded improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail addressed in
care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or substantial
completion of bonded improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the Municipal Engineer. The request shall indicate which bonded
improvements have been completed and which bonded
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
Thereupon, the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all bonded
improvements of which such notice has been given and shall file a
detailed report, in writing, with the governing body, and shall
simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45
days after receipt of the obligor's request, indicating either
approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements, with
a statement of reasons for any rejection. The report shall identify
each bonded improvement determined to be completed and
satisfactory, together with a recommendation as to the amount of
reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
completed and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance
with the previously prepared itemized cost estimate.
(2) The Municipal Engineer shall schedule a public hearing, to be held
at 8:00 p.m. on a weekday. The Municipal Engineer shall inform the
obligor or developer of the date of the hearing, and the obligor or
developer shall be required to provide notice of at least 15 days by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of land within
the subdivision that there will be a public hearing concerning the
public improvements covered by the performance guarantee. The
notice will specify whether the obligor or developer seeks to
release the performance guarantees. The obligor or developer shall
cause to be published a notice of the public hearing in a newspaper
circulated within the Township of East Brunswick, said publication
to be at least 10 days prior to the date of the proposed hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer. The obligor
or developer and its engineer are required to be present. At the
hearing, members of the public shall be afforded the right to speak
with regard to the public improvements. A list of concerns
expressed by the homeowners shall be made part of a punch list to
be included in a detailed report which the Municipal Engineer shall
file, in writing, with the governing body. Following the inspection of
the improvements by the Municipal Engineer and the public
hearing, the Municipal Engineer will include in his report to the
governing body a recommendation indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of such improvements, with a
§ 132-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-53
1:350
statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth by the
Municipal Engineer. Included within the report will be a synopsis
of the public hearing.
(3) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Municipal Engineer or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Municipal Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
governing body, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee with respect to those
approved bonded improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the total
performance guarantee and safety and stabilization guarantee
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of
all improvements. The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
reduced by the same percentage as the performance guarantee is
being reduced at the time of each performance guarantee
reduction.
(4) For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bonded improvement
shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate which formed the basis
of the performance guarantee, and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including any
contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of
the approved bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total
amount of the performance guarantee, then the municipality may
retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee and
safety and stabilization guarantee to ensure completion and
acceptability of bonded improvements, as provided above.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Municipal Engineer.
§ 132-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-53
1:351
H. If the governing body fails to approve or reject the improvements
determined by the Municipal Engineer to be complete and satisfactory
or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory
improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the Municipal
Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time,
approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer
and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A.
of this section; and the cost of applying to the court, including
reasonable attorneys' fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
I. Inspection fees.
(1) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of the improvements, which fees shall not exceed the
sum of the amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The municipality
may require the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in
an amount calculated as follows: except for extraordinary
circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of
improvements subject to a performance guarantee, plus an amount
not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements not
subject to a performance guarantee, which cost shall be
determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. If the inspection fees
required are less than $10,000, the developer shall have the option
of paying same in two equal installments with the initial amount
deposited to be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance of
inspections fees on deposit reaches 10%, the remaining installment
shall be due and payable. If the inspection fees required are
$10,000 or greater, the developer shall have the option of paying
same in up to four installments with the initial amount deposited to
be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance of inspection fees
on deposit reaches 10%, the developer shall make additional
deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
(2) If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated herein, is insufficient to
cover the cost of additional required inspections, the Township may
require the developer to deposit additional funds in escrow,
provided that the Township delivers to the developer a written
inspection escrow deposit request, prepared by the Municipal
Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for additional
inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspections, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
(3) In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 29 of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the provisions of this
section shall be applied by stage or section.
§ 132-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-53
1:352
J. If the property or any part of same is sold or otherwise conveyed to a
successor developer prior to the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, an assignment of developer's agreement and new
performance, maintenance or other guarantees shall be required from
the new owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership
of property that is the subject of a construction permit, and prior to
beginning or continuing work authorized by the construction permit,
the new owner or successor developer shall file with the Building
Department an application for a permit update to notify the Building
Department of the name and address of the new owner or successor
developer and of all other changes to information previously submitted
to the Building Department. The Building Department shall not approve
the application for a permit update until it receives notification from the
governing body, or its designee, that the new owner or successor
developer has furnished adequate replacement performance,
maintenance or other guarantees and assignment of developer's
agreement.
K. Dedicated improvements. To the extent that any of the improvements
have been dedicated to the municipality on the subdivision plat or site
plan, the municipal governing body shall be deemed, upon the release
of any performance guarantee required pursuant to this chapter, to
accept dedication for public use of streets or roads and any other
improvements made thereof according to site plans and subdivision
plats approved by the approving authority, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by
the Municipal Engineer. Prior to acceptance, the developer shall be
responsible for all maintenance of improvements, including streets and
roads, streetlighting, snow plowing, curbs and sidewalks, waterlines,
storm sewers and any other improvements which were installed.
Nothing contained herein shall relieve the developer of the obligation to
post maintenance guarantees in accordance with all requirements.
L. Maintenance guarantee.
(1) Upon completion of all the improvements in a good and
workmanlike manner and in accordance with all rules, regulations,
standards, specifications and ordinances of the Township and the
filing of as-built drawings, the Township will accept the
improvements subject to the deposit and posting of maintenance
guarantees in an amount equal to 15% of the estimated cost of
construction, which cost shall be determined by the Municipal
Engineer. The security for maintenance shall be held by the
municipality in accordance with an escrow agreement similar to
the escrow agreement referred to above. Maintenance guarantees
shall be approved by the Municipal Attorney as to form, sufficiency
and execution, and such guarantee shall run for a period of two
years. Under no circumstances shall the Township pay or be liable
for any interest on any funds deposited with the Township as a
performance or maintenance guarantee.
§ 132-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-53
1:353
§ 132-53.1. Deposits Required to Offset Costs of Inspections and
Tests. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-111; amended 5-10-93 by
Ord. No. 93-21; 3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-12; 4-28-03 by Ord. No. 03-15;
9-26-05 by Ord. No. 05-29]
(2) No maintenance bond shall be accepted for any item that has
further stages of work or which will need to be altered or reworked.
M. Uncompleted improvements. If, in the event of inclement weather or
construction delays not occasioned by any act of the developer,
subdivider, builder, or successor, it shall be impossible to install the
required sidewalks, streetlighting, surveyors' monuments, shade trees
and landscaping at the time that a certificate of occupancy is applied
for, the applicant shall furnish the Director of Planning and Engineering
with an acknowledgment executed by the prospective home buyer
setting forth the improvements or portions thereof that are not as yet
installed and that the home buyer is agreeable to taking title and
possession of the dwelling in that condition in reliance upon the
existing performance guarantees posted pursuant hereto and the terms
and provisions of this subsection. Should those uncompleted
improvements referred to above not be installed within six months after
the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Township
Council of the Township of East Brunswick, upon the recommendation
of the Municipal Engineer, may authorize, by resolution, that the
performance guarantees posted pursuant hereto be utilized by the
Township of East Brunswick for the purpose of installing such
uncompleted improvements.
A. Prior to construction of any of the improvements referred to above
specifically, the commencement of any preparatory site work, including,
but not limited to, clearance of the property, grading or excavation or
the signing of the final subdivision or site plan, whichever occurs first,
the developer shall deposit with the Township a sum equal to 5% of the
cost of the improvements, but not more than $4,999, which shall be
used to pay the costs of inspection and testing fees incurred by the
Township. In the event that the costs of inspection and testing are less
than the amount deposited, the balance shall be refunded to the
subdivider. If the costs are greater than the amount deposited, the
Township shall require additional deposits as necessary. The following
fee schedule shall be charged:
1. Township employees.
(a) Up to eight hours in a single weekday: $75 per hour.
(b) Beyond eight hours in a single weekday: $112 per hour.
(c) Saturday: $112 per hour.
(d) Legal Township holiday: $187 per hour.
§ 132-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-53.1
1:354
§ 132-53.2. Inspections. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-21;
amended 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34; 3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-12;
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-12]
Inspection time will be rounded to the next half hour for billing
purposes. Inspections for Saturdays and holidays must be preapproved
by Assistant Township Engineer prior to scheduling.
2. Testing laboratory: cost to the Township.
3. Outside consulting services When the Township deems it necessary
to retain outside professional services, the developer shall
reimburse the Township for all reasonable professional consulting
fees
B. For those subdivision and site plans for which the reasonably
anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by
a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the
balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the anticipated inspection
fees. For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees
are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid
in four installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall
be 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional
deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. The Municipal
Engineer shall not permit any construction requiring inspection if
sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
C. Construction within Township right-of-way: A right-of-way permit shall
be required for all construction work located within the Township rightof-
way, including sidewalks, curb aprons and curbs adjacent to
roadways. The permit fee shall be $25.
A. Prior to construction, the developer shall arrange for a preconstruction
conference among the developers, contractor and Manager of
Engineering Services or his/her designee. The Manager of Engineering
Services shall be notified by certified mail by the developer at least five
business days in advance of the planned commencement of
construction activity.
B. No work shall be done without the appropriate valid construction
permit from and inspection by the Township. The Manager of
Engineering Services or his/her designee is authorized to issue a
summons in the event any developer, agent, or corporation refuses to
honor a stop-work notice. No underground installation shall be covered
§ 132-53.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-53.2
1:355
§ 132-54. As Built Requirements. [Amended 10-15-01 by Ord. No.
01-33; 10-28-02 by Ord. No. 02-24; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
until inspected and approved. The Township Department of Planning
and Engineering shall be notified 24 hours before each of the following
phases of the work has been commenced so that the Township may
inspect the work: pavement subgrade; curb and gutter forms; curbs and
gutters; pavement (after each coat, in the case of priming and sealing);
drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling; shade
trees and planting strips; street name signs; and monuments.
C. No work or construction of improvements requiring same day
inspection by the Township shall be performed on Saturdays, Sundays,
legal township holidays or at any other time or hours than those during
which the East Brunswick Municipal Building is open to the general
public without prior approval from the Department of Planning and
Engineering. These items of work include, but are not limited to,
pouring concrete, paving and pipe construction.
D. Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits, the Manager of
Engineering Services or his/her designee shall inspect the site to
determine that all work shown on the approved site plan and/or
subdivision plan has been completed, including, but not limited to,
curbs, aprons, utilities, functioning water supply and storm drainage
improvements to ensure proper drainage of the lot and surrounding
land, fine grading of lots, clearing of sight triangles, soil stabilization,
including topsoil and seeding, sidewalks and installation of the base
course for the street including subgrade to serve the lot and structure
for which the permit is requested. In addition, there shall be
compliance with all township codes and provisions, including payment
of all monies due. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-12]
E. Streets shall not receive finished surface course paving until all heavy
construction is completed as determined by the Manager of
Engineering Services or his/her designee. Shade trees shall not be
planted until all grading and earthmoving is completed. [Amended
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-12]
F. Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan or required by an approving resolution.
Professionals inspecting improvements under construction shall charge
only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the
progress and quality of the work and such inspections shall be
reasonable based on the approved development plans and documents.
[Added 10-2-95 by Ord. No. 95-34]
A. Prior to bond release for all residential improvements and all other
improvements in the public right of way or public easements, "as built"
drawings shall be submitted to the Township Engineer. As built plans
shall be submitted on plastic film as well as a CAD generated data file
(compatible with the most current version of AutoCAD) with a scale of
§ 132-53.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-54
1:356
no greater than 1" = 50'. All submittals must be referenced to the N.J.
State Plane coordinate system of 1983 and the NAVD of 1988. As built
plans shall include the following:
1. All public and private right of ways, property lines and easements.
2. Monuments plus at least three ties from permanent fixtures (i.e.
manholes, inlets, building corners, etc.). Utility poles are not
acceptable. If a building corner is used, the entire footprint of the
building shall be shown.
3. Pavement width.
4. Pavement cross section elevations every 50 feet, except when
roadway centerline profiles are 1 percent or less, pavement cross
sections shall be taken every 25 feet.
5. Lot and block numbers, building numbers and addresses of each
living unit, commercial space or industrial use.
6. Off-site improvements, if any pursuant to the requirements of item
7 below.
7. Utilities. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
a. Drainage System.
i. Size, length, type and class of pipe.
ii. Manholes, inlets, headwalls and all other drainage
structures.
iii. Invert, grate and top of curb elevations for inlets; invert
and rim elevations for manholes; invert and top elevation
on other structures.
b. Water Lines.
i. Size, type and class of pipe.
ii. Hydrants and guard valve location with measurement from
hydrant.
iii. At least three ties to water valves from permanent fixtures
(i.e. manholes, inlets, building corners, etc.). Utility poles
are not acceptable. If a building corner is used, the entire
footprint of the building shall be shown.
c. Sanitary Sewer System. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No.
10-22]
i. Size, length, type and class of pipe.
ii. Manholes and other structures or facilities.
§ 132-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-54
1:357
iii. Invert and rim elevations including all incoming and
outgoing pipes.
iv. Confirmation of watertight locking covers where required
by site plan, subdivision or Sewer Utility approvals.
[Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
8. Certification by a New Jersey Licensed Surveyor or New Jersey
Professional Engineer that the as built plan is complete and
correct.
B. Prior to release of improvement inspection escrows for all nonresidential
improvements and bond release for all other improvements
in the public right-of-way or public easements, "as-built" drawings shall
be submitted to the Township Engineer. As-built plans shall be
submitted on plastic film as well as a CAD generated data file
(compatible with the most current version of AutoCAD) with a scale of
no greater than 1" = 50'. All submittals must be referenced to the N.J.
State Plane coordinate system of 1983 and the NAVD of 1988. As built
plans shall include the following:
1. All public and private right-of-ways, property lines and easements.
2. Monuments plus at least three ties from permanent fixtures (i.e.
manholes, inlets, building corners, etc.). Utility poles are not
acceptable. If a building corner is used, the entire footprint of the
building shall be shown.
3. Contours at 1 foot intervals based on National Geodetic vertical
Datum 1988 with spot elevations at building corners and areas
where slopes are less than 1%.
4. Lot and block numbers, building numbers and addresses of each
living unit, commercial space or industrial use.
5. Off-site improvements, if any pursuant to the requirements of item
6 below.
6. Utilities
a. Drainage Systems
i. Size, length, type and class of pipe.
ii. Manholes, inlets, headwalls and all other drainage
structures.
iii. Invert, grate and top of curb elevations for inlets; invert
and rim elevations for manholes; invert and top elevation
on other structures.
b. Water Lines.
i. Size, type and class of pipe.
§ 132-54 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-54
1:358
§ 132-55. Apportionment of Costs for Off-Tract Improvements.
ii. Hydrants and guard valve location with measurement from
hydrant.
iii. At least three ties to water valves from permanent fixtures
(i.e. manholes, inlets, building corners, etc.). Utility poles
are not acceptable. If a building corner is used, the entire
footprint of the building shall be shown.
c. Sanitary Sewer System.
i. Size, length, type and class of pipe.
ii. Manholes and other structures or facilities.
iii. Invert and rim elevations including all incoming and
outgoing pipes.
iv. Confirmation of watertight locking covers where required
by site plan, subdivision or Sewerage Authority approvals.
7. All planimetric features of the site, including but not limited to:
building footprint(s), curbs, sidewalks, retaining walls, sheds,
fences, etc.
8. Certification by a New Jersey Licensed Surveyor or New Jersey
Professional Engineer that the as-built plan is complete and
correct.
A. A developer, as a condition for approval of a subdivision or site plan, in
accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:55D-42, shall be required to pay only his
pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street
improvements and water, sewerage and drainage facilities and
easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the
subdivision or development but necessitated or required by
construction or improvements within such subdivision or development.
The pro rata share shall be determined by analyzing the circulation plan
element of the East Brunswick Master Plan showing the location and
types of facilities for all modes of transportation required for the
efficient movement of people and goods into, about and through the
municipality, as well as the utility service plan element of the East
Brunswick Master Plan analyzing the need for and showing the future
general location of water supply and distribution facilities, drainage
and flood control facilities, sewage and waste treatment, solid waste
disposal and provision for other related utilities. Consideration shall be
given by the Planning Board to the question of whether or not the need
for the off-tract improvement was created by the proposed development
of land and whether the required improvement not only benefits the
developer's tract but other properties as well. The Board shall also
determine the related common area which is to be serviced or benefited
by the facilities or improvements required.
§ 132-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-55
1:359
The developer shall be required to pay the difference between the
cost of the off-tract improvement and the total amount by which all
properties served thereby, including the developer's property, have
been specifically benefited by the improvement. Further, if the off-tract
improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a general
improvement or if the improvement is to be constructed by a developer
with a provision for later reimbursement by the municipality, then
the developer shall not be charged with the amount by which the
developer's property was specially benefited by the improvement. In
the event that the municipality shall construct the off-tract
improvement as a local improvement under N.J.R.S. 40:56-1 et seq.,
the developer may be called upon to pay, in addition to the amount set
forth above, the amount by which the subject property was specially
benefited by the improvement.
B. Prior to the Board making a determination of the amount to be paid by
the developer, the governing body shall make a determination whether
the off-tract improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
general improvement or as a local improvement or whether it is to be
done by the developer with a formula providing for partial
reimbursement if the improvement specially benefits properties other
than the subdivision. Once that decision has been made, the Planning
Board shall be required to estimate, with the aid of the Municipal
Engineer, the Director of Finance and the Board of Special Assessments
the cost of the improvement and the amount by which all properties to
be serviced thereby, including the subject property, will be specially
benefited therefrom.
C. When the foregoing has been determined, the developer shall be
required to provide, as a condition for approval of his subdivision or site
plan application, a bond, or a cash deposit in lieu thereof, not exceeding
ten percent (10%) of the cost of the improvements, as determined by
the Planning Board, to ensure payment to the municipality of one (1) of
the following amounts:
1. If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
general improvement, an amount equal to the difference between
the estimated cost of the improvement and the estimated total
amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby, including
the subject property, will be specially benefited by the
improvement.
2. If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
local improvement, then, in addition to the amount referred to in
Subsection C(1), the estimated amount by which the subject
property will be specially benefited by the improvement.
3. If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement.
§ 132-55 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-55
1:360
§ 132-55.1. Street Lighting. [Added 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
If an approving authority includes as a condition of approval of an
application for development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1
et seq.) the installation of street lighting on a dedicated public street
connected to a public utility, then upon notification in writing by the
developer to the approving authority and governing body of the municipality
that (1) the street lighting on a dedicated public street has been installed
and accepted for service by the public utility and (2) that certificates of
occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling units and
50% of the floor area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated public
street or portion thereof indicated by section pursuant to section 29 of
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-38), the municipality shall within 30 days
following receipt of the notification, make appropriate arrangements with
the public utility for, and assume the payment of, the costs of the street
lighting on the dedicated public street on a continuing basis. Compliance by
the municipality with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
constitute acceptance of the street by the municipality.
§ 132-56. Building Permits. [Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-17;
4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
D. After the improvement is completed, the estimated amounts shall be
redetermined to the end that the developer will be required to pay his
appropriate share of the cost thereof.
E. The standards set forth above shall not be altered subsequent to
preliminary approval by a developer.
F. Where a developer pays the amount determined as his pro rata share
under protest, he shall institute legal action within one (1) year of such
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to
the fairness and reasonableness of such amount, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
A. Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the
Construction Official until final approval has been granted to the
application for development.
B. At the time of issuance of any building permit, the building code official
will provide written instruction on proper disposal and recycling of
construction and demolition waste and furnish a Notification of
Construction/Demolition Activity Form. The Form must be filled out by
the permittee and faxed to the Middlesex County Division of Solid
Waste Management (MCDSWM) within 48 hours of the issuance of a
municipal permit. [Added 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
C. Building Lots to Abut Street. No permit for the erection of a building or
structure shall be issued unless the lot abuts a street giving access to
such proposed building or structure. Such lot shall be on an existing
state, county or municipal street or highway or on a street shown upon
§ 132-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-56
1:361
a plat approved by the appropriate Board or on a street on a plat duly
filed in the office of a county recording officer prior to the passage
of an ordinance under this chapter or any prior law which required
prior approval of plats by the governing body or other authorized body.
Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Township
Council or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by
means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with standards and
specifications for road improvement approved by the Township Council
as adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare
of a special circumstance of the particular street. [Amended 11-19-07
by Ord. No. 07-25]
D. No building permits shall be issued by the Chief Construction Official
for any home in a subdivision until final subdivision approval has been
granted by the Planning Board. [Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No.
91-17; 11-19-07 by Ord. No. 07-25]
E. Conditional building permits. In the event that the Planning Board
requires any correction or revision of the site plan, no building shall be
issued a permit until the applicant has submitted a site plan corrected
or revised in accordance with the decision of the Planning Board;
provided, however, that the Chief Construction Official may, in his
discretion, when a written request for modification has been submitted
by the applicant, issue a conditional building permit, after the applicant
has received site plan approval by the Planning Board but before the
applicant has submitted corrected or revised site plans pursuant to the
site plan approval granted by the Planning Board. The Chief
Construction Official will base his decision on the following standards
[Added 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]:
(1) That the applicant would suffer financial loss if permission to start
construction is not granted.
(2) That the applicant shall proceed at his own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire
structure will be granted.
(3) That permission to proceed with partial construction shall not be
construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the
provisions of the Code of the township, except as stipulated by
modification or legally granted variation as described in approvals
by township agencies.
(4) That such conditional building permit shall be valid for a period of
three (3) months from the date of issuance and shall not be
renewed. At the expiration of such period, construction shall cease
until such time as the applicant shall obtain a building permit in
accordance herewith.
§ 132-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-56.1
1:362
§ 132-56.1. Zoning Permits Required. [Added 8-14-00 by Ord. No.
00-15; amended 4-9-12 by Ord. No. 12-02]
§ 132-57. Conditional Building Permits.
The Construction Official may issue a conditional building permit to any
applicant who has received site plan or subdivision approval, but who has
not yet submitted the completed revisions or corrections of the plats, plans
and requisite documents, upon a showing by such applicant, in writing, that
the failure to issue a building permit before such revisions and corrections
can be completed will cause undue hardship in the development of this
subject property or that other extenuating conditions exist which warrant
the issuance of a conditional building permit. Such conditional building
permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) months from the date of
issuance and shall not be renewed. At the expiration of such period,
construction shall cease until such time as the applicant shall obtain a
building permit.
§ 132-58. Certificates of Occupancy. [Amended 11-12-91 by Ord. No.
91-111; 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19; 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
A. All fences six feet or less in height which do not serve as a pool barrier,
shed installations as defined in 228-3 and new and additional
impervious surfaces greater than 50 square feet in area shall require a
zoning permit prior to the start of construction. Such permit shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee. No more than a total of
50 square feet of impervious surface may be added to property over a
three (3) year period without first obtaining an impervious surface
permit. [Amended 4-9-12 by Ord. No. 12-02]
B. All zoning permit applications shall be made to the Zoning Officer or
his/her designee on forms provided by the Office.
C. The application fee for a fence, shed and impervious surface zoning
permit is $25.00. [Amended 4-9-12 by Ord. No. 12-02; 8-13-18 by
Ord. No. 18-18]
D. Zoning permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance.
A. No land or new construction shall be occupied or used in whole or in
part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Construction Official stating that the use of the
land or building complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. No change, extension or alteration of the use of any land or structure
shall be made until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the Construction Official upon notification by the Zoning Officer that
such change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
§ 132-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-58
1:363
C. No certificate of occupancy for any land or structure shall be granted
until all required improvements or conditions of approval have been
met, installed or completed. A temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued but only for a specific period, upon such conditions as the
Township Engineer may impose, such as bonding, to ensure the
completion or installation of any such improvements unfinished
because of weather or unforeseen delay. The installation of any
required public or private improvements or improvements required as
conditions of site plan approval may also be delayed if the Township
Engineer warrants in writing to the Construction Official that the delay
is in the best interests of the Township.
D. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Chief Construction
Official for any home in a subdivision until all the public improvements
in the phase or section in which the certificate of occupancy is being
requested (except for final paving course) are installed and the home is
connected to all the utilities in accordance with the township
regulations. This subsection shall apply in addition to any other
requirements set forth in the building codes and any other Township
ordinances relating to certificates of occupancy. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy contrary to this subsection shall be deemed an
act of misfeasance by the issuing officer. [Amended 11-12-91 by Ord.
No. 91-111; 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-19]
E. The transfer of any home with the intention of occupancy or the
occupancy of any home without a certificate of occupancy having been
issued, in a subdivision or elsewhere, where all of the water mains,
storm sewers, culverts, underground electrical and telephone conduits,
street grading, curbs and street pavement (except for the final paving
course) have not been installed in front of or on the building site or to
the rear of the building site, shall be a violation, by the subdivider or
seller and the purchaser or occupant, of this chapter. A subdivider or
seller or an occupant or purchaser found guilty of violating this
subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
F. During the period from late fall to early spring or at any other times of
the year, it may not be feasible to install landscaping and minor
construction details required by site plan approval due to inclement
weather, unavailability of material or other reasons. The Director of
Planning & Engineering may authorize the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy where landscaping is not installed or minor construction
details are not complete, provided that a cash deposit sufficient to
accomplish all uncompleted work set forth on the site plan is posted
with the Township of East Brunswick. The Director of Planning and
Engineering will exercise his or her decision based on the following
standards [Added 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(a) That the applicant would suffer severe financial loss unless a
certificate of occupancy is issued and that a temporary certificate
of occupancy would not suffice.
§ 132-58 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-58
1:364
§ 132-58.1. Display of Certain Maps and Plans By Subdividers.
[Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-111]
(b) That the construction is of a minor nature, meaning it does not
make up a large cost item in the overall site plan, and that the site
can be used with the minor item omitted without endangering the
health and welfare of the public or those using the premises.
(c) That the weather conditions will make it unlikely that the
landscaping, given all reasonable care, would survive.
(d) That the sum deposited shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the
cost of completing the work to be done, not to exceed 120% of the
cost of installation, as estimated by the Township Engineer in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.
(e) That the construction or the permanence of the construction would
be jeopardized by the existing weather conditions.
(f) The sum deposited as escrow shall also include an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all inspections and tests which are
required in connection with the construction or installation of all
public improvements and all work required by site plan approval
but not completed at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued.
In addition, the Director of Planning & Engineering or his or her
designee(s) shall estimate the amount necessary to cover the pro
rata share of the cost of providing reasonable protection for offtract
impact caused by site work on the subject premises, which
escrow shall be released at such time as the Director of Planning &
Engineering or his or her designee(s) is satisfied that the site has
been constructed in such a way so as to protect against such offtract
impact.
G. The applicant must also execute an agreement to complete the work as
soon as weather permits and in no instance after more than one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the application. Failure to
complete the work within one hundred eighty (180) days shall
constitute sufficient authorization for the Director of Planning and
Engineering to utilize the cash deposit and have all work completed as
shown on the approved site plan. [Added 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
A. All owners, developers and subdividers having an interest in a major
subdivision in the Township of East Brunswick shall display within all of
their sales offices or the sales office of any broker or agent engaged by
them for the purpose of selling residential dwellings, the following:
(1) The portion of the Middlesex County Master Plan showing the
Township of East Brunswick.
(2) The Master Plan of the Township of East Brunswick.
(3) The Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 132-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-58.1
1:365
(4) The Official Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
B. The above maps shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to one
thousand (1,000) feet.
C. The maps and plans shall be prominently displayed in an open and
unobstructed manner in all sales offices and shall be shown to all
prospective buyers.
D. The above maps will be available from the Township Engineer at a
nominal charge.
E. In addition to the above maps, the approved site plan, preliminary
subdivision map or final PURD plan (whichever is applicable) certified
by the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary shall be displayed
within all sales offices. Scale shall not be less than one (1") inch to fifty
(50') feet.
F. All owners, developers and subdividers having an interest in a major
subdivision or major residential site plan in the Township of East
Brunswick shall display within all of their sales offices or the sales office
of any broker or agent engaged by them for the purpose of selling
residential dwellings the following:
(1) A sales map in the sales office in a place that may be observed and
reviewed by any person(s) calling at the office.
(2) A copy, on standard legal size paper, in type or clear print, of any
proposed protective or restrictive covenants and easements to be
applied to all or any portion of lands within the subdivision.
(3) A copy of any Board approved revisions to the site plan or
subdivision and all approved revisions or field changes to
construction plans. Any such revised item or plan sheet shall have a
notation marked on the original document that it is "REVISED' as of
(date). The corresponding item or revision sheet SHALL NOTE
THERE ON THE FOLLOWING: "ORIGINAL DOCUMENT DATED
(date) HAS BEEN REVISED ON (include all dates)."
(4) A "public offering statement" for the entire development, if the
tract of land is to be developed as a planned unit development, as
that term is defined in the Municipal Land Use Act and filed with
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
(5) A copy of the Environmental Risk Audit (ERA) as described in
Section 132-I(2), below.
G. The sales map shall be based on the Official Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base at the scale of not less than fifty (50)
feet to an inch or greater throughout the map, which said scale shall be
clearly indicated thereon and shall be consistent in all directions shown
thereon. The map shall show the owner's approved subdivision and all
§ 132-58.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-58.1
1:366
lands contiguous thereto for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet,
within or without the Township of East Brunswick.
H. The sales map shall clearly show and include for the area within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the subdivision in all directions the following
information which shall be maintained current.
(1) The location of proposed streets and the layout of proposed lots
within the subdivision.
(2) The location of all state, county and municipal roads in existence on
the date of the final approval of the subdivision.
(3) The location of all state, county and municipal roads proposed and
approved by any governmental agency having jurisdiction to
establish such roads. The location of all such roads shall be as
shown on the Official Master Plan adopted by the appropriate
agency of the state, county or municipality.
(4) The location of all existing structures and wooded areas within the
subdivision.
(5) A designation of the zoning district to be subdivided and the zoning
districts of all contiguous properties within the distance of one
thousand (1,000) feet.
(6) The location of all railroads and railroad rights-of-way for public
utilities.
(7) The location of all public or private utility plants; the location of all
sanitary landfill and hazardous waste sites operations in existence
or proposed; the location of all Superfund sites; the location and
identification of all industrial, manufacturing and warehousing
uses; the location of all hazardous (as defined in the New Jersey
Hazardous Substances Labeling Act, N.J.S.A. 24:5A-1) uses which
emit pollutants (as defined in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-3) into the air, (as
defined in the Air Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2C-2) soil, or
water - courses; and the location of all gas transmission lines.
(8) The location of all schools, parks, playgrounds, public buildings and
sidewalks.
(9) The location of all streams, ponds and watercourses and a legend
reference as to whether flood hazard insurance is required.
(10) The location and description of any use approved by the Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board during the previous three (3) years.
(11) The location of all drainage ditches within the area shown on the
sales map.
(12) The size of each parcel in the subdivision to be sold, whether
improved or unimproved.
§ 132-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-58.1
1:367
(13) A map legend setting forth the present tax, water and sewer rates
of any public authority servicing the subdivision.
(14) A map legend setting forth the phone numbers and extensions for
the Township Clerk, Township Administrator, and Director of
Planning.
(15) The location of any and all structures proposed on each parcel.
I. SALES MAP RELATED DOCUMENTS INFORMATION; UPDATE;
ENVIRONMENTAL RISK AUDIT.
(1) The information to be depicted on the sales map shall be based on
the most recent zoning and street maps, federal insurance rate
maps, and the prospective development map on file with the office
of the Director of Planning. The completed sales map shall be
submitted for review to the Chief Construction Official prior to it
being posted, who shall review it for compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance. There shall be a charge of one
hundred dollars ($100.) for the review and certification of
compliance by the Chief Construction Official, which shall be paid
by check payable to the Township of East Brunswick at the time of
submission for approval.
(2) An Environmental Risk Audit (ERA) shall be conducted for all of the
property which is the subject of the subdivision. The person or
entity conducting the ERA shall have no personal or financial
interest in the property or project. His/her qualifications shall be
attached to the ERA. The ERA shall include a statement setting
forth the use of the subject property for a period of 10 years prior to
the application for subdivision (Historical Property Evaluation). If
there is any evidence of environmental contamination,
manufacturing, warehousing landfilling subsurface burying of
materials or any other information which could affect the health,
safety or welfare of persons exposed to the property, the details of
same shall be set forth in the ERA. The ERA shall also reflect the
results of on-site soil sampling and water testing and shall reflect
all surface and groundwater contamination. The ERA shall contain
a site contamination assessment, quantifying the potential risks in
terms of the cost to remove contamination from the property. A
copy of the ERA shall be filed with the Chief Construction Official,
who shall review it for compliance with the requirements of this
ordinance. There shall be a charge of one hundred ($100.) dollars
for the review and certification of compliance, which shall be paid
by check payable to the Township of East Brunswick at the time of
submission for approval.
(3) The Chief Construction Official or his/her designee shall review
each sales map and any revisions to it or the other items required
under Section 192-52F, G and H displayed pursuant to the terms of
this ordinance not less than every three (3) months and shall
§ 132-58.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-58.1
1:368
require such additional information as he/she deem necessary to
maintain these documents in an up-to-date condition. There shall
be a charge for the inspection of the information which shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25) per visit, made payable by check to the
Township of East Brunswick. The Chief Construction Official may
from time to time, as he/she deems necessary, direct the owner
or seller to display additional information on the documents so
that same may be maintained in an up-to-date condition. New
information obtained by the owner or seller shall be included in the
sales map or related documents within thirty (30) days of receipt
of such information. The Chief Construction Official shall affix his/
her approval, upon his/her satisfaction of the inspection of the
documents, indicating the date thereof.
J. Certificate of compliance.
(1) At or before the execution of the contract of sale for any lot within a
subdivision, the seller shall obtain, on a form approved by the
governing body, a certification from the purchaser that:
(a) The sales map was on display and available for inspection on
any occasion of his visit to the sales office.
(b) He had a reasonable opportunity to study and review the sales
map.
(c) He had the opportunity to visit the site of the lot he is
purchasing at least once before he executed the contract of
sale.
(d) He had the opportunity to review any protective or restrictive
covenants and easements prior to the execution of the contract
of sale.
(e) He had the opportunity to review the construction plans for the
structure he is buying and all related common elements.
(f) The seller did not refuse or decline to answer any questions
directed to him pertaining to the sales map or the protective or
restrictive covenants or easements.
(2) The seller shall file the certificate mentioned in Subsection A
hereof with the Chief Construction Official within twenty (20) days
of the full executive of the contract of sale.
K. Additional notice provisions.
(1) In the event the owner or seller of land files an application to
amend a previously received approval from the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board (Site Plan, subdivision or variances),
including but not limited to recreation facilities, bikeways or trail,
drainage, sewerage or open space easements, lighting details or
other items deemed to be significant by the Director of Planning,
§ 132-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-58.1
1:369
each previous purchaser who is an owner at the time of such
application and each contract purchaser of any such lot or unit
within 200' of the proposed change shall be advised, in writing,
by the developer by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
hearing date on such revisions and that a copy of the proposal is
available for such review in the sales office and the office of the
Director of Planning. Proof of service shall be required to be filed
with the Chief Construction Official and with the Department of
Planning.
L. Violations and penalties.
(1) If any person engages in the sale of a lot or lots within a subdivision
without first displaying the sales map and other related documents
or the protective covenants of easements as required herein, the
owner of the subdivision shall be subject to a fine for each such lot
sold or contracted to be sold provided hereinafter.
(2) The owner of a subdivision who shall fail to file the certification of
compliance as required herein, or fails to disclose to the purchaser
the information as provided by the representative of the
Department of Planning, through his or the fault of any person
engaging in the sale of lots on his behalf, shall be subject to a fine
as provided for hereinafter.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court
of the Township of East Brunswick of a violation of the terms of this
ordinance shall be subject to one or more of the following in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge: imprisonment in the
county jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days
or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a
period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a
violation of this ordinance exists, shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of this ordinance shall be
considered a separate offense upon each and every day in which a
violation exists.
(4) In addition to the foregoing, if the owner or its agents continuously,
for a period of thirty (30) days or more, fails and refuses to comply
with the requirements of this Section, the municipality may
institute and maintain an action for injunctive relief to prohibit the
continued sale of the lots within the subdivision until compliance
with this Section, in addition to the suspension of the issuance of
any further building permits for the subdivision or conducting of
any inspections for approvals required under the subdivision
approval.
M. Applicability of Provisions.
§ 132-58.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-58.1
1:370
§ 132-58.2. Display of Certain Maps and Plans By Real Estate
Brokers. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-111]
All real estate brokers maintaining offices in the Township of East
Brunswick shall post maps as set forth above.
§ 132-59. Enforcement.
The Mayor shall enforce this chapter. In case any building or structure
is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Mayor and
his agent or interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal action, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 132-59.1. Penalty For Conveying of Land Prior to Approval.
[Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-111]
All the requirements set forth in this section with regard to the sale
of lots shall apply with equal force and effect to the lands which have
been previously subdivided pursuant to the law, and from and after
the effective date of this Section, all owners of subdivided land shall
comply forthwith. However, it is understood that the requirements of
this section shall apply only to the first sale of a lot or lots of the
subdivision to an individual home buyer. Whenever the word "He" or
"Him" appears in the ordinance, it is intended to apply with equal force
to "She" or "Her".
A. If, before favorable referral and final approval has been obtained any
person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision upon which the Planning Board is
required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.) or to imprisonment for not more than ninety
(90) days, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a
separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on the land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.30 et seq.,
the municipality may institute and maintain civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.24, but only if the municipality
has a Planning Board or a committee thereof with power to act and
which meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis and
§ 132-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-59.1
1:371
whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures in
accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.20.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.30 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.24 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291
and replaced by N.J.R.S. 40:55D-56.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40: 55-1.20 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c.
291, and replaced by N.J.R.S. 40:55D-38 through 40:55D-41 and
40:55D-44.
C. In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled
to a lien upon the portion of land from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the subdivider, or his assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price
paid and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two (2) years
after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of the land, or within six (6) years if unrecorded.
§ 132-59.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-59.1
1:372
ARTICLE VI
Master Plan
§ 132-60. Preparation and Periodic Review.
The Planning Board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt a Master
Plan, or component parts thereof, to guide the use of land within East
Brunswick in a manner which protects the public health and safety and
promotes the general welfare. Such Master Plan shall be reexamined by the
Planning Board at periodic intervals of not more than every six (6) years.
Adequate provision for such reexaminations shall be made by the Township
Council.
§ 132-61. Contents.
The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or statement on land use
and development proposals with maps, diagrams and text, presenting, at
least, the following elements A and B and where appropriate, the following
elements C through L:
A. A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the municipality are based.
B. A land use plan element
1. Taking into account and stating its relationship to the statement
provided for in subsection A hereof and other Master Plan elements
provided for in subsections C through L hereof and natural
conditions, including but not necessarily limited to topography, soil
conditions, water supply, drainage, flood plain areas, marshes and
woodlands;
2. Showing the existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of
development of land to be used in the future for varying types of
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
educational and other public and private purposes or combination
of purposes; and stating the relationship thereof to the existing and
any proposed zone plan and zoning ordinance;
3. Showing the existing and proposed location of any airports and the
boundaries of any airport hazard areas delineated pursuant to the
Air Safety and hazardous Zoning Act of 1983," P.L. 1983, c. 260 (C.
6:1-80 et seq); and
4. Including a statement of the standards of population density and
development intensity recommended for the municipality.
C. A housing plan element, pursuant to Section 10 P.L. 1985, C. 222 (C.
52:27D-310), including but not limited to residential standards and
proposals for the construction and improvement of housing.
§ 132-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-61
1:373
D. A circulation plan element showing the location and types of facilities
for all modes of transportation required for the efficient movement of
people and goods into, about and through the municipality, taking into
account the functional highway classification system of the Federal
Highway Administration and types, locations, conditions and
availability of existing and proposed transportation facilities, including
air, water, road and rail.
E. A utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing the
future general location of water supply and distribution facilities,
drainage and flood control facilities, sewage and waste treatment, solid
waste disposal and provision for other related utilities and including
any storm water management plan required pursuant to the provisions
of P.L. 1981 c. 32 (c. 40:55D-93 et seq).
F. A community facilities plan element showing the location and type of
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses, police stations and other related facilities, including their
relation to the surrounding areas.
G. A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive system of areas
and public sites for recreation.
H. A conservation plan element providing for the preservation,
conservation and utilization of natural resources including, to the
extent appropriate, open space, water, forests, soil, marshes, wetlands,
harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and other natural
resources.
I. An economic plan element considering all aspects of economic
development and sustained economic vitality, including
1. A comparison of the types of employment expected to be provided
by the economic development to be promoted with the
characteristics of the labor pool resident in the municipality and
nearby areas and
2. An analysis of the stability and diversity of the economic
development to be promoted.
J. An historic preservation plan element:
1. Indicating the location, significance, proposed utilization and
means for preservation of historic sites and historic districts; and
2. Identifying the standards used to assess worthiness for historic site
or district designation.
K. Appendixes or separate reports containing the technical foundation for
the Master Plan and its constituent elements.
L. A recycling plan element which incorporates the State Recycling Plan
goals, including provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling
§ 132-61 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-61
1:374
§ 132-62. Subplans.
The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
§ 132-63. Relationship to Contiguous Municipalities.
The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the municipality as developed
in the Master Plan to
§ 132-64. Notice Concerning Master Plan.
The planning board shall give:
of recyclable materials designated in the municipal recycling
ordinance, and for the collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable
materials within any development proposal for the construction of 50
or more units of single family residential housing or 25 or more units
of multi-family residential housing and any commercial or industrial
development proposed for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land.
A. The master plans of contiguous municipalities;
B. The master plan of the county in which the municipality is located; and
C. The State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to
the "State Planning Act" P.L. 1985, c. 398, (c. 52:18A-196 et al); and
D. The district solid waste management plan required pursuant to the
provisions of the "Solid Waste Management Act", P.L. 1970, c. 39 (c.
13:1E-1 et seq) of the County in which the municipality is located.
A. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the
master plan; such notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing;
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an adjoining
municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of a
master plan involving property situated within 200 feet of such
adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any such
hearing;
C. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the county planning
board of:
1. All hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of the municipal
master plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing; such
§ 132-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-64
1:375
notice shall include a copy of any such proposed master plan, or
any revision or amendment thereto; and
2. The adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan not more
than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the master plan or
revision or amendment thereto.
§ 132-64 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-64
1:376
ARTICLE VII
Capital Improvement Program and Project Review
§ 132-65. Preparation.
The Planning Board shall prepare a program of municipal capital
improvements, which shall be prepared within one (1) year of enactment
of this chapter and which shall be projected over a term of at least six
(6) years, and amendments thereto. Such program may encompass major
projects being currently undertaken or future projects to be undertaken
with federal, state, county and other public funds or under federal, state
or county supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption
by the Township Council, constitute the capital budget of the township as
required by N.J.R.S. 40A:4 43 et seq. The program shall classify projects
in regard to the urgency and need for realization and shall recommend
a time sequence for their implementation. The program may also contain
the estimated cost of each project and indicate probable revenues, if any,
as well as existing sources of funds or the need for additional sources of
funds for the implementation and operation of each project. The program
shall, as far as possible, be based on existing information in the possession
of the departments, divisions and agencies of the township and shall take
into account public facility needs indicated by the prospective development
shown in the Master Plan of the Township of East Brunswick or as permitted
by other municipal land use controls.
§ 132-66. Adoption of Capital Improvement Program.
Whenever the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvement program
pursuant to Section 20 (C. 40:55D-29), it shall recommend such program to
the Township Council, which may adopt such program with any modification
approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership
of the Township Council and with the reasons for said modification recorded
in the minutes.
A. In preparing the program, the Planning Board shall confer, in a manner
deemed appropriate by the Board, with the Mayor, the chief fiscal
officer, other municipal officials and agencies and the School Board or
boards. Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement
of persons and establishments caused by each recommended project.
B. In addition to any of the requirements above, whenever the Planning
Board is authorized and directed to prepare a capital improvements
program, every municipal department, division, authority or agency
shall, upon request of the Planning Board, transmit to said Board a
statement of all capital projects proposed to be undertaken by such
municipal department, division, authority or agency during the term of
the program, for study, advice and recommendation by the Planning
Board.
§ 132-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-67
1:377
§ 132-67. Review of Capital Projects.
Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the Master
Plan, the Township Council or other public agency having jurisdiction over
the subject matter, before taking action necessitating expenditure of any
public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such project,
shall refer the action involving such specific project to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master Plan and
shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until forty five (45)
days have elapsed after such reference without receiving such
recommendation from the Planning Board. This requirement will apply to
action by a housing, parking, highway, special district or other authority,
redevelopment agency, school board or other similar public agency, state,
county or municipal.
§ 132-68. Notice Concerning Capital Improvement Program.
Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the county
planning board of the adoption, revision or amendment of the municipal
capital improvement program not more than 30 days after the date of
such adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided hereunder
shall include a copy of the municipal capital improvement program, or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto as the case may be.
Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be
considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 132-67 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-68
1:378
ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing Ordinance
[Amended 9-14-09 by Ord. No. 09-18; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21;
3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
§ 132-69. Affordable Housing Obligation.
§ 132-70. Definitions. [Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by
Ord. No. 17-12]
The following terms when used in Article VIII of this Ordinance shall have
the meanings given in this Section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this ordinance, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., and the terms of the Settlement Agreement reached in the Township's
third round Declaratory Judgement Action.[Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No.
17-14]
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq.; in
the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
A. This Ordinance is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over
time and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This Ordinance shall apply except where inconsistent with
applicable law.
B. The Township of East Brunswick Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by
the governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways the
Township of East Brunswick shall address its fair share for low- and
moderate-income housing.
C. This Ordinance implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
§ 132-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-70
1:379
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.[Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development in which all or a
portion of the units are restricted as to their affordability to and occupancy
by low and moderate income households.[Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No.
17-12]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited
to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100
percent affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs of,
and exclusively for, the residents of an older segment of the population such
that: 1) all the residents of the development where the unit is situated are
62 years or older; or 2) at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by one
person that is 55 years or older; or 3) the development has been designated
by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair
Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3607.[Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
Administrative Agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.) or subsequent entity with similar jurisdiction.[Amended 11-28-16 by
Ord. 16-21]
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 132-70 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-70
1:380
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50 percent or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50 percent but less than 80 percent
of the median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
following: transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer
of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
§ 132-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-70
1:381
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result of
inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a class
A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80 percent
of the regional median as defined by COAH's adopted Regional Income
Limits published annually by COAH.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit
financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — Means the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30 percent or less of the median household
income.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very
low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 132-71. Affordable Housing Programs. [Amended 11-28-16 by
Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. 17-12]
The Township of East Brunswick has determined that it will use the
following mechanisms to satisfy its affordable housing obligations:
A. Rehabilitation program.
§ 132-70 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-71
1:382
1. The Township of East Brunswick's rehabilitation program shall be
designed to renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and
moderate-income households such that, after rehabilitation, these
units will comply with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
2. Both owner occupied and renter occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
3. The Township of East Brunswick will participate in the Middlesex
County Housing & Community Development (MCHCD)
rehabilitation program. The rehabilitation program will be
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.2 (b) through 5.2(1). [Amended
11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21]
4. All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low and moderateincome
households for a period of 10 years (the control period). For
owner occupied units the control period will be enforced with a lien
and for renter occupied units the control period will be enforced
with a deed restriction.
5. The Township of East Brunswick shall designate, one or more
Administrative Agents to administer the rehabilitation program.
The Administrative Agent(s) shall prepare and the Township shall
adopt a rehabilitation manual for the owner occupancy
rehabilitation program and a rehabilitation manual for the rental
occupancy rehabilitation program. Both rehabilitation manuals
shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the
Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the Administrative Agent(s).
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
6. Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), but shall be administered
in accordance with the following:
a. If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to UHAC.
b. If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
UHAC.
c. Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards approved by the Court as part of East
Brunswick's third round Judgement of Compliance and Repose.
§ 132-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-71
1:383
7. Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as incomeeligible
in accordance with UHAC, except that households in owner
occupied units shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
B. Market to Affordable program.
1. A market to affordable program is established to permit the
purchase or subsidization of units through a written agreement
with the property owner and sold or rented to low- and moderateincome
households. The market to affordable programs may
produce both low- and moderate-income units (the program may be
limited to only low- or only moderate-income units as per the Fair
Share Plan).
2. The following provisions shall apply to market to affordable
programs:
a. At the time they are offered for sale or rental, eligible units
may be new, pre-owned or vacant.
b. The units shall be certified to be in sound condition as a result
of an inspection performed by a licensed building inspector.
3. The units shall comply with UHAC with the following exceptions:
a. Bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b) and (c));
b. Low/moderate income split (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(a)); and
c. Affordability average (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) and (e)); however:
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21]
1) The maximum rent for a moderate-income unit shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60 percent
of median income and the maximum rent for a low-income
unit shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 44 percent of median income; and
2) The maximum sales price for a moderate-income unit shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 70
percent of median income and the maximum sales price
for a low-income unit shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 40 percent of median income.
C. Inclusionary Zoning. [Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
1. Phasing of the construction of affordable units and market units in
an Inclusionary development shall be as follows:
§ 132-71 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-71
1:384
§ 132-72. New Construction.
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low-and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
2. Design. In inclusionary developments low- and moderate-income
units shall be integrated with the market units.
3. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating
source as market units within the inclusionary development.
A. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable Housing
Units:
1. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low income
unit.
2. In each development containing affordable housing units, at least
50 percent of the restricted affordable units within each bedroom
distribution shall be low-income units.
3. At least 13% of the affordable units in each development containing
affordable housing units shall be very low income units (affordable
to households earning 30 percent or less of the regional median
household income by household size), with such very low income
units counted as part of the low income housing requirement.
4. Affordable units in developments containing affordable housing
units that are not age-restricted shall be structured in conjunction
with realistic market demands such that:
a. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20 percent of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
b. At least 30 percent of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be two bedroom units;
§ 132-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-72
1:385
c. At least 20 percent of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be three bedroom units; and
d. The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
5. Affordable units in developments containing affordable housing
units that are age-restricted shall be structured such that the
number of bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted lowand
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development.
The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by
having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
6. All Low Income Housing Tax Credit projects shall confirm to the
income, affordability average and bedroom distribution
requirements set forth in the UHAC at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3 with the
exception that 13 percent of affordable rental units in such
developments shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 30 percent of median income instead of the UHAC
requirement for 10 percent of affordable rental units being
affordable to households earning no more than 35 percent of
median income.
B. Accessibility Requirements:
1. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
2. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
a. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
b. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
c. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
d. An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
e. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
f. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
C. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices:
§ 132-72 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-72
1:386
1. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and in COAH, utilizing the regional income limits
established by COAH.
2. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60 percent of median income, and the average rent
for restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52 percent of median income.
3. The developers and/or sponsors of restricted rental units shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, except that:
a. At least 13 percent of all low- and moderate-income rental
units shall be affordable to very low income households
earning no more than 30 percent of median income with such
very low income units counted as part of the low income
housing obligation.
4. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70 percent of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55 percent
for restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability
average, moderate-income ownership units must be available for at
least three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
5. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household;
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
d. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
e. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
6. In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
§ 132-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-72
1:387
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household; and
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
7. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95
percent of the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of
interest), taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28
percent of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size
household as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the price
shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented. [Amended
11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
8. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30 percent of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4,
as may be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
9. The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
10. The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed nine percent in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low- income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low- income housing
tax credits.
11. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall
be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the annual
tenant paid utility allowances approved by HUD. [Amended
3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
12. The developer shall submit the name and qualifications of a
proposed administrator for the affordable housing units in its
development to the Municipal Housing Liaison for review and
approval by the Township Council. Submission of an administrator
§ 132-72 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-72
1:388
§ 132-73. Affirmative Marketing Requirements. [Amended 30-6-17
by Ord. 17-12]
for approval shall occur 150 days prior to the commencement
of the administration of the affordable units. Any administrator
selected by the developer must be authorized by Resolution of
the Township council to act as the Administrative Agent for that
particular project and shall report to the Municipal Housing
Liaison. [Added 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
13. Increases in sales prices and annual rent increases and the
determination of median household income by household size shall
utilize methodology approved by the Court as part of East
Brunswick's Judgement of Compliance and Repose. [Added 3-6-17
by Ord. No. 17-12]
A. The following general guidelines apply to all developments that contain
low-and moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
B. East Brunswick Township's Affirmative Marketing Plan shall be subject
to approval of the Court and shall be compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15,
as may be amended and supplemented.
C. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region Three and covers the period of deed
restriction.
D. The Administrative Agent designated by the Township of East
Brunswick shall assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units
consistent with the Affirmative Marketing Plan for the municipality and
the Settlement Agreement reached with the parties to the Township's
Declaratory Judgement action.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
§ 132-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-73
1:389
§ 132-74. Occupancy Standards. [Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21;
3-6-17 by Ord. 17-12]
§ 132-75. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and
Enforcement Mechanisms. [Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-21;
3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
G. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Township of East
Brunswick.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the Administrative Agent shall strive to:
1. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
2. Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
3. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to UCC/Fire Code occupancy standards
will apply.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this Ordinance until the Township of East Brunswick elects to release
the unit from such requirements however, and prior to such an election,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, for at least
30 years unless a minimum of 50 years is specified as part of a
settlement agreement.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value.
D. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note obligating the
purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to
repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's release from the
requirements of this Ordinance, an amount equal to the difference
between the unit's non-restricted fair market value and its restricted
§ 132-73 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-75
1:390
§ 132-76. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units,
Homeowner Association Fees and Resale Prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 132-77. Buyer Income Eligibility.
price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien
evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit. The municipality
reserves the right to reject the repayment option and extend the
controls when allowable.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this Ordinance shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure
with respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented, assuming the municipality elects to release the unit
from the controls on affordability.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
B. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50
percent of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall
be reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80
percent of median income, and a very low income ownership units shall
be reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 30 percent of median income.
§ 132-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-77
1:391
§ 132-78. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership Unit;
Subordination. [Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
§ 132-79. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units. [Amended
3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33 percent of the household's certified
monthly income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95 percent of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit,
as such price is determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
Ordinance until the Township of East Brunswick elects to release the
unit from such requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, and
prior to such an election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, for at least 30 years, unless a minimum of 50 years is
specified as part of a settlement agreement.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Middlesex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to
the Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this Ordinance, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
§ 132-77 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-79
1:392
§ 132-80. Price Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases.
§ 132-81. Tenant Income Eligibility.
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed five percent of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the
costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in
this Ordinance.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
1. Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30 percent of
median income.
2. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50 percent of median
income.
3. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80 percent of median income.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income, lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to
the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35 percent
(40 percent for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly
income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be
exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35 percent (40 percent for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household
income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing
costs;
§ 132-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-81
1:393
§ 132-82. Administration. [Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35 percent (40
percent for households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible
monthly income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to
pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
Administrative Agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in (b)1 through 5 above with the
Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for East Brunswick
Township is established by this ordinance. The Mayor shall make the
actual appointment of the MHL by means of a letter.
1. The MHL shall be the person employed as Housing Specialist by
East Brunswick Township.
2. The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to COAH for
approval.
3. The MHL must meet all COAH requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training.
4. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of East Brunswick, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the
Administrative Agent:
a. Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents and interested households;
b. The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls.
c. Approval of and supervising any contracting Administrative
Agent.
d. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
East Brunswick's Fair Share Plan;
§ 132-81 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-82
1:394
§ 132-83. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
e. Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by the Court.
f. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable; and
g. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH, or the Affordable Housing
Professionals of New Jersey.
B. The Township of East Brunswick shall designate by letter of the
Township Administrator, subject to the approval of the Court, one or
more Administrative Agents to administer newly constructed affordable
units in accordance with UHAC.
C. An Operating Manual shall be provided by the Administrative Agent(s)
and subject to approval of the Court. The Operating Manuals shall be
available for public inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk and
in the office(s) of the Administrative Agent(s).
D. The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC and which are
described in full detail in the Operating Manual, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
1. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
2. Affirmative Marketing;
3. Household Certification;
4. Affordability Controls;
5. Records retention;
6. Resale and re-rental;
7. Processing requests from unit owners;
8. Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
E. The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities, hereunder.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
§ 132-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-83
1:395
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of
the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer or
Tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the Owner,
Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
1. The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer or
Tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units the Owner,
Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
a. In the case of an Owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the East Brunswick
Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount
of rent illegally collected;
b. In the case of an Owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
2. The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of the
Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the
same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderateincome
unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating Owner shall be sold at a sale
price which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and
pay off any First Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the
costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating Owner shall have the right to
possession terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the
Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the lowand
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to
§ 132-83 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-83
1:396
reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred
in connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be personally responsible for and
to the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred
by the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In
the event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
Owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the Owner shall make a claim with
the municipality for such. Failure of the Owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of
such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on
such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be
paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the
Owner or forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The Owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior
liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderateincome
unit by satisfying the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to
the difference between the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any
prior liens and costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal
fees and the maximum resale price for which the low- and moderateincome
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the
same manner as the excess which would have been realized from an
actual sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the Owner
to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may
be referred to the Owner by the municipality, with such offer to
purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and
moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations governing
affordable housing units.
§ 132-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-83
1:397
§ 132-83.1. Reporting and Monitoring Requirements.
H. The Owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the Owner.
A. On the first anniversary of the entry of the Order granting East
Brunswick a Final Judgement of Compliance and Repose, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of the Repose period, the
Township shall provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable
housing activity within the municipality through posting on the
municipal website with a copy of such posting provided to Fair Share
Housing Center and the Intervenor/Defendants in IMO Township of
East Brunswick, County of Middlesex, Docket No.: MID-L-4013-15,
using forms previously developed for this purpose by the Council on
Affordable Housing or any other forms endorsed by the Court-appointed
Special Master and Fair Share Housing Center.
B. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020, as
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township shall post on its
municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center
and the Intervenor/Defendants in IMO Township of East Brunswick,
County of Middlesex, Docket No.: MID-L-4013-15, a status report as to
its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt
sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic
opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center
and the Intervenor/Defendants in IMO Township of East Brunswick,
County of Middlesex Docket No.: MID-L-4013-15, regarding whether
any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and should be
replaced. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing before
the Court regarding these issues.
C. For the review of very low income housing requirements required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the
entry of the Order granting East Brunswick a Final Judgement of
Compliance and Repose, and every third year thereafter, the Township
will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share
Housing Center and the Intervenor/Defendants in IMO Township of
East Brunswick, County of Middlesex, Docket No.: MID-L-4013-15, a
status report as to its satisfaction of its very low income requirements,
including the family very low income requirements referenced herein.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the municipality and Fair Share Housing Center on the issue of whether
the municipality has complied with its very low income housing
obligation.
§ 132-83 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 132-84
1:398
§ 132-84. Appeals. [Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-12]
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent designated pursuant
to this Ordinance shall be filed in writing with the COAH or subsequent
entity with similar jurisdiction or with the Superior Court.
§ 132-85. Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed as
to such inconsistencies.
§ 132-86. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.
§ 132-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-86
1:399
Chapter 134
LIBRARY, MUNICIPAL
§ 134-1. Damage to Library Property Prohibited.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage, destroy or illegally
copy any library materials. No person shall deface, disfigure, damage or
destroy any library equipment or furnishings, the library building, or any
other library property.
§ 134-2. Theft of Library Property Prohibited.
§ 134-3. Library Circulation Policy Posted.
The Library shall display the library Circulation Policy in a conspicuous
place in the library building.
1. A person commits the offense of theft of library property when he or she
does any of the following acts:
a. Knowingly and intentionally removes any library material or
property from the premises of the library without authority to do
so; or
b. Knowingly and intentionally borrows any library material by:
i. Using a library card not in compliance with library policy and
procedures; or
ii. Using a library card knowing that it is revoked, cancelled or
expired, or
iii. Using a library card knowing that it is falsely made,
counterfeit, materially altered, or stolen; or
c. Fails to return library materials in compliance with current library
policy.
2. Library managers, library staff responsible for the circulation of library
materials, and/or library security officers may question any person(s):
a. To ensure that a person is removing any library material or
property with authority to do so or borrowing it in accordance with
library policies and procedures; or
b. When the theft detection system alarm sounds as that person
proceeds through said system.
§ 132-86 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 134-4
1:400
§ 134-4. Complaint Procedure.
The Library Director and/or the Library Manager(s) who oversee(s)
circulation are authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court under
the following conditions:
§ 134-5. Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 135
LICENSES
1. When the cost of damages or unreturned library property exceeds
$25.00; or
2. When the cost of unreturned and/or damaged materials and/or
property, and/or unpaid fines and/or fees is $25.00 or greater.
1. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a minimum fine of
one hundred ($100.00) dollars or twice the cost of the unreturned and/
or damaged material(s) and/or property and/or unpaid fines and/or fees,
whichever is greater, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3.
2. For the second and each succeeding offense in which a violation occurs
or continues upon conviction thereof, the individual will be subject to a
minimum fine of two hundred ($200.00) dollars or twice the cost of the
unreturned and/or damaged material(s) and/or property and/or unpaid
fines and/or fees, whichever is greater, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2C:43-3.
§ 134-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-5
1:401

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-101]
§ 135-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued
under this chapter.
§ 135-2. Information required to be on application forms. [Amended
9-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-52]
All applications for licenses, except those issued by the Division of Health,
shall be made to the Township Clerk upon forms provided by him and shall
contain the following information:
A. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
B. A complete physical description, together with three recent
photographs, of the applicant, which shall be approximately 2 x 2
inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishable manner.
C. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and a full description of the premises.
D. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number.
E. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship
and authority to work in East Brunswick.
F. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
G. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold.
H. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses.
I. Agent responsible for licensed activity.
J. With regard to each person to be conducting business of licensee:
(1) Home address
(2) Place of birth
(3) Date of birth
(4) Social security number
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-2
1:403
§ 135-3. Issuance of license. [Amended 12-8-69 by Ord. No.
69-122-A]
The Township Clerk shall issue all licenses upon the completion of all the
requirements for the appropriate license and the payment of all required
fees. In the case of licenses issued to hawkers, peddlers and solicitors, the
Clerk shall issue the license upon the filing of the application, payment of
all required fees and completion of investigation.
§ 135-4. Investigation of applicants. [Amended 8-13-90 by Ord. No.
90-42; 7-12-93 by Ord. No. 93-38]
Each application shall be referred to the Director of Public Safety or a police
officer designated by him. He/she shall immediately institute whatever
investigation of the applicant's business, moral character and ability to
properly conduct the licensed activity he/she considers necessary for the
protection of the public. If the Director of Public Safety determines that
the applicant's character, ability or business responsibility is unsatisfactory
or the products, services or activities are not free from fraud, he/she shall
immediately notify the Township Clerk who shall notify the applicant that
his application has been rejected, or, where the license has already been
issued, the Clerk shall summarily revoke the license. In all such cases the
applicant or licensee may file an appeal to the Township Council which
shall, within five (5) business days following the filing of an appeal, conduct
a hearing to determine whether the license should be issued or reinstated.
§ 135-5. Licenses to be issued by Clerk and bear Township Seal.
All licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk and shall bear the seal of
the township attested to by him/her.
(5) Sex
(6) Age
(7) Height
(8) Weight
(9) Hair color
(10) Eye color
(11) Tattoos, scars, amputations or other distinguishing features
K. A Statement as to whether any licensee or person working for licensee
on licensed business has ever been arrested or convicted of a crime or
disorderly persons offense with explanation in detail.
L. List of municipalities where licensee has previously operated.
§ 135-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-6
1:404
§ 135-6. Display of license.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a particular premises or from
a vehicle, the license shall be prominently displayed on the premises or
vehicle. In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his
possession at all times and shall display it upon request of any police officer
or any person with whom he is doing business.
§ 135-7. Licenses not transferable.
Every license shall apply only to the person, firm or corporation to whom it
was issued and shall not be transferable.
§ 135-8. Revocation of licenses; reasons.
§ 135-9. Reissuance of revoked license.
The Township Council may issue another license to a person whose license
has been revoked as provided in this Article, if, after hearing, it is satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation
will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose license has been revoked
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be issued another
license to carry on the same activity.
A. In addition to the provisions of § 135-4, any license or permit issued by
the Township of East Brunswick may be revoked by the Township
Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) A violation of any provision of this Code.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the
public health, safety or general welfare.
B. Except as provided in § 135-4 or in the case of an emergency, no license
shall be revoked without notice and hearing. The hearing authority in
all cases shall be the Township Council which shall revoke or suspend
the license if it is satisfied by a fair preponderance of the evidence that
the licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 135-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-10
1:405
§ 135-10. Certain licenses not subject to Article.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, this Article
shall not apply to the issuance, suspension or revocation of alcoholic
beverage licenses which are regulated by a separate chapter and
appropriate state statutes.
§ 135-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-10
1:406
ARTICLE II
Circuses, Carnivals and Similar Exhibitions
[Adopted 8-19-31; amended 7-22-74 by Ord. No. 74-122-D8-24-81 by
Ord. No. 81-381; 7-9-90 by Ord. No. 90-35; 3-8-10 by Ord. No.
10-05]
§ 135-11. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or exhibit any circus or
carnival or similar public exhibition in the Township of East Brunswick
without having first obtained a permit therefor from the Clerk of the
township, who shall only issue a permit after the same has been approved
by the Township Council.
§ 135-12. Submission of application. [Amended 8-24-81 by Ord. No.
81-381]
Application shall be submitted to the East Brunswick Township Clerk sixty
(60) days prior of the commencement of the event, setting forth the
proposed number of days and hours of operation, in conformance with the
East Brunswick Noise Ordinance; the nature of the exhibit; the type and
nature of food concessions; the proposed method of cleanup; the proposed
layout of the exhibits on a sketch or plot plan; the proposed methods of
screening the area from adjacent properties; the location, intensity and
direction of all outdoor lighting; the anticipated noise levels; and a general
statement as to the purpose for which the event is to be held. Accompanying
the application shall be a certificate of liability insurance for the protection
of the general public. The Township Clerk shall submit the application to
the Director of Public Safety who shall determine the number of police
required to regulate traffic and security control, ingress and egress and fire
protection standards.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Noise.
§ 135-13. Required notices; fee. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV; 3-8-10 by Ord. No. 10-05]
The applicant shall publish notice in the newspaper circulating within the
municipality at least ten (10) days in advance of the date on which the
Township Council is scheduled to hear the matter and shall pay to the Town
Clerk a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.). This paragraph shall not apply to
an applicant who has obtained approval from the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment of the Township of East Brunswick to conduct public
exhibitions on property owned by the applicant.
§ 135-14. Security. [Amended 3-8-10 by Ord. No. 10-05]
The applicant shall file security in the amount of three hundred dollars
($300.) at the same time that the application is filed, which security shall
be returned by the Township Clerk if the premises are restored to their
§ 135-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-14
1:407
prior condition, as determined by the Department of Health; but if the
premises are not so restored within three (3) days of the conclusion of the
event, excluding inclement weather not conducive to outdoor cleanup, the
Township of East Brunswick may use as much of the security as is necessary
to restore the premises. This paragraph shall not apply to an applicant who
is the owner of the property upon which the exhibition is to be conducted.
§ 135-15. Restrictions on location.
No circus or carnival or similar public exhibit shall be permitted in a
residential area, other than in connection with a school function located on
school grounds.
§ 135-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-9-90 by Ord. No.
90-35]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall pay a fine not to
exceed $1,000.00, in accordance with State Statute, in addition to the fee
referred to in Section 135-13 and the security referred to in Section 135-14.
Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 135-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-16
1:408
ARTICLE III
Peddlers, Solicitors and Itinerant Vendors
[Adopted 6-11-46; amended 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33; 7-14-03 by
Ord. No. 03-21]
§ 135-17. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who is not in the business of selling goods, but
one who goes from house to house or from place to place for the purpose
of obtaining alms, contributions, or subscriptions, or who does research
analyses, makes surveys or opinion polls, obtains rating data or similar
information, or engages in educational, citizen lobbying activities or similar
work which involves door-to-door or place-to-place activity.[Added 7-14-03
by Ord. No. 03-21]
ITINERANT VENDOR — A person in the business of selling merchandise
or services who conducts his business from a fixed location, but who does
not intend to continue in business within the township permanently. A
proprietor of a business which is seasonal in nature who suspends business
during the off season shall not for that reason alone be considered an
"itinerant vendor."[Amended 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33]
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — A group of persons, corporation or
association organized for philanthropic, charitable, religious, patriotic or
other public-service purposes and not for private gain. Examples of
"nonprofit organizations" include veterans groups and organizations which
assist the poor, the aged, the sick, the physically handicapped or mentally
retarded; or which aid victims of fire, flood or similar catastrophes. This
enumeration is intended to be typical and shall not be construed as
exclusive.
PEDDLER — A person who goes from home to home or from place to place,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, selling or renting and delivering goods and
services.[Amended 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33]
SOLICITOR — A person who goes from house to house or from place to
place selling merchandise by sample or by taking orders for future delivery
with or without accepting advance payments for the goods and regardless
of whether advance solicitation is made by mail, telephone or personal
contact. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the person who comes
in personal contact with the buyer, whether he obtains the order, delivers
the goods or accepts money in payment for them.[Added 7-14-03 by Ord.
No. 03-21]
§ 135-18. Persons not subject to Article. [Amended 8-14-95 by Ord.
No. 95-26]
This Article shall not apply to any of the following persons:
§ 135-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-18
1:409
§ 135-19. Exemptions and exceptions. [Amended 9-12-77 by Ord.
No. 77-122-M; 8-14-95 by Ord. No. 95-26; 7-14-03 by Ord. No.
03-21]
§ 135-20. License required. [Amended 7-14-03 by Ord. No. 03-21]
No person shall engage in business as a peddler, solicitor or itinerant
vendor without having first obtained a license in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
A. Any person licensed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance or
the Real Estate Commission of the State of New Jersey.
B. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles.
C. Any sale required by statute or the order of any court.
D. Any person engaged in delivering merchandise or other things in the
regular course of business to the premises of the person ordering or
entitled to receive it.
E. Any person soliciting votes for a bona fide candidate for political office.
F. Members of a first aid squad as defined by the New Jersey Revised
Statutes.
A. The following persons shall not be required to apply or secure a license
nor to pay any processing or licensing fee, but shall comply with all
other applicable provisions of this Code and shall be required to
possess a special permit which will be issued by the Township Clerk
upon presentation of proper identification and proof of their status:
[Amended 8-28-95 by Ord. No. 95-26]
(1) Veterans and members of volunteer fire departments, volunteer fire
engine, hook and ladder, hose, supply company or salvage corps of
any municipality or fire district in New Jersey holding a certificate
of exemption, who are residents of the State of New Jersey and who
hold a special license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, et seq.;
(2) Persons to whom a valid mercantile license has been issued under
the provisions of laws or ordinances other than this chapter;
(3) Physically handicapped persons who are residents of the Township
of East Brunswick; and
(4) Persons selling products grown on their own farms.
B. [Removed 7-14-03 by Ord. No. 03-21]
§ 135-18 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-21
1:410
§ 135-21. Fee. [Amended 3-14-66 by Ord. No. 66-43; 6-27-66 by Ord.
No. 66-56; 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33]
The fee for a peddler's, solicitor's or itinerant vendor's license shall be fifty
dollars ($50.) per person per year or any part thereof.
§ 135-22. Hours of sale. [Amended 7-14-03 by Ord. No. 03-21]
§ 135-23. Conduct.
Every person licensed under this Article shall conduct himself according to
the following rules and regulations:
§ 135-23.1. Posting of No Solicitation Signs. [Added 7-14-03 by Ord.
No. 03-21]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of East Brunswick that
the occupant or occupants of residences in this Township shall determine
A. No person licensed under this Article shall engage in business before
9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on weekdays. This subsection shall not
apply to persons who are expressly invited by residents of the Township
to come to their homes at a different time, nor shall this subsection
apply to persons selling Christmas trees and related wreaths, blankets
and floral displays during the Christmas season. [Amended 12-27-76
by Ord. No. 76-122-L; 1-14-79 by Ord. No. 79-205; 7-14-03 by
Ord. No. 03-21]
B. Peddlers selling manufactured ready-to-eat food products, such as ice
cream or custard, shall be permitted to operate from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. any day, including Sunday, but shall be subject to all other
restrictions. This subsection shall be strictly construed.
C. A canvasser may conduct door-to-door canvassing between 9 a.m. to 9
p.m. in accordance with the provisions of this Article. [Added 7-14-03
by Ord. No. 03-21]
A. He shall not enter or attempt to enter the house of any resident of the
township without an express invitation from the occupant of the house.
B. He shall not conduct himself in a manner that is objectionable or
annoying to the occupant of any house.
C. No peddler or solicitor, nor any person on his behalf, shall shout, make
any cry out, blow a horn, ring an electronically actuated bell, or use any
sound devices, except for bells commonly used on ice cream trucks,
including any loudspeaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any
street, park or public place or private premises for any purpose directly
or indirectly associated with attracting attention to or selling, renting
or disposing of any goods, wares, merchandise, articles or services,
which such licensee proposes to sell, rent or otherwise dispose of or
distribute. [Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33]
§ 135-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-23.1
1:411
whether an itinerant vendor, nonprofit organization, peddler, solicitor or
canvasser may be permitted to solicit at their respective residences.
§ 135-23.2. Do Not Knock Registry; Do Not Drop Registry;
Unsolicited or Non-Subscribed Materials Prohibited. [Added 5-6-13
by Ord. No. 13-14]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of East Brunswick that
residents should have the option to be relieved from unwanted commercial
solicitations, hawking, inquiries and general disturbances from commercial
solicitors, itinerant peddlers, hawkers, and canvassers. Residents may
include their residences on a Do Not Knock registry to curtail unwanted
solicitations. It is further declared that residents should have the option to
be relieved from unsolicited or non-subscribed commercial printed material
at their residences. Residents may include their addresses on a Do Not Drop
registry to curtail the distribution of unwanted commercial printed matter
at their residences.
A. No itinerant vendor, nonprofit organization, peddler, solicitor or
canvasser shall solicit any residence within the Township if there is a
sign posted on the premises indicating that they are not welcome.
Examples of such signs may include but are not limited to the following:
"No Solicitation," "Solicitors Are Not Welcome" and "Canvassers Are
Not Welcome."
B. Every itinerant vendor, nonprofit organization, peddler, solicitor or
canvasser seeking to solicit any residence within the Township shall
look for any signs indicating that they are not welcome prior to going
onto the residence. If such a sign is posted, every itinerant vendor,
nonprofit organization, peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises without question.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this Article III shall be
sanctioned under Section 135.26.4 of this Article and/or Section 1-15 of
Article I of the Township Code.
A. Do Not Knock Registry. There is hereby established a "Do Not Knock
Registry" to be maintained in the Office of the Township Clerk. The
purpose of the Do Not Knock Registry is to permit residents to bar any
commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking taking place by foot,
wagon, motor vehicle or any other conveyance on the door-to-door
basis. Residents may register for such list by personal delivery, regular
mail or e-mail to the Township Clerk. After registration on the Do Not
Knock Registry, it shall be a violation of the terms of this Section of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick to visit any residences for
commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking to any registered person
and/or such person's property. No commercial solicitation, peddling or
hawking of any nature or kind whatsoever shall be permitted on any
properties that have been listed with the Do Not Knock Registry, to be
maintained at the Township Clerk's Office.
§ 135-23.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-23.2
1:412
§ 135-24. Use of vehicles. [Amended 7-28-86 by Ord. No. 86-763]
No licensee shall sell or rent any merchandise from his vehicle other than
food or beverages. No licensee shall transact business from his vehicle
unless it is properly parked immediately adjacent to the curb of a public
street in a permitted locality. No licensee shall at any time double-park his
B. Do Not Drop Registry. There is hereby established a "Do Not Drop
Registry" to be maintained in the Office of the Township Clerk. The
purpose of the Do Not Drop Registry is to permit residents to bar the
receipt of unsolicited or non-subscribed printed materials at their
properties. Residents may register for such list by personal delivery,
regular mail or e-mail to the Township Clerk. After registration on the
Do Not Drop Registry, it shall be a violation of the terms of this Section
of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick to distribute unsolicited
or non-subscribed printed materials to any registered person and/or
such person's property. No circulars, publications, handbills, brochures,
shoppers, or flyers, whether of a commercial, religious or charitable
nature shall be distributed to any properties which have been listed
with the Do Not Drop Registry, to be maintained at the Township Clerk's
Office.
C. Exceptions. These provisions shall not be applicable to the delivery or
personal solicitation of:
(1) Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of
the United States Postal Service;
(2) Parcels, packages and materials delivered by a commercially
recognized courier service or overnight express delivery agency,
such as, by way of example, Federal Express or United Parcel
Service;
(3) Newspapers and other publications and periodicals if subscribed to
by the owner or occupant of the recipient premises, provided same
are placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose, or, in
the absence of such receptacle, tightly wrapped to prevent blowing
or scattering upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas;
(4) Delivery of laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food
products and commercial product sampling by agreement with or
invitation of the owner or occupant of the recipient premises;
(5) Personal delivery or drop off of non-commercial handbills of a
political, charitable, or religious nature whose distribution is or
may be protected by constitutional rights of free speech, provided
that same are packaged and placed in such a manner as not to blow
and scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas; and
(6) Hawkers and peddlers licensed pursuant to Chapter 135 of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick, who abide by all
provisions of the Do Not Knock and Do Not Drop registries.
§ 135-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-24
1:413
vehicle while transacting business nor transact business other than on the
curb side of his vehicle.
§ 135-25. Restrictions on location. [Amended 9-8-75 by Ord. No.
75-122-I]
No peddler shall offer for sale any merchandise, food, beverage or other
goods along any public street or adjoining private property of said streets
listed herein during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days:
A. Lawrence Brook School.
(1) Corona Road, between Jean Road and Sullivan Way.
(2) Gage Road, between Sullivan Way and Whitehall Road.
(3) Sullivan Way, between Gulf Road and Eggers Street.
B. Smith School/Churchill School.
(1) Bonner Road, entire length.
(2) Eggers Street, between University Road and Taylor Avenue,
westerly leg.
(3) Marlow Road, entire length.
(4) Norton Road, entire length.
C. Weber School.
(1) Hardenburg Lane, between Riva Avenue and Oakmont.
(2) Hardenburg Lane, between Riva Avenue and Marie Terrace.
(3) Riva Avenue, between Oakmont Avenue and Ann Terrace.
D. Memorial School/St. Bartholomews School.
(1) Innes Road, entire length.
(2) Ryders Lane, between Smith Lane and Redcoat Drive.
E. Irwin School.
(1) Racetrack Road, between Route 18 and Summerhill Road.
(2) Summerhill Road, between Academic and Deerfield.
F. Hammarskjold School/Vocational Tech.
(1) Landsdowne Road, between Rues Lane and Clovis Road.
(2) Rues Lane, between Summerhill Road and Huntington Road.
G. Chittick School.
§ 135-24 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-25
1:414
(1) Flagler Street, between Old Bridge Turnpike and the most easterly
leg of Helena Street toward River Road. [Amended 10-6-75 by
Ord. No. 75-122-J]
(2) Old Bridge Turnpike, between Thomas Road and Racetrack Road.
H. Crandall School.
(1) Kossman Street, between Old Bridge Turnpike and Chestnut
Street.
I. Warnsdorfer School/McGinnis School.
(1) Carlton Court, entire length.
(2) Dunhams Corner Road, between Colonial Drive and Springfield
Road.
(3) Dutch Road, between Dunhams Corner Road and Concord Drive.
(4) Fern Road, between Dunhams Corner Road and Tall Oaks Drive.
(5) Hardenburg Lane, between Dunhams Corner Road and Brookside
Court.
J. Frost School.
(1) Frost Avenue, between Queens Road and its westerly terminus.
K. Bowne School.
(1) Diamond Court, entire length.
(2) Oxford Road, entire length.
(3) Main Street, between Route 18 and Old Stage Road.
L. Central School.
(1) Quincey Street, adjoining Central School playground.
(2) Cranbury Road.
M. East Brunswick High School/Central School. [Added 12-22-75 by
Ord. No. 75-122-K]
(1) Camelot Drive, entire length.
(2) Cranbury Road, between Dunhams Corner Road and Summerhill
Road.
(3) Lycoming Lane, entire length.
(4) Tudor Place, entire length.
§ 135-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-26
1:415
§ 135-26. Regulation of nonprofit organizations. [Amended 2-8-99
by Ord. No. 99-7]
A. Nonprofit organizations desiring to engage in any of the activities for
which a license is required by this Article shall not be required to apply
for or secure a license, to pay a license fee or to post a bond, but shall
comply with all other applicable provisions of this Code, provided that
there is filed with the Township Clerk a sworn statement containing the
following information: [Amended 2-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-7]
(1) The name and purpose of the organization for which the permit is
sought.
(2) Names and addresses of the officers of the organization.
(3) Names and addresses of the agents or representatives who will
solicit, sell merchandise or distribute literature in the township.
(4) The name and address of the owner or authorized agent of said
owner, who has granted the nonprofit organization permission to
engage in any of the aforementioned activities on the owner's
property.
B. In lieu of the usual investigation of applicants for a license, the Director
of Public Safety shall conduct whatever inquiry he considers necessary
to determine that the organization in question is a bona fide nonprofit
organization. The organization shall provide satisfactory proof of
nonprofit status to the Director of Public Safety, the Township Clerk, or
both upon request, including but not limited to evidence of tax
exemption and registration with the State of New Jersey. Upon being
satisfied that the organization has demonstrated its bona fide nonprofit
status, the Director of Public Safety shall notify the Township Clerk who
shall issue a special permit to the organization in question. [Amended
2-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-7]
C. Each representative or agent of the organization shall carry proper
identification indicating the name of the organization and his own name
and address and shall be prepared to display it upon request.
D. Nonprofit organizations shall comply with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter except that they shall be permitted to carry
on their activities on Sundays.
E. The special permit issued to the organization in question shall bear the
name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made,
the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit
and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by
the Township of East Brunswick. All permits must be signed by the
Township Clerk. No permit may grant the right to solicit longer than
sixty (60) days from its date, but the Township Clerk may extend any
permit for additional periods of not more than sixty (60) days upon a
showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by failure to
§ 135-26 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-26
1:416
§ 135-26.1. Exclusive Rights in Streets. [Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No.
89-33]
No Licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor a stationary location thereon, nor be permitted to operate in
a congested area where such operations might impede or inconvenience
the public use of such streets. The judgment of a police officer, exercised
in good faith, shall be deemed to be conclusive as to whether the area is
congested and the public is impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 135-26.2. Exhibition of License. [Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No.
89-33]
All licensees are required to exhibit their Certificate of License in plain
view and shall permit the license to be examined by any citizen or law
enforcement officer.
§ 135-26.3. Revocation. [Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-33; amended
2-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-7]
Any permit or license issued under this Article III may be revoked by the
Director of Public Safety for good cause after notice and hearing.
§ 135-26.4. Violation and Penalties. [Added 2-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-7]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article III shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
extend the permit for such additional time. [Added 12-8-69 by Ord.
No. 69-122-A]
§ 135-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-26.4
1:417

ARTICLE IV
Junkyards
[Adopted 9-24-63]
§ 135-27. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — An area, covered or uncovered, used for the purpose of
buying, selling, exchanging or storing old or secondhand metals, bottles,
glassware, tinware, paper, lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or
inoperable automobiles or any other thing which is no longer used or usable
for its intended purpose but which may have value because of the parts or
materials it contains.
§ 135-28. License required; fee. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV]
No person shall operate a junkyard in the Township of East Brunswick
without having first obtained a license from the Clerk and having paid the
required license fee. The fee for a junkyard license shall be two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.) for an initial license and seventy-five dollars ($75.) per
year thereafter.
§ 135-29. Information required on application form.
In addition to the information required by § 135-2, the application for a
license under this Article shall be accompanied by a plot plan in triplicate,
drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the premises, the location of all
fences and screening and any other information which may appropriately
be required for the effective enforcement of this Article.
§ 135-30. Investigation.
In addition to the investigation provided for by § 135-3, the Building
Inspector shall inspect the premises for which a license is desired to
determine whether it complies with the provisions of this Article. He shall
report the results of his investigation to the Township Clerk. No license shall
be issued unless the Building Inspector's report is favorable.
§ 135-31. Required screening.
All junkyards shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least eight (8)
feet in height, so constructed that the interior of the junkyard will not be
visible from a public street. The wall or fence shall be painted white, dark
green or some similar color and shall be kept in good repair. It shall contain
no more than two (2) entrances or exits, each not less than fifteen (15)
feet nor more than twenty (20) feet wide. In place of a wall or fence, a
junkyard may be screened by a planting of dense evergreen screening. In
that case, the junkyard shall also be enclosed by a cyclone or chainlink-
§ 135-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-31
1:419
type fence, erected inside the screening sufficient to prevent unauthorized
persons from gaining entrance.
§ 135-32. Health and safety precautions.
§ 135-33. Inspection.
The Building Inspector may inspect any junkyard at any reasonable time to
ascertain whether the provisions of this Article are being complied with.
A. Adequate precautions shall be taken in every junkyard to prevent fire
from breaking out or spreading. In particular, no explosive or extremely
flammable material shall be stored in a junkyard.
B. Junk shall be so stored and stacked so as to permit customers of the
junkyard and other persons to move about easily and without risking
injury.
C. No operator of a junkyard shall permit rodents or conditions likely to
attract rodents or any other unhealthy or unsanitary condition to exist
on the premises.
D. No operator of a junkyard shall be permitted to continue the operation
of business if he is in violation of any municipal, county, state or federal
law. In the event that the Chief Building Inspector finds such violation,
he may issue a stop order or file a summons in the Municipal Court
alleging a violation of this chapter. [Added 9-12-77 by Ord. No.
77-122-N]
§ 135-31 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-33
1:420
ARTICLE V
Mechanical And Electronic Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-10-63; amended 12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-122; 6-25-79
by Ord. No. 79-145; 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73; 6-10-91 by Ord. No.
91-62; 6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-73; 9-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-94;
11-8-93 by Ord. No. 93-65; 8-10-98 by Ord. No. 98-23]
§ 135-34. Definitions. [Amended 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any mechanical or electronic
amusement device to another for use in his place of business, whether
under lease or any similar arrangement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine
which may be operated by the public for entertainment or amusement,
whether the machine is coin-operated or not and whether or not it registers
scores or tallies. Examples of mechanical or electronic amusement devices
are pinball machines, bowling machines, mechanical grab machines, Skee-
Ball machines, pokerino machines, juke-boxes, video games, and similar
devices. The enumeration is intended to be typical and shall not be
construed as exclusive. All "mechanical or electronic amusement devices"
are subject to the zoning requirements of the East Brunswick Code. Such
devices are permitted uses only in the C-3, HC-1, HC-2, HC-3 and MXD
Zones. The installation of "mechanical or electronic amusement devices"
shall be considered to be an amusement facility subject to the remaining
provisions of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.[Amended
12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-122; 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-145; 12-26-90
by Ord. No. 90-73]
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any mechanical or
electronic amusement device is placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 135-35. License required. [Amended 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73]
No person shall distribute or operate a mechanical or electronic amusement
device within the Township of East Brunswick without having first obtained
a license and paid the required license fee.
A. No coin-operated amusement device shall be placed, maintained,
operated or used in any public place, quasi-public place, or in any
building, store or other place wherein the public is expressly or
impliedly invited or may enter within the municipal limits of the
Township without the distributor or the owner-proprietor thereof
having first obtained a valid distributor's license, and the proprietor or
the owner-proprietor thereof having first obtained a valid proprietor's
license for each such device.
§ 135-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-35
1:421
§ 135-36. License applications.
Applicants for distributor's or operator's licenses which are associations
shall supply the information required by § 135-2 for all members of the
association. Applicants which are corporations shall supply the information
required by § 135-2 for all officers and directors and for all stockholders
of the corporation who own more than ten percent (10%) of its issued
and outstanding capital stock. Corporations shall also supply the name and
address of their registered agent.
Applicants for licenses under this Article shall not be required to supply
the physical description and photographs required by § 135-2 but shall be
required to supply a description of the machine or device sought to be
licensed.
§ 135-37. Fees. [Amended 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73; 6-10-91 by
Ord. No. 91-62; 9-26-91 by Ord. No. 91-94; 11-8-93 by Ord. No.
93-65]
B. No distributor shall place any such device with any unlicensed
proprietor, nor shall any proprietor receive any such device from any
unlicensed distributor.
A. Distributors shall be charged the following fee:
(1) Amusement games, per calendar year, one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), per distributor license.
(2) Juke boxes, per calendar year, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00),
per distributor license.
(3) Automatic kiddie rides, per calendar year, two hundred dollars
($200.00), per distributor license.
B. Except as provided below in Paragraph C of this section, each
proprietor shall pay the following prescribed respective fees for each
and every device of the following respective types:
(1) Amusement games, per calendar year, one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) for the first device and twenty dollars ($20.00) for
each additional device. [Amended 11-8-93 by Ord. No. 93-65]
(2) Jukeboxes, per device, per calendar year, fifty dollars ($50.00).
(3) Automatic kiddie rides, per device, per calendar year, fifty dollars
($50.00).
C. Each owner-proprietor shall receive both a distributor's license for each
type of device, and a proprietor's license for each and every device,
upon payment of the following prescribed aggregate fees for each and
every device of the following respective types:
§ 135-35 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-37
1:422
§ 135-38. Licenses transferable if notice is furnished.
A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving notice
to the Township Clerk to that effect and giving a description of the new
machine. A license may be transferred from one place to another by giving
notice to the Township Clerk to that effect and supplying the required
information as to the new premises.
§ 135-39. Restrictions on location. [Amended 6-25-79 by Ord. No.
79-145; 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73]
No mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be located in any
premises within five hundred (500) feet of a church or other religious
institution or a public or private school. The distance shall be measured
from the nearest entrance of the church or school to the nearest entrance
of the premises on which the mechanical or electronic amusement device is
located or is sought to be located along the route that a pedestrian would
normally walk. Mechanical or electronic amusement devices are permitted
in C-3, HC-1, HC-2, HC-3 and MXD Zones and are specifically prohibited in
all other zones.
§ 135-40. Regulations. [Amended 12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73;
6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-73]
The following regulations shall apply to all mechanical or electronic
amusement devices:
(1) Amusement games, per device, per calendar year, two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for the first five machines and thirty dollars
($30.00) for each additional machine. [Amended 9-26-91 by Ord.
No. 91-94]
(2) Juke boxes, per device, per calendar year, fifty dollars ($50.00).
(3) Automatic kiddie rides, per device, per calendar year, fifty dollars
($50.). [Amended 6-10-91 by Ord. No. 91-62]
D. Deleted 6-10-91 by Ord. No. 91-62.
A. The premises shall be so arranged as to permit a clear view of each
mechanical or electronic amusement device at all times, subject to the
following exceptions: [Amended 7-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-267;
11-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-542; 6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-73]
(1) The mechanical or electronic amusement devices are clearly
intended to be used by children under the age of 18 years.
B. No operator shall knowingly permit any person convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude to be associated with him in the ownership or
management of the business or to be in his employ or to loiter on the
premises.
§ 135-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-40
1:423
§ 135-41. Use as gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to authorize any gambling device
of any kind whatsoever, including any device that dispenses any kind of
payoff or reward, or any device that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device under any law of the State of New Jersey. If the Director of
Public Safety has reason to believe any mechanical or electronic amusement
device is used as a gambling device, he shall cause that machine to be
seized and impounded. If after trial it is determined that the machine was
in fact being used as a gambling device, it shall be destroyed, and the
license of the operator or distributor shall be revoked. Revocation of license
and seizure of machine are in addition to any other penalty which may be
imposed for a violation of this Article.
§ 135-41.A. License tags and cards; contents; display. [Added
12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-73; amended 8-10-98 by Ord. No. 98-23]
Each proprietor licensee shall receive from the Township Clerk a license
card which shall contain the names of the distributor and the proprietor, the
distributor license number thereof, the address where the device is placed,
the year, the signature of the Township Clerk, and any other information
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Township Clerk. Such license
card shall be posted in a conspicuous place, near the device so licensed, in
the establishment of the proprietor licensee.
C. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use mechanical or
electronic amusement devices except for trophies, plaques or items of a
similar nature of nominal value.
D. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian to remain on the premises after
10:00 p.m.
E. No operator shall permit any activity which is illegal or immoral or
which creates an undue amount of noise or a danger of a breach of the
peace to occur on the premises.
§ 135-40 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-41.A
1:424
ARTICLE VI
Pool and Billiard Parlors
[Adopted 12-10-63]
§ 135-42. License required.
No person shall operate a pool or billiard parlor in the Township of East
Brunswick without having first obtained a license and paid the required fee.
§ 135-43. Fee. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV]
The license fee for pool and billiard parlors shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.)
for the first table and fifteen dollars ($15.) for each additional table. The
application for license shall state the number of tables which will be used.
§ 135-44. Exceptions to licensing requirements.
§ 135-45. Regulations. [Amended 4-13-70 by Ord. No. 70-122-B;
4-13-92 by Ord. No. 92-9]
The following regulations shall apply to all licensed pool and billiard
parlors:
A. This Article shall not apply to a pool or billiard table in a private
residence used solely by the occupants of the house and their guests.
B. This Article shall not apply to a bona fide social club, golf club, field
club, religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal or other nonprofit
organization having a membership in excess of twenty-five (25) which
has pool or billiard tables solely for the recreation and amusement of its
members, provided that the organization files with the Township Clerk
on a form provided by him a claim for exemption and a statement of the
facts upon which the claim is based.
A. Hours of operation. The hours of operation of pool and billiard parlors
shall be between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight seven (7) days a week.
B. Card playing. No card playing shall be permitted on premises licensed
under this Article even if card playing is for social purposes.
C. Outside view of premises. All premises where pool and billiards are
played shall be so arranged and so lighted that a full view of the interior
may be had from an adjacent public thoroughfare or from adjacent
rooms to which the public is admitted at all hours.
§ 135-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-45
1:425

ARTICLE VII
Wreckers
[Adopted 4-14-64; amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-21; 11-28-16
by Ord. 16-199]
§ 135-46. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC WRECKER LICENSE — Required of all wrecker operators who are
based within the Township of East Brunswick. Also required of all out-oftown
wrecker operators who wish to be called by the police department for
"customer requests." The Basic Wrecker License also entitles an operator
who qualifies for fatal accident wrecker response, as determined pursuant
to the Middlesex County Prosecutor's guidelines, to be called by the police
department for fatal and potentially fatal accidents.
BUSINESS LOCATION — A base of operation that is staffed during normal
business hours every weekday and Saturdays, excluding holidays. The
business must be clearly marked with signs identifying the name of the
business and the hours of operation. The Business Location must include a
fenced-in lot for the storage of towed vehicles, and must meet the location
requirements set forth in § 135-50A and § 135-50B, as applicable. In lieu
of a fence, a well-lit storage lot which can be observed by passing patrol
cars is acceptable. However, if the Traffic Division Commander determines
at any time that the security of the lot is inadequate, he may require the
installation of a security fence and/or additional lighting in order for the
operator to maintain a Police Tow List Wrecker License.
CLEAN-UP — Removal and/or disposal of any debris left on the roadway or
property as a result of a motor vehicle accident or recovery.
CRUISING — Driving a wrecker along a public highway at a slow speed or
in some other fashion obviously intended to solicit business.
HEAVY WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or remove other vehicles which
have registered gross vehicle weights in excess of 10,000 pounds.
POLICE TOW LIST WRECKER LICENSE — Entitles a wrecker operator to
be placed on the rotational Police Tow List.
OPERATOR — Anyone who engages in the business of operating a wrecker
or heavy wrecker. It is not necessary that the vehicle used is owned by the
operator. A person who leases, borrows or otherwise obtains a wrecker or
heavy wrecker shall be considered an "operator." However, the term does
not include a person hired by another to drive a wrecker or heavy wrecker.
WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or remove other vehicles usually so
damaged or disabled that they cannot proceed under their own power. It
also refers to the operator of a wrecker as defined herein.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance replaced the existing ordinance in its entirety.
§ 135-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-47
1:427
§ 135-47. License required.
Every wrecker operator and heavy wrecker operator who is based in the
Township of East Brunswick must be licensed by the township. In addition,
every wrecker operator and heavy wrecker operator who applies for a Police
Tow List Wrecker License, or wishes to be called by the police department
for "customer requests" and/or fatal accident response, must be licensed by
the township and meet the requirements of this wrecker ordinance.
§ 135-48. Investigation; required equipment; issuance of license.
A. Wrecker license applications must be obtained from the Township
Clerk. Completed applications, along with a sketch of the property
indicating where towed vehicles will be stored, must be returned to the
Township Clerk with the appropriate fee. A list of all drivers who will
operate licensed wreckers must be included with the wrecker license
application. The address, driver's license number, date of birth and
social security number of the applicant and all wrecker drivers must be
included.
B. The township's Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer shall ensure that
every East Brunswick-based wrecker Business Location is in a zone
approved for wrecker operations.
C. In accordance with § 135-4, wrecker license investigations shall be
conducted by the Department of Public Safety. A Traffic Division officer
shall conduct the actual investigation. The investigation shall include a
criminal history check and a motor vehicle record check of all wrecker
license applicants and their drivers. Each wrecker must be personally
inspected by a Traffic Division officer to ensure compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) A valid DMV registration and, if required, a valid inspection.
(2) A valid DMV amber light permit.
(3) Insurance: $75,000 (Property Damage) and $500,000 (Personal
Injury).
(4) Emergency lights: Visible at 1/4 mile and can be seen over the
towed vehicle.
(5) One fire extinguisher (Five pound carbon dioxide or dry powder).
(6) One broom and a debris container.
(7) One steering lock bar.
(8) The business name and location on the wrecker (39:4-46).
(9) A minimum of five gallons of absorbent granules for cleaning up
fluid spills.
(10) A reflectorized safety vest.
§ 135-47 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-48
1:428
§ 135-49. Fee.
The annual fee for a license to operate a wrecker shall be determined by the
following schedule:
Basic Wrecker License - Regular Wrecker $50.00
Basic Wrecker License - Heavy Wrecker $50.00
Police Tow List Wrecker License - Regular Wrecker $100.00
Police Tow List Wrecker License - Heavy Wrecker $100.00
The Basic Wrecker License fees and the Police Tow List Wrecker License
fees are "per vehicle." All fees are non-refundable.
§ 135-50. Police Tow List Eligibility.
(11) Portable lighting equipment (Heavy wreckers only).
(12) The wrecker and its equipment must be in good condition.
D. The results of each investigation and inspection shall be reported to the
Township Council which shall approve or reject the application within
30 days after receiving the written report of the investigation and
inspection. In addition to the reasons set forth in § 135-4, wrecker
license applications may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(1) Incomplete, inaccurate or falsified application.
(2) Unsafe or inadequate towing vehicles and/or equipment.
(3) Non-compliance with the township's wrecker ordinance.
(4) The Business Location is not in a zone where the use is permitted
(East Brunswick locations only).
(5) The owner pleaded guilty or was convicted of a zoning or property
maintenance violation in East Brunswick during the 12 months
preceding the application date.
(6) Criminal or motor vehicle convictions of the owner or his
employees which, in the reasonable belief of the Traffic Division
Commander, would jeopardize the safety of customers.
(7) Inadequate or insecure storage facility.
Wrecker licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon the
approval of the application by the Township Council. All licenses
shall expire on December 31st of each year.
A. Regular Wreckers: In order to be eligible to apply for a Police Tow List
Wrecker License for a regular wrecker, an operator's Business
Location, including the storage yard, must be within 3 1/2 miles of the
§ 135-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-50
1:429
§ 135-51. Operational Requirements.
East Brunswick Municipal Building. All operators must also meet the
response time requirements listed under § 135-51B.
B. Heavy Wreckers: In order to be eligible to apply for a Police Tow List
Wrecker License for a heavy wrecker, an operator's Business Location,
including the storage yard, shall be located in East Brunswick
Township, or immediately adjacent thereto, in order to ensure response
time, as required by § 135-51B.
A. Assignment of Services: Towing services are assigned to Police Tow List
wrecker operators on a rotational basis. However, when a need arises
for an expeditious tow, the nearest licensed wrecker operator may be
called. If the operator is on the rotational tow list, the call shall count as
the operator's next turn. Subsequent wrecker requests shall be
assigned to the operators who were skipped. When a motorist requests
a specific wrecker operator ("customer request"), and the operator is
licensed to tow in the township, the requested operator shall be called.
If the requested wrecker operator is on the rotational tow list, the call
shall count as the operator's next turn. Police tow logs shall be available
for inspection by any licensed operator during regular business hours.
B. Response Time: From the time of dispatch by police headquarters,
wreckers shall arrive on the scene within the following time limits:
Regular
Wrecker
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 15 minutes
6:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m. 20 minutes
Heavy Wrecker 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 20 minutes
601: p.m. to 7:59 a.m. 30 minutes
When a Police Tow List wrecker operator's response time exceeds the
time limits, the wrecker shall be canceled and the operator shall lose
his turn on the rotational tow list. The next operator on the Police Tow
List shall then be dispatched. Prevailing weather and road conditions
should be considered prior to canceling a wrecker for excessive
response time. In addition to losing their turn on the rotational tow
list, Police Tow List wrecker operators who exceed the response time
limits shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 135-56B for each
violation. When a Basic Wrecker License operator exceeds the response
time limits, the wrecker shall be canceled and the next wrecker on the
Police Tow List shall be dispatched. Basic Wrecker License operators
shall be subject to license revocation in accordance with § 135-8 if
they exceed the response time limits more than five (5) times in any
calendar year. All Police Tow List wrecker operators must provide
24-hour, 7-day service. In addition, they must respond to a minimum
of 80% of their calls each month. The Traffic Division will monitor
compliance by conducting a monthly review of the police department's
tow records.
§ 135-50 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-51
1:430
C. Routine Police Tows: Vehicles towed due to breakdown, accident,
criminal arrest, etc., shall be taken immediately to the operator's
Business Location unless the vehicle driver or the police request
otherwise. Vehicles shall be locked and parked in the secure area of the
operator's Business Location. If any of the vehicle's windows are
broken, a tarp or other non-porous material shall be applied to protect
the vehicle's interior from the elements.
D. Police Holds: If a police officer requests a "police hold" on a vehicle, a
"police hold" card shall be completed by the officer and given to the
wrecker driver at the time of the tow. The "police hold" card shall be
attached to the vehicle's rear view mirror to prevent its unauthorized
release. The only reason for a "police hold" shall be for further police
investigation. All "police hold" vehicles should be towed directly to the
police impound as a "contract tow." However, if a vehicle must first be
towed to police headquarters for processing and/or evidence removal,
the contract tow operator shall comply. He shall then be entitled to two
tow fees, one to police headquarters and one to the police impound.
E. Conditional Release: A "conditional release" card shall be used to
indicate that a vehicle may be released provided certain conditions are
met. For example, a vehicle that was towed because the driver was
revoked or unlicensed may be released to a licensed driver. A vehicle
that was towed because it was uninsured or unregistered may be
released if proof of insurance or registration is presented. Storage
charges shall begin to accrue after a 24-hour grace period on a
"conditional release." "Conditional release" vehicles shall not be
released from the wrecker facility until the owner/driver produces a
release authorization card obtained from police headquarters.
F. Motorcycles, go-carts, mini-bikes, ATVs, etc.: All motorcycles, go-carts,
mini-bikes, ATVs, etc., shall be towed by a flatbed wrecker. If a "police
hold" has been placed on the vehicle, it shall be transported to the
police impound as soon as possible and no storage charges are to be
assessed. If a "police hold" is not placed on the vehicle, the operator
shall store it at his Business Location and standard storage rates shall
apply.
G. Storage of Vehicles and Removal to the Police Impound:
(1) Vehicles that are towed due to a police request shall not remain on
the wrecker operator's property longer than fifteen (15) chargeable
storage days. After the fifteenth day, the vehicle shall be towed to
the police impound by the wrecker operator who provided the
initial tow. Storage and towing charges shall be assessed against
the owner or other responsible party by the wrecker operator on a
township provided receipt form. A copy of the receipt form must
accompany the vehicle when it is towed to the police impound.
(2) Once a vehicle is accepted at the police impound, the Traffic
Division shall send a registered letter to the owner advising him of
§ 135-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-51
1:431
§ 135-52. Towing rates and other charges. [Amended 3-24-03 by
Ord. No. 03-09; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-19]
the vehicle's location and current towing and storage fees. If the
owner pays the wrecker operator the towing and storage costs,
the vehicle will be released. However, if the owner decides that
he no longer wants the vehicle, he must sign the title over to
the township. The towing and storage fees will be listed as the
minimum bid for the vehicle, which will be sold by the township
at the next auction. If the owner fails to respond to the registered
letter, the township will apply to the DMV for title and sell the
vehicle at the next auction. The towing and storage fees will be
listed as the minimum bid.
(3) The maximum number of vehicles which may be stored on an East
Brunswick-based operator's property shall conform to the sketch
approved by the township's Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The maximum rates that can be charged by any licensed wrecker
operator for towing a passenger vehicle (including vehicles listed under
§ 135-51F) to his Business Location or to any location within East
Brunswick Township are as follows:
8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m.: One hundred dollars ($100.00)
6:01 p.m. until 7:59 a.m.: One hundred and ten dollars ($110.00)
Additional Charges:
(1) Winching (24 hours): $50.00
(2) Service Call (8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.): $35.00 (+ cost of
consumables)
(3) Service Call (6:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m.): $60.00 (+ cost of
consumables)
Clean-up fee for the clean-up of debris on the highway or at the
scene of an accident and application of absorbent material may be
charged at the rate of $45.00 per vehicle. The fee for absorbent
material (example-speedy dry) is included with the clean-up fee per
vehicle.
B. The maximum rate that can be charged by any licensed heavy wrecker
operator for towing a truck to his Business Location or to any location
within East Brunswick Township is as follows:
$175.00 (24 hours)
Additional Charges:
(1) Air line connection: $25.00
(2) Removal of a bumper: $25.00
§ 135-51 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-52
1:432
(3) Use of a wheel lift: $25.00
(4) Brake releases (per axle): $25.00
The above rates apply only to typical tow situations. Additional
charges must be justified by a documented need for additional
personnel, equipment, and/or supplies.
C. A wrecker operator and a motorist may agree to the payment of a fee in
excess of the amount specified in this section when unusual difficulties
and/or distances are involved. Such agreements shall be without
prejudice to the right of the motorist to apply to the Director of Public
Safety for a refund of part of the fee paid on the grounds that it was
exorbitant or that the motorist was induced to pay it by reason of
misrepresentation, duress or some other unfair conduct by the wrecker
operator.
D. If a motorist requests to have his or her vehicle taken to a location
within the township other than the wrecker operator's Business
Location, the wrecker operator shall comply if the motorist has either
cash or a credit card to pay for the tow charges. There shall be no
additional charge for towing a vehicle to any location within East
Brunswick Township. If a wrecker operator is based outside East
Brunswick Township, there shall be no additional charge for towing a
vehicle to the operator's Business Location. If a motorist requests to
have his or her vehicle taken outside the township, but within
Middlesex County, and the wrecker operator is able to comply with the
request, the charge shall be three dollars ($3.00) per mile for every mile
beyond the boundaries of East Brunswick, regardless of the time of day.
The motorist is responsible for negotiating the terms of a tow beyond
the boundaries of Middlesex County. No driver or owner of a wrecker
shall demand or receive any commission, gratuity or other payment
other than the established or agreed-upon fee for towing a disabled
vehicle. No operator shall refuse to accept Master Card, Visa or cash as
payment for services.
E. Maximum vehicle storage charges are as follows: [Amended 11-28-16
by Ord. 16-19]
(1) The daily passenger vehicle storage fee, which begins after a
24-hour grace period, shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
"Passenger vehicles" includes automobiles, motorcycles, go-carts,
mini-bikes, ATVs, etc.
(2) The daily storage fee for trucks, omnibuses, tractor cabs, and/or
trailers with GVWR of 8,000 pounds and over, shall be forty dollars
($40.00) each.
(3) The daily storage fee for tractor cabs and/or a trailer, with a GVWR
of 10,000 pounds and over, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) each.
§ 135-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-52
1:433
§ 135-53. Applications for adjustment of charges; hearing.
The application to the Director of Public Safety provided for in § 135-52C
shall be made within thirty (30) days of the incident. It shall be in writing
and contain sufficient information to properly identify the date, time and
place, as well as the parties involved in the incident. Upon receiving the
application, the Director shall set a date for a hearing and notify all parties
involved. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided in Article
XVII of Chapter 3, Administration of Government of this Code. The Director
shall determine what part, if any, of the fee was exorbitant or was paid
as a result of misrepresentation, duress or other unfair practices. The
amount determined by the Director shall be immediately refunded to the
complainant by the wrecker operator. Failure to immediately refund the
overcharge will subject the operator to license revocation proceedings in
accordance with § 135-8.
§ 135-54. Information required to be on application. [Amended
11-25-91 By Ord. No. 91-116]
In addition to the information required by § 135-2, applicants shall submit a
signed application as follows.10
§ 135-55. Regulations.
F. Wrecker licensees shall provide every customer with an East Brunswick
Township towing receipt for the towing and storage fees paid. Blank
receipt forms are available from the Traffic Division at no charge to
licensed operators. The receipts specify the maximum towing and
storage charges, and explain the right to appeal to the Director of
Public Safety if a customer feels the charges are excessive.
A. The following information shall be prominently displayed on the driver's
side of every licensed wrecker:
(1) The Township of East Brunswick wrecker license number.
(2) A township-issued rate plate listing the rates charged.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the owner.
(4) The date of inspection of safety equipment.
B. No driver or owner of a wrecker shall attempt to divert patrons of one
garage to another garage or repair facility.
C. No driver of a wrecker shall engage in "cruising" as defined in § 135-46
or otherwise interfere with the progress of traffic on public highways.
10.Editor's Note: The Application for a Wrecker License can be found as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 135-52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-55
1:434
§ 135-56. Penalties.
D. All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees are required
to wear red or orange traffic vests with adequate reflective material for
night use when working in the roadway.
E. All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees shall comply
with § 209-17.1, regarding the parking of trucks and commercial
vehicles on East Brunswick Township streets between 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. In addition, they shall also comply with § 228-224C2 at all
times in residential areas, including private driveways, if the vehicle
dimensions exceed the limits specified in the ordinance.
F. All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees shall perform
reasonable cleanup of all debris associated with an accident or
breakdown. All debris and fluid spills shall be removed from the scene
and disposed of properly by the wrecker operator and/or his employee.
All licensed wreckers shall carry a minimum of five gallons of absorbent
granules for motor vehicle fluid spills.
G. All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees shall be
experienced in the towing of vehicles. Unsafe or improper towing
methods may result in immediate suspension from the Police Tow List.
A Basic Wrecker License may be revoked by the Township Council after
notice and hearing in accordance with § 135-8.
H. All wrecker operators are responsible for ensuring that their agents
and/or employees are familiar with this ordinance. Wrecker operators
shall be held responsible for any violations of this ordinance by their
agents and/or employees.
I. Before a new driver may operate a licensed operator's wrecker, he must
first be investigated and approved in accordance with § 135-48A and
§ 135-48D(6).
J. Every year, typically during the month of December, a meeting will be
held at police headquarters for all licensed wrecker operators. A
representative of every licensee shall be present at the annual meeting.
A. For a violation of any provision of this wrecker ordinance, except
§ 135-51B (wrecker response time limits), Police Tow List Wrecker
licensees shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation in any given calendar year will result in a warning
letter.
(2) Second violation in any given calendar year will result in a 15-day
suspension from the Police Tow List.
(3) Third violation in any given calendar year will result in a 30-day
suspension from the Police Tow List.
§ 135-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-56
1:435
§ 135-56.1. Enforcement.
The municipal officers and/or agencies designated to enforce the provisions
of this ordinance in accordance with due process of law are the East
Brunswick Township Police Department's Traffic Division Commander, and
the East Brunswick Township Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer, where
applicable.
(4) Fourth violation in any given calendar year will result in a
suspension from the Police Tow List for the remainder of the
calendar year, or for 90 days, whichever is greater.
For a violation of any provision of this wrecker ordinance, including
§ 135-51B (wrecker response time limits), Basic Wrecker licensees
shall be subject to possible license revocation in accordance with
§ 135-8.
B. For a violation of § 135-51B (wrecker response time limits), Police Tow
List wrecker licensees shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation in any given calendar year will result in a warning
letter.
(2) Second violation in any given calendar year will result in a 7-day
suspension from the Police Tow List.
(3) Third violation in any given calendar year will result in a 14-day
suspension from the Police Tow List.
(4) Fourth violation in any given calendar year will result in a 28-day
suspension from the Police Tow List.
(5) Fifth violation in any given calendar year will result in a suspension
from the Police Tow List for the remainder of the calendar year, or
for 56 days, whichever is greater.
§ 135-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-56.1
1:436
ARTICLE VIII
Regulation of the Selling or Purchases of Gold, Silver, Any Other
Precious Metals and Secondhand Dealers
[Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-374; amended 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29;
8-22-16 Ord. 16-14]
§ 135-57. Definitions.
As used in this Article:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey Driver's
License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another US state, a valid United States Passport, or other verifiable
US Government PHOTO issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this ordinance, transient buyers, as defined herein, are
subject to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other
dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the city,
town, township, village, or borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
§ 135-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-57
1:437
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this ordinance, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six (6) months at any
address in the municipality where the Dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six (6) months.
§ 135-58. License Required. [Amended 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29]
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefore from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising
in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or
secondhand goods referred to in § 135-57 above are being bought in any
location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as
a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall
place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles
or goods without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a
person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license
number shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-righthand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
indicate the license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties established in § 135-62.
§ 135-59. Application Process for dealers; Approval or denial.
[Amended 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29; amended 8-22-16 Ord. 16-14]
§ 135-57 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-59
1:438
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
chapter for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 135-57, although
nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant denial of a
license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police shall, as part of the initial application process,
require a fingerprint criminal background check through the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information
Services Division, this will require an additional fee from the
applicant and shall submit to the same on a triennial basis
thereafter. The applicant shall voluntarily furnish the results of the
fingerprint criminal background check to the officer assigned to
conduct the background investigation. Renewal applications do not
require a fingerprint criminal background check, unless the
triennial year after original application.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business, however
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 135-61D of this chapter will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 135-61A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within thirty (30) days of the submission of the application to
the Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal
record check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has
not been received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of
§ 135-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-59
1:439
§ 135-60. Records. [Amended 11-28-11 by Ord. No. 11-20; 11-23-15
Ord. 15-29]
Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within ten (10) days of such denial and the Clerk shall
forward to the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such
denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the reporting requirements specified in
§ 135-61.1, the retention and inspection requirements of § 135-61, or
any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the recommendation
of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license
accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond as required by
§ 135-61.2 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
ten (10) days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Any person, partnership, or corporation in the full or part-time business
of purchasing gold, silver, precious metals and gems in the Township of
East Brunswick shall maintain a written record of all purchases.
§ 135-59 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-60
1:440
§ 135-61. Retention; revocation; other Restrictions. [Amended
10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-407; 11-28-11 by Ord. No. 11-20; 11-23-15
Ord. 15-29; 8-22-16 by Ord. 16-14]
B. The record of all purchases must contain the following:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person from
whom it was purchased. P.O. Box numbers are not acceptable.
(2) The date and time of the transaction.
(3) A descriptive list of any items purchased and the price paid.
(4) Statement in full of any identifying marks, such as inscriptions,
serial numbers, series numbers or any other information appearing
calculated to set apart the particular object said from others of like
kind.
(5) A signature of seller.
(6) The type of identification used, and number associated with said
identification. Identification must be in the form of a photograph
bearing, valid State or Federal issued driver's license or other
government issued form of identification bearing a photograph
(7) A digital photograph or color copy of each item, which clearly
shows each individual item.
(8) The name of the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
transaction.
C. These records shall be maintained for a period of no less than five (5)
years and shall be subject to the inspection of any law enforcement
official of the Township of East Brunswick.
D. A copy of all transactions containing the information set forth in
subsection B must be delivered to the East Brunswick Police
Department within thirty six (36) hours of the transaction.
E. The purchaser must provide the seller with a written receipt describing
the item(s) purchased and the amount paid.
A. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in § 135-61.1 except for jewelry, gold silver and precious metals which
must be maintained for at least fifteen (15) business days or for the
statutory period provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or
other secondhand goods subject to inspection must remain in the same
condition as when purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold,
§ 135-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-61
1:441
disposed of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the sevenday
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient
buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the
location where the purchased item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 135-61.1 (B) upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer
with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
"victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, an electronic and/or written record of all
purchases of precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form
prescribed in § 135-61.1C and shall make such records available for
inspection upon request of the East Brunswick Police Department or
any other law enforcement agency.
D. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 16 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate there under. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 135-62 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter; violation of
any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any other
illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to subsection
H. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately, pending the
outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must immediately
§ 135-61 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-61
1:442
cease engaging in the business of purchasing for resale, receiving
for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or other
secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in subsection
H.
F. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 135-62.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police of the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
G. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
§ 135-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-61
1:443
§ 135-61.1. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers. [Added 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29; amended 8-22-16 by Ord.
16-14]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of
receiving written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
H. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
§ 135-57.
B. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of eighteen years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, drivers license # and state
issuing license, and telephone number of the seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 135-57, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items may be photographed together as long as they
are separated and distinguishable.
(6) The receipt number;
§ 135-61 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-61.1
1:444
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers or any
owner applied markings engraved thereon, serial numbers, series
numbers, or any other information, which sets apart the particular
object from others of like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, fax to the East Brunswick Investigative Division
the net weight in terms of pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy) or
kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling
or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1
et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in subsection (C) above, must be electronically
documented through the use of an electronic database system
authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within twenty-four (24)
hours from the date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are
used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information set
forth in subsection C above into their database as soon as possible upon
the dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced or the database
coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain
computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to
replace faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited
for a violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the
penalties for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as
described in § 135-61.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
§ 135-61.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-61.1
1:445
§ 135-61.2. Bond. [Added 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29]
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the [party municipality], be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 135-61.3. Fees; period of license validity. [Added 11-23-15 Ord.
15-29; amended 8-22-16 Ord. 16-14]
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or
a dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under
this chapter, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These
fees are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in
relation to any mandatory electronic database system designated by the
Chief of Police as provided by § 135-61.1 (D) and adopted for use by the
Police Department in the future. Payments are to be made in the manner
directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year period
January to December 31st.
§ 135-62. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29]
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding ninety (90) days in addition to a suspension or
revocation of operating license as provided in § 135-61 (F) and § 135-61 (G)
above. Each and every violation shall be considered a separate violation.
member of the police department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well
as the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 135-61. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
§ 135-61.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-62
1:446
Each violation shall result in an additional suspension period. Any person
who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter within one
year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous
violation may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat
offender and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as
provided in § 135-61 (G). The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of this chapter.
§ 135-62.1. Time limit for conformance; repealer; severability.
[Added 11-23-15 Ord. 15-29; amended 12-14-15 Ord. 15-32]
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter within ninety (90) days following the effective date of this
chapter.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A.
45:22-1 et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.,
the sale of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any
other statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed
herein.
D. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 135-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-62.1
1:447

ARTICLE IX
Health Spas and Related Uses
[Added 12-27-82 by Ord. No. 82-482]
§ 135-63. Definitions. [Amended 10-9-06 by Ord. No. 06-31; 11-9-15
Ord. 15-24]
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
APPLICANT — Person applying for a license under this ordinance and must
include all partners including limited partners, of a partnership applicant,
any officer or director of a corporate applicant, and any stockholder holding
more than 2% of the stock of a corporation applicant.
CUSTOMERS AND MEMBERS — A person who patronizes a health spa
or related use and utilizes the services afforded on the premises by any
employee or independent contractor under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other
consideration therefor.
EMPLOYEES — Any and all persons, including independent contractors,
who render any services on behalf of a health spa or related use to
customers or members and who are paid directly either by the operator or
the establishment or by the customers and members.
HEALTH SPA — A place providing shower facilities and affording to its
customers or members facilities for physical exercise, including, but not
limited to, swimming, dancing, body building, gymnastics, nautilus
equipment or equivalent, jogging, aerobic dancing, slimnastics, steam
rooms, sauna, whirlpool, tanning and related uses.[Amended 10-9-06 by
Ord. No. 06-31; 11-09-15 Ord. 15-24]
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment
providing massage therapy, reflexology, acupressure, acupuncture that is
not related to a medical facility or doctor.[Added 11-09-15 Ord. 15-24]
RELATED USES — This ordinance shall apply to owners and operators of
any facilities offering any of the activities of a health spa, even if such
related uses are part of a non-regulated facility, such as a tennis or
racquetball club, a gymnasium or other use.
§ 135-64. Application for Licenses for Health Spas, Massage and
Bodywork Establishments or Related Uses. [Amended 10-9-06 by
Ord. No. 06-31; 11-09-15 Ord. 15-24]
Any person desiring to own or operate a health spa, massage and bodywork
establishment or related use within the Township of East Brunswick shall
file a written application with the Municipal Clerk to be filed by the owner
and operator on a form to be furnished by the Municipal Clerk. The
applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $200.00 and shall in addition
furnish the following information:
§ 135-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-64
1:449
A. Whether ownership of the business is by an individual, a partnership, a
corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is
to be conducted.
D. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers
of Principals of applicant, manager and Assistant Manager.
E. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of
the applicant.
F. Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, place and date of birth and Social
Security number of principals of applicant, manager and Assistant
Manager, if any, of the premises.
G. The business history and experience of the principals of the applicant,
including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously
operating a health spa has had a license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or
occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or
revocation.
H. All criminal convictions of the principals of the applicant within seven
(7) years prior to the filing of the application, other than traffic or
disorderly persons violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which
convicted, and the offense for which applicant was convicted and the
circumstances thereof. The applicant shall submit to a full criminal
history check by an agency approved by the Township and shall submit
to the same on a triennial basis thereafter. The applicant shall execute a
waiver and consent to permit a fingerprint and criminal background
including criminal history check. The cost of the criminal background
check shall be borne by the applicant. Upon receipt of the results of
their fingerprint and criminal history check, the applicant shall provide
all documentation to the East Brunswick Police Department
Investigative Division.
I. All information required by § 135-1 through § 135-7 of the Code of the
Township of East Brunswick.
J. Authorization for the municipality, its agents and employees, to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualification of the
applicant for the permit.
K. A copy of each massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapists' valid
state certificate or license issued pursuant to the Massage, Bodywork
and Somatic Therapist Certification Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
[Added 11-09-15 Ord. 15-24 ]
§ 135-64 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-64
1:450
§ 135-65. Issuance or Denial of Health Spa License.
The applicant shall be subject to the provisions of § 135-3 through § 135-7 of
the Code of the Township of East Brunswick. The Director of Public Safety
shall file his report with the Municipal Clerk within thirty (30) days of the
filing of the application and the license shall be issued by the Municipal
Clerk unless the investigation discloses one of the following:
§ 135-66. Facilities Necessary. [Amended 10-9-06 by Ord. No. 06-31;
11-9-15 Ord. 15-24]
No health spa, massage and bodywork establishment or related use shall be
issued a license nor shall the same be operated, established or maintained
in the Township of East Brunswick unless the facilities are made available
for periodic inspection by representatives of the Department of Public
Safety and the Division of Construction Inspection to make certain that
the premises are in conformity with all municipal and state requirements.
Among other things, the owners and operators of the premises must comply
with each of the following minimum requirements:
L. A complete list of the names and residence address of all massage,
bodywork and therapists and employees in the business. [Added
11-09-15 Ord. 15-24 ]
M. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated, signed and sworn to before a Notary
Public or attorney of the State of New Jersey. The Police Department
will pursue any and all criminal charges applicable against any
applicant that provides false information to the Township on its
application. [Amended 11-09-15 Ord. 15-24 ]
A. The applicant, a stockholder holding at least two (2%) percent of the
stock of the corporation, an officer or director of a corporation or any of
the partners including limited partners or the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business have been
convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, sexual
misconduct, prostitution, soliciting for purposes of prostitution or any
other crime involving prostitution or any other crimes for which one of
the principals has been convicted unless such conviction occurred more
than seven (7) years prior to the date of the application.
B. The applicant or any of its principals has knowingly made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or
in any document required by the municipality in conjunction therewith.
C. The applicant has had a municipal license or permit for a similar use
denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes which action
was not reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction within seven (7)
years prior to the filing of the application.
§ 135-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-66
1:451
§ 135-66.1. Suspension or Revocation of Establishment License.
A. Tanning Rooms, if any, shall be Underwriter Laboratory approved and
comply with all Federal and State requirements including, but not
limited to, Food and Drug Administration standards.
B. Separate facilities for lockers, dressing, showers and massages are to
be provided so that male and female customers or members will not be
in the changing or shower rooms at the same time, subject to the right
of the applicant to provide separate changing rooms or use of such
facilities on an alternating basis by male and female customers or
members.
C. Areas shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels
and other materials used in the operation of the health spa. All soiled
linen, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered
containers or cabinets separate from the clean storage area.
D. All employees shall wear clean, non-transparent outer garments at all
times.
E. The sexual and genital area of customers and members must be
covered by towels, clothes or undergarments in the presence of an
employee, masseur, masseuse or other patrons except in the shower
area.
F. No employee, masseur or masseuse shall perform any act in violation of
the East Brunswick ordinances which prohibit sex clubs and massage
parlors.
G. No Massage or Bodywork establishment may conduct business between
11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the law of the State of New Jersey nor shall any
owner or manager tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior which violates this chapter.
B. Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Township, after public hearing before the Township
Council, where it is found that any of the provisions of this chapter or
the Law of the State of New Jersey are violated by any employee and/or
owners and where the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation.
C. The Township Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall
give the licensee at least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges
against the licensee and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Township Council, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific
and in writing.
§ 135-66 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-67
1:452
§ 135-67. Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act. [Added
9-30-13 by Ord. No. 13-20]
Effective September 4, 2012, P.L. 2007, c. 337, the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act requires that any person engaged in the practice of
massage and/or bodywork therapy, as defined in the Act, must be licensed
by the State Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy.
§ 135-68. Transfer of Licenses.
No license for the operation of a licensed premises issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be transferable except upon the filing of a new
application with the Municipal Clerk and such transfer shall not be valid
until the application for transfer is approved; provided, however, that upon
the death or incapacity of the licensee, the health spa or related use may
continue in business until the anniversary date of the license to allow for an
orderly transfer of the license.
§ 135-69. Appeals to the Township Council.
Any person affected by the findings and determinations of the Township
Clerk with regard to an application filed under this ordinance may appeal
to the Township Council of the Township of East Brunswick, provided such
appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the date of such determination
by the Township Clerk. The Township Council may extend the time within
which to file an appeal by an additional thirty (30) days upon a showing
of good cause. The Township Council shall conduct a hearing based upon
the documents which have been filed and shall permit oral argument and
submission of written argument but shall entertain no new evidence at the
time of the Council hearing.
§ 135-70. Non-applicability of this Article.
This article shall not apply to licensed hospitals, licensed nursing homes or
clinics or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing
arts under the laws of the State, or persons working under the direct
supervision and in their presence, of any such persons or in any such
establishments, nor shall this article apply to barbers or cosmetologists
lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a
valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State,
nor to non-profit corporations, nor to governmental entities.
§ 135-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-70
1:453

ARTICLE X
Bingo Licenses
[Added 7-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-519]
§ 135-71. Restriction on Hours of Operation of Bingo Games
Licensed by the Township of East Brunswick.
All premises which are licensed to conduct bingo games within premises
located in a residential zone shall be prohibited from conducting bingo
games between the hours of 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m., Sunday night
through Thursday night, inclusive. Bingo games may be conducted at such
premises on Friday nights and Saturday nights during the hours indicated
subject to specific approval by the Township Council but application for
bingos on Friday night and Saturday night during the aforesaid hours may
be denied by the Township Council upon a demonstration of good cause by
any interested person or persons.
§ 135-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-71
1:455

ARTICLE XI
Amusement Licenses
[Added 7-10-89 by Ord. No. 89-39; amended 7-8-91 by Ord. No.
91-74]
§ 135-72. Amusement Licenses for the Middlesex County Fair to
non-profit organizations and associations.
This section of Chapter 135, Licenses, of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick, was repealed and rescinded on 7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-74.
§ 135-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-72
1:457

ARTICLE XII
Christmas Trees
[Added 1-22-90 by Ord. No. 90-2; amended 9-25-91 by Ord. No.
91-96; 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
§ 135-73. License Required. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
§ 135-74. Fee. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
§ 135-75. Location of Sale. [Amended 9-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-96;
5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
The applicant shall present the Township Clerk with written permission
from the property owner authorizing the sale of Christmas trees and
Christmas decorations. The application shall set forth the proposed method
of clean up, a proposed lay out of the sales area, the location, intensity and
direction of all outdoor lighting and a plan for parking and traffic safety.
Accompanying the application shall be a certificate of liability insurance
coverage form and amount as directed by Director of Law for the protection
of the general public. The Township Clerk shall submit the application to 1)
the Director of Public Safety, who shall determine the adequacy of parking
and traffic safety, ingress and egress and fire protection standards, 2) the
Zoning Officer, who shall determine lighting, buffering to protect nearby
residences, and proper siting on a particular piece of property, and 3) the
Chief Construction Official, who shall determine whether the appropriate
construction permits, including electrical permits have been issued. If the
A. No person shall engage in the outdoor seasonal sale of Christmas trees
and/or Christmas decorations without having first obtained a license
therefore from the Township Clerk, which license shall bear a number
issued by the Township Clerk and which shall be prominently displayed
at the licensed premises. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
B. This ordinance shall not apply to businesses who offer for sale in their
ordinary course of business, agricultural, horticultural or forestry
produce or products as long as the sales occur on the same property as
their regular business location. Such businesses shall be as further
defined in 228-3 Definitions. [Added 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
C. An application for a license must be filed by November 15, of the year in
which said license shall take effect. Any license granted pursuant to this
Article XII shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
[Added 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
A. The fee for a Christmas tree sales license shall be $100.00 for the initial
application and $100.00 for each annual renewal for each premises on
which the regulated activity is to be conducted.
B. Non-profit organizations shall be exempt from § 135-74A and § 135-77,
provided that said organizations submit proof of their non-profit status
with the application for a license from the Township Clerk.
§ 135-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-75
1:459
application complies with the determinations made by the Director of Public
Safety, the Zoning Officer, and the Chief Construction Official, the Township
Clerk shall issue the license.
§ 135-76. Use of the Premises. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No.
98-12]
If the applicant proposes to locate a trailer on a premises, the trailer may be
utilized only as an office and may not be occupied as living space. No hookup
to water or sewer is permitted. The applicant shall obtain an electrical
permit if lighting is needed. Signs must be placed at least 10 feet from the
right-of-way and may not be placed in the right-of-way. A maximum of 2
signs is permitted on the premises. No sign shall exceed 16 square feet in
area. No separate sign permit is required.
§ 135-77. Security. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No. 98-12]
The applicant shall file security in the amount of $500.00 at the time that
the application is filed, which security shall be returned by the Township
Clerk when the premises are restored to their prior condition, as
determined by the Code Enforcement/Zoning Officer. If the premises are not
so restored within 3 days of the conclusion of the sale, excluding inclement
weather not conducive to outdoor clean up, the Township of East Brunswick
may use as much of the security as is necessary to restore the premises.
§ 135-78. Violations and Penalties. [Amended 5-11-98 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Any person or business entity violating the provisions of this Article XII shall
pay a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, $1,000.00.
§ 135-75 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-78
1:460
ARTICLE XIII
Clothing Bins11
[Added Ord. 15-32 12-28-2015]
§ 135-79. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOTHING DONATION BIN — Any receptacle or container made of metal,
steel, or any other material designed for the collection and temporary
storage of donated clothing or other materials.
SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit,
property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 135-80. License required; fee.
No person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation
purposes in the Township of East Brunswick without having first obtained
a license from the Code Enforcement Officer and having paid the required
license fee. The fee for a clothing donation bin license shall be twenty five
dollars ($25) for an initial license and twenty-five dollars ($25) per year
thereafter.
§ 135-81. Information required on application form.
The applicant shall include the following information:
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as shown on a map or
sketch;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office where a
representative of the person or other entity, respectively, can be
reached at a telephone information line during normal business hours
for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or other
entity. For the purposes of this ordinance, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
11.Editor's Note: The Clothing Donation Bin License is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 135-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-81
1:461
§ 135-82. Restrictions on locations.
The municipality may deny an application for clothing donation bins if they
believe the location would constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall
include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin
within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells fuel or
other flammable liquids or gases; located so as to not interfere with sight
triangles, on-site circulation, landscaping or any other requirements that
may have been imposed as part of the approved site plan of the premises;
or impede traffic flow.
Bins shall not be located on a residential property. Locations that abut a
residential property and/or zone shall be setback at least ten (10') feet from
the side and rear property lines.
§ 135-83. Requirements.
§ 135-84. Renewal of permit.
An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed upon
application for renewal and payment of $25 annually, to offset the costs
involved in enforcing C. 40:48-2.60 et seq. Such application shall include:
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
A. Each bin shall be regularly emptied of its contents so that it does not
overflow, resulting in items being outside the bin.
B. Each bin shall be fully enclosed and locked so that the contents may not
be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of
the contents.
C. Each bin shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet by
five feet, nor be more than six feet in height.
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as shown on a map or
sketch, and if the person intends to move it, the new location where the
bin would be situated after the renewal is granted;
B. The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and
any changes the person anticipates it may make in these processes
during the period covered by the renewal;
C. The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office where a
representative of the person or other entity, respectively, can be
reached at a telephone information line during normal business hours
for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or other
entity. The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office where a
representative of any entity which shared or profited from any clothing
§ 135-81 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-84
1:462
§ 135-85. Display required on bin.
The following shall be displayed on the bin in a clear and conspicuous
manner on the exterior of the bin:
§ 135-86. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days,
any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
Code Enforcement Officer that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in
any act or practice in violation of this article, the person who placed the bin
shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified within
45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the person who
placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will
be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other
means used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be
affixed to the exterior of the bin itself. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of
the municipality.
or other donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may
do so during the period covered by the renewal; and
D. Written consent from the property owner to continue to located the bin
on his property.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration;
B. The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin; and the telephone number of the
person's bona fide office and, if applicable, the telephone number of the
bona fide office of any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
C. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that the clothing or other donations collected via the bin,
their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity
other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such
entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
D. A statement, consistent with the information provided in the most
recent permit or renewal application indicating the manner in which
the person anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold, or dispersed and the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or spent.
§ 135-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-86
1:463

ARTICLE XIV
Retail Electronic Smoking Device Establishments
[Adopted 9-12-16 by Ord. No. 16-15]
§ 135-87. Definitions.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic or other powered device
that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person
inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic
cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe.
RETAIL ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any
establishment that sells or offers for sale electronic smoking devices and/or
products designed for consumption through inhalation.
SALE — Every delivery of electronic smoking devices, whether the same is
by direct sale or the solicitation or acceptance of an order, including the
exchange, barter, traffic in, keeping and exposing for sale, displaying for
sale, delivering for value, peddling and possessing with intent to sell.
§ 135-88. License required, fee. [Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-26]
No person shall operate a retail electronic smoking device establishment
in the Township of East Brunswick without having first obtained a license
from the Clerk and having paid the required license fee. The fee for a
retail electronic smoking device establishment shall be $1,500 for an initial
license and $1,000 per year thereafter. Licenses are required on an annual
basis, to be valid from January 1 and expire automatically on December 31
of each year.
§ 135-89. Application.
The license application shall contain the information required by § 135-2.
The Township Clerk shall issue the license upon the completion of all of the
requirements of the application and the payment of the required fees.
§ 135-90. Enforcement.
The municipal officers and/or agencies designated to enforce the provisions
of this article in accordance with due process of law are the East Brunswick
Police Department, and the East Brunswick Township Zoning and Code
Enforcement Officer, where applicable.
§ 135-91. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 135-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-91
1:465

ARTICLE XV
Buy in East Brunswick Reward Programs
[Adopted 2-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-06]
§ 135-92. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other vendor to
offer or operate a reward program which includes the payment of taxes for
Township of East Brunswick taxpayers who shop at participating Township
businesses without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such license shall not be transferable from the
person or entity to whom the license is issued.
§ 135-93. Duties of licensee.
Every licensee under this chapter for a reward program, which includes the
payment of taxes for Township taxpayers, shall be required to comply with
the following:
§ 135-94. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the Township
Clerk a sworn application, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the
Clerk, which shall give the following information:
A. Any such reward program shall be administered solely by the licensee
who shall undertake to register interested taxpayers and Township
businesses.
B. The licensee shall comply with all applicable state statutes and
regulations governing the conduct of such reward programs.
C. The licensee shall comply with all reporting requirements established
by the Township for any payment of taxes made to the Township by the
licensee.
D. The Township shall not be responsible for any impact of reward
program participation on mortgage escrow calculations, nor shall the
Township be responsible for any changes in property ownership.
E. The licensee shall establish and maintain an FDIC insured dedicated
bank account for any Township of East Brunswick reward program at a
bank located in the State of New Jersey. No funds from any other
program or purpose shall be commingled with Township of East
Brunswick reward program funds. A copy of the bank statement for
such account shall be provided to the Township upon request.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant
and, if the applicant is a corporation, of all shareholders with more than
10% interest in the entity.
§ 135-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-94
1:467
§ 135-95. License fee.
The annual fee for a license under this chapter, initial or renewal, shall be
$25. The fee shall be paid with the license application and is not refundable.
§ 135-96. Issuance and expiration of licenses.
All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be authorized by the governing
body and may be issued after such authorization by the Township Clerk.
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire one year from the date of their
issuance.
§ 135-97. Revocation of licenses.
§ 135-98. Appeals.
C. The name and address of the bank in which the required insured
dedicated bank account is to be maintained for the reward program
covered by the license.
D. A statement as to whether the applicant or any of the shareholders
thereof has been convicted of any crime and, if so, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
E. A statement that the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Township, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all
claims, actions, liability, damages or costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees and other costs of defense arising out of any action
brought against the Township pertaining to the reward program
operated by the licensee.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Township Clerk, in writing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements by the licensee in the
course of conducting the business licensed.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner.
B. Revocation of a license may be appealed to the Township Council in the
same manner as set forth in § 135-98 of this chapter for an appeal of a
denial of a license. The licensee may not operate the business or
enterprise licensed during the pendency of said appeal.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Township Clerk in the denial
of a license as provided in § 135-97 of this chapter, shall have the right
to appeal to the Township Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Township Council, within 10 days after the notice of the action
§ 135-94 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-98
1:468
§ 135-99. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both, in the discretion of
the court.
complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
B. The Township Council shall set a time and place for hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant. The
decision of the Township Council on such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 135-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-99
1:469

ARTICLE XVI
Recreational Uses
[Adopted 12-23-2019 by Ord. No. 19-41A]
§ 135-100. Events outside normal business hours.
Recreational uses located within the HC-1, HC-2 and HC-3 Zones (Highway
Commercial) permitted either by right or by variance and which seek to
remain open beyond normal business hours must seek a one-day permit
from the Township Council (hereinafter the "permit"). Permits may only
be issued for events sponsored by governmental or not-for-profit 501(c)3
entities. A recreational facility may apply for no more than 14 such permits
in any calendar year. Any recreational facility operating on such a permit
shall be required to have a special or regular duty East Brunswick police
officer assigned to the location. All costs and expenses of the special or
regular police officer at the recreational facility shall be paid to the
Township by the applicant for the permit. The permit request for extended
hours may be denied by the Township Council upon a demonstration of good
cause by any interested person or persons. If alcohol is permitted on the
recreational facility's premises, it cannot be sold, served or consumed after
12:00 midnight even if the business is permitted to remain open.
§ 135-101. Enforcement.
The municipal officers and/or agencies designated to enforce the provisions
of this article in accordance with due process of law are the East Brunswick
Police Department.
§ 135-102. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 135-103. Application and fees.
The recreational facility shall apply for the permit through the East
Brunswick Clerk's office, using the application form provided by the Clerk.
The application form shall, at a minimum, require the following information:
the name and address of the recreational facility, contact information for the
recreational facility personnel responsible for supervising the after-hours
event, the name and address of the sponsor, contact information for the
sponsor's personnel responsible for supervising the after-hours event, proof
that the sponsor is a governmental or not-for-profit 501c(3) entity, hours of
operation requested, and date of event. The recreational facility shall pay a
permit fee of $250 to the Township upon submitting the permit application.
This application fee shall be nonrefundable.
§ 135-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-103
1:471
Chapter 136
LIMOUSINES AND OTHER MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 136-1. License Required.
No person shall keep, hire or use for hire or pay, or cause to be kept or
used for hire or pay, any motor vehicle or limousine utilizing the Township
of East Brunswick as a place of business or place of garaging as expressed
in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq. without having first obtained a license for that
purpose from the Township Clerk for such limousine or livery, which license
shall be known as "limousine license". Such license shall be for a term of
one (1) year and shall be renewable annually and shall be non-transferable.
§ 136-2. Fee. [Amended 3-8-10 by Ord. No. 10-04]
§ 136-3. Form and Content of License. [Amended 3-8-10 by Ord. No.
10-04]
The limousine license shall be in writing, numbered, in triplicate, signed
by the Township Clerk on a form provided by the Municipality, and shall
contain the following information:
A. The fee for a limousine license shall be $50.00 for each limousine
service plus $10.00 for each limousine covered under the limousine
service owner's insurance policy. [Amended 3-8-10 by Ord. No.
10-04]
B. The Township Zoning Officer shall inspect the place of business to
verify parking area before signing off on the limousine license. The
Township Clerk shall issue a limousine license only upon satisfactory
compliance by the limousine service owner with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 through 22, the payment of the fee described above,
the submission of a current certificate of insurance and a signed
statement from the Township Zoning Officer certifying that the
limousine service is not operating in a residential zone. [Amended
8-14-89 by Ord. 89-52; 3-8-10 by Ord. No. 10-04 ]
1. Name, business address, and business telephone number of the
limousine service owner.
2. Make, model, year, registration number, and license plate number of
each vehicle owned or controlled by the applicant.
3. The name of the company providing insurance coverage, the number,
and the expiration date of the policy.
§ 135-103 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 136-4
1:472
§ 136-4. By Whom License is Issued.
Licenses for limousines and liveries or any renewal thereof shall be issued
by the Township Clerk and no approval of the Township Council shall be
required.
§ 136-5. Disposition of the License. [Amended 3-8-10 by Ord. No.
10-04]
One copy of the limousine license shall be retained by the Township Clerk,
and one copy shall be filed with the New Jersey Motor Vehicles Commission.
The limousine service owner shall receive the original license which shall
be displayed at the business address of the limousine service at all times.
§ 136-6. Violations and Penalties.
Any person or persons, firms, corporations, or other organizations found to
be in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction
thereof in Municipal Court, in addition to the penalties provided by N.J.S.A.
48:16-22, pay a fine of not less than $50.00 and no more than $100.00 for
the first offense and for each subsequent offense shall, upon conviction, pay
a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Upon failure to pay such
fine, such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
Chapter 137
LITTERING
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and their derivatives shall have
the meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety or welfare or otherwise constitutes
a nuisance.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, lanes, parkways, sidewalks,
municipal parking lots, alleys or other public ways and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, recreation areas, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
§ 136-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-1
1:473
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
§ 137-2. Sweeping litter into gutters, streets or other public places
prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the township the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying places of business within the township shall keep the sidewalks
in front of their business premises free of litter.
§ 137-3. Littering from vehicles prohibited.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the township.
§ 137-4. Trucks prohibited from causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the township, the wheels or tires of which carry out or deposit in any
street or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substance or foreign matter of
any kind.
§ 137-5. Littering of bodies of water prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
river or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the township.
§ 137-6. Littering of private property prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the
township, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, other
public place or upon any private property. This section shall not apply to
litter resulting from the normal course of construction of any buildings or
parts thereof during the period of construction.
§ 137-7. Premises to be maintained free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 137-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 137-8
1:474
§ 137-8. Littering public places prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the township or on those portions of any private
property that are open to the public.
§ 137-9. Transportation of litter into municipality restricted.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside this municipality or into this municipality for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof, except in those areas that have been
authorized for such purpose.
Chapter 139
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 139, Loitering, adopted 8-14-67 as Ord. No. 67-85, was
repealed and rescinded on 11-13-84 by Ord. No. 84-618.]
Chapter 142
MEAT PACKAGING
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD DEALER — Includes every person, firm or corporation, his, her, its
or their agents, servants or employees engaged in the business of selling,
offering or exposing for sale food, at retail, for human consumption, either
on or off the premises where sold.
§ 142-2. Packing of meat.
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer in the Township of East Brunswick,
as defined in § 142-1, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail, any
sealed, prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh cut meat or frozen
meat, unless the packaging thereof is colorless and transparent on all sides,
exclusive of labeling, which labeling shall not occupy more than ten percent
(10%) of one (1) side of said package or which fresh cut meat or frozen
meat is layered or shingled, making the entire contents of said package not
wholly visible. This section shall not apply to meat commonly designated or
known as "chopped meat" or "ground meat."
§ 142-3. Labeling with calendar date. [Added 11-11-74 by Ord. No.
74-14-L]
A calendar date may be shown on labeling when declared in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 137-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:475
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation, his, her, its or their agents, servants or
employees found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, for each such violation.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; See Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 145
MUNICIPALLY SPONSORED EVENTS
A. The calendar date shall express the month of the year and the day of the
month for all products and also the year in the case of products
hermetically sealed in metal or glass containers, dried or frozen
products or any other products that the Director of Health finds should
be labeled with the year because the distribution and marketing
practices with respect to such products may cause a label without a
year identification to be misleading.
B. Immediately adjacent to the calendar date shall be a phrase explaining
the meaning of such date, in terms of "packing" date, "sell by" date or
"use before" date, with or without further qualifying phrase, for
example, "for maximum freshness" or "for best quality," and such
phrases shall be approved by the Director of Health as prescribed in
317.4, Federal Regulations under 21 U.S.C. § 601 and 21 U.S.C. § 45.1.
§ 142-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 142-4
1:476
ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverages at Municipally Sponsored Events
§ 145-1. Purpose.
The Director of Public Safety is authorized to issue special regulations
restricting the possession and/or consumption of all or specific types of
alcoholic beverages at municipally sponsored or cosponsored events,
gatherings, meetings or assemblies which are being held at public lands or
public buildings, or private lands or buildings for which the Township has
entered into a use agreement. The purpose of these regulations is to provide
for the safety and welfare of the public and to ensure public order.
§ 145-2. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful to possess and/or consume alcoholic beverages as
specified in the regulations.
§ 145-3. Notice.
If the main entrance to the lands and/or buildings are posted with a notice
prohibiting the conduct regulated under this Chapter or if a public
announcement is made at the site declaring that such conduct is prohibited,
this shall be considered sufficient notice of the existence of this ordinance
and all regulations issued thereunder.
§ 145-4. Emergency Measures.
If circumstances warrant, the Director of Public Safety or his representative
may issue and implement regulations under this ordinance notwithstanding
the fact that an event, gathering, meeting or assembly has already
commenced.
§ 145-5. Penalty.
Any person who violates or aids and abets any person to violate the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars or more than Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars or imprisoned for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or
both.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:477

ARTICLE II
Special Parking and Traffic Regulations at Municipally Sponsored
Events
§ 145-6. Purpose.
The Director of Public Safety may issue special regulations for traffic and
parking at municipally sponsored or cosponsored events, gatherings,
meetings or assemblies which are being held at public lands or public
buildings, or private lands or buildings for which the Township has entered
into a use agreement. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the
safety and welfare of the public and to ensure public order.
§ 145-7. Regulations.
Such regulations may provide for parking, vehicular traffic flow, pedestrian
and non-vehicular traffic flow, emergency lanes and exits and may prohibit
the impeding of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. These regulations may
prescribe or proscribe types and areas of use.
§ 145-8. Notice.
Notice of such regulations shall be deemed sufficient when so indicated by
signs or other mechanical or electrical traffic control devices or attendants
or police officers.
§ 145-9. Relationship of this Ordinance to Title 39 of New Jersey
Statutes.
Nothing provided in this article shall supersede Title 39 of New Jersey
Statutes to the extent that the statutes regulate pedestrian and vehicular
traffic flow or parking.
§ 145-10. Penalty.
Any person who violates or aids and abets any person to violate the
provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed Five
Hundred ($500.00) Dollars or imprisoned for a term not to exceed sixty (60)
days, or both.
A. Vehicles violating these regulations may be towed by authorization of
the Division of Police.
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-10
1:479
Chapter 147
NOISE
§ 147-1. Declaration of Findings and Policy.
WHEREAS, excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and, WHEREAS a substantial body
of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and, WHEREAS, the people have a right to, and should
be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound,
Now, THEREFORE, it is the policy of the Township of East Brunswick to
prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety
of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.
This ordinance shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources
within the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this ordinance have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the C weighting network with a
sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its
successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The C weighting network is more
sensitive to low frequencies than is the A weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — The work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the violator; and/or the activity
or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of an
enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
§ 145-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-2
1:480
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such devise is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
1.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
2.
§ 147-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-2
1:481
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either (a) the vertical boundary that separates
one parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or
commercial property; (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a
dwelling unit that is part of a multi-dwelling unit building; or (c) on a
multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries
between the two portions of the property on which different categories of
activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building
which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real
property line would be the interface between the residential area and the
commercial area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC
unit on the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of
the receiving unit).
Note this definition shall not apply to a commercial source and a
commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of property
(e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 147-3. Applicability.
A. This noise ordinance applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
§ 147-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-3
1:482
§ 147-4. Exemptions.
§ 147-5. Enforcement Officers.
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private right-of-ways;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
B. This noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities (i.e. non-profits and/or religious
facilities);
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in § 147-9 and § 147-10 below, the provisions of this
ordinance shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the
extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II and III, except as provided for in
§ 147-9 below.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
ordinance and pursue enforcement activities.
§ 147-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-5
1:483
§ 147-6. Measurement Protocols.
§ 147-7. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level
meter (i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance
determinations) and pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 147-6(B) of this ordinance and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 147-3(A) above in
such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or
within the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in
Tables I, II or III, except as specified in § 147-6(B).
B. Impulsive Sound
Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not equal
or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive
sound which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or
exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times
in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound and shall meet the
requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
§ 147-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-7
1:484
TABLE I
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVELS WHEN MEASURED
OUTDOORS
RECEIVING PROPERTY
CATEGORY
Residential property, or
residential portion of a multi-use
property
Commercial facility,
public service facility,
non-residential portion
of a multi-use property,
or community service
facility
TIME 7 a.m.-10 p.m. 10 p.m.- 7 a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted
sound level standard, dB
65 50 65
TABLE II
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVELS WHEN MEASURED
INDOORS
RECEIVING PROPERTY
CATEGORY
Residential property, or
residential portion of a multi-use
property
Commercial facility, or
non-residential portion
of a multi-use property
TIME 7 a.m.-10 p.m. 10 p.m.- 7 a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted
sound level standard, dB
55 40 55
Note: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are
separated by a real property line and they also share a common or
abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same parcel of property.
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:485
§ 147-8. Sound Production Devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that it crosses a property line and raises
the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound level by more
than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table IV when measured
within the residence of a complainant according to the measurement
protocol in § 147-6(B) of this ordinance. These sound level measurements
TABLE III
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE OCTAVE BAND SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS IN
DECIBELS
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
OUTDOORS
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
INDOORS
Commercial
facility, public
service facility,
non-residential
portion of a multiuse
property, or
community service
facility
OUTDOORS
Commercial
facility, or
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property
INDOORS
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz.
Octave Band
Sound Pressure
Level, dB
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Time
7
a.m.-10
p.m.
10
p.m.-7
a.m.
7 a.m.-10
p.m.
10
p.m.-7
a.m. 24 Hours 24 Hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8000 53 38 43 28 53 43
Note: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source
must be constant in level and character. If octave band sound pressure
level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in the bands containing the
principal source frequencies, discontinue the measurement.
§ 147-7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-8
1:486
shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C" weighting, "fast"
response.
TABLE IV
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE INCREASE IN TOTAL SOUND LEVELS
WITHIN A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Week nights 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.
Weekend nights 11:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. All other times
3 dB(C) 6 dB(C)
§ 147-9. Restricted Uses and Activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g. golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in
Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound reduction device.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
§ 147-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-9
1:487
§ 147-10. Motor Vehicles.
Violation of each paragraph of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore non-minor violations.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five (5) minutes for continuous airborne sound and
fifteen (15) minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated.
At all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, non-vehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on
a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator.
G. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property
line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort,
and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the
unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a Noise Control Officer or
Noise Control Investigator. Prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five (5)
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or more
vocalizations per minute in that period; or,
(2) Vocalizing for twenty (20) minutes intermittently, defined as an
average of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
§ 147-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-10
1:488
§ 147-11. Enforcement.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be cause for a Notice of
Violation (NOV) or a Notice of Penalty Assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject
to a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the
violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this Ordinance the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this Ordinance that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 147-2 of this
ordinance) a NOV shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days) pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq. where the
responsible party's/violators' voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued. It shall be noted that the
NOV does not constitute a formal enforcement action, a final
agency action or a final legal determination that a violation has
occurred. Therefore, the NOV may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a non-minor violation the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected a NOPA with a civil
penalty of no more than $3,000 will be issued. If a non-minor violation is
§ 147-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-11
1:489
Chapter 150
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
immediately corrected a Notice of Violation without a civil penalty
shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation occurs
again (within 12 months of the initial violation) a NOPA shall be issued
regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected or not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator, an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period time ends, a NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based
upon the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
§ 147-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-11
1:490
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Public Health Nuisance Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code12]
§ 150-1. Adoption of standard code by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the township in removing
or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for violation is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ 150-2. Title of code adopted.
The said code established and adopted by this Article is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey,
(1953)."
§ 150-3. Copies on file.
Three (3) copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953) have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk upon
the introduction of this Article and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:491

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Wells and Test Holes
[Adopted 2-10-69 as Ord. No. 69-14-C]
§ 150-4. Certain wells and test holes deemed a nuisance.
The maintenance of a well or test hole not in operation: around which no
wall, fencing or similar barrier has been erected to afford notice of the
existence of such well or test hole; or in which there exists a present danger
of pollution or contamination; or which has remained inoperable for two (2)
months without being sealed and filled with clean fill, is a nuisance.
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:493

ARTICLE III
Pesticide Spraying
[Adopted 4-29-74 as Ord. No. 74-14-I]
§ 150-5. Regulations.
A. No person shall apply or cause to be applied any pesticide from a
helicopter or other airborne vehicle without first making suitable
permit application with the Director of Health and Welfare of the
Township of East Brunswick.
B. No permit shall be issued until the Director of Health and Welfare is
satisfied that the applicant has sufficient experience, facilities,
equipment and proficiency to carry out properly such extermination
with a maximum degree of safety.
C. No person shall apply pesticides in a manner that causes or may tend to
cause either unreasonable damage to non-target areas or unreasonable
harm and injury to persons.
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-5
1:495

ARTICLE IV
Transportation of Hazardous, Toxic and Chemical Waste
[Adopted 3-24-80 by Ord. No. 80-225]
§ 150-6. Prohibition Against Illegal Transportation of Hazardous,
Toxic and Chemical Wastes.
No person shall operate a vehicle at any time upon the streets or roadways
of the Township of East Brunswick if:
§ 150-7. Facilities Handling Hazardous and/or Toxic Material to
Maintain a Recovery Drum on Premises. [Added 4-25-84 by Ord. No.
84-568]
Any person or entity who owns or operates a commercial facility within the
Township of East Brunswick which stores, manufactures, mixes, processes
or in any way has in their possession any material, including but not limited
to flammable, combustible, corrosive poisonous or hazardous, as classified
in accordance with 49 CFR of the Code of Federal Regulations, shall have
at least one (l) recovery drum upon their premises. The drum will be
maintained and used for the sole purpose of control and containment of any
of the aforementioned materials in the event of a leak, spill or container
failure. The recovery drum shall have the following minimum standards of
construction:
§ 150-8. Inspection and Enforcement. [Added 4-25-84 by Ord. No.
84-568]
The provisions of § 150-7 shall be enforced by the Municipal Fire Inspectors.
a. Such vehicle is being used for the purpose of hauling or transporting
solid waste; and
b. Such waste may consist of hazardous toxic waste or chemical waste as
defined by the Regulations of the Bureau of Solid Waste Management
within the New Jersey Department of Transportation; and
c. If the operator of such a vehicle does not have proper documentation
indicating the contents of the vehicle, a permit for the transportation of
the waste and a permit to dispose of the waste at a designated solid
waste facility, all as required by the Regulations of the Bureau of Solid
Waste Management.
1. Have a minimum capacity of 85 gallons (322 liters);
2. Overall height (over lock ring): 38-5/8" (98l MM);
3. Overall diameter (over the roll loops): 26-7/8" (708 MM);
4. Cover, bottom and body structure: 16 ga. common grade carbon steel;
5. Exterior paint: Yellow with black stripes, imprint "RECOVERY DRUM".
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-9
1:497
§ 150-9. Penalty. [Added 3-24-80 by Ord. No. 80-225]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
in the East Brunswick Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to exceed
five hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisonment in the County Jail for a
period not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and each violation of any of the provisions contained in this
Article and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 150-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 150-9
1:498
ARTICLE V
The Costs of Removal to be Liens
[Added 12-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-420]
§ 150-10. The Costs of Removal to be Liens.
In the event that the Township of East Brunswick shall incur any costs
due to the removal, containment, disposal, or other action taken by the
Township of East Brunswick with regard to spills of hazardous, toxic,
chemical, or oil spills, such costs shall be certified by the Township Official
in charge of such cleanup or removal to the Division of Revenue who shall
bill the party responsible for the condition. If the bill is not paid within
sixty (60) days, the Collector of Revenue shall make the costs a part of the
taxes next assessed upon the premises where the condition was located,
unless the party responsible for the condition is other than the owner of the
property, in which case the Township shall be entitled to be reimbursed for
all such costs by the party creating the aforesaid condition.
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:499
Chapter 153
OBSCENITY AND PUBLIC INDECENCY
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The Township of East Brunswick is attempting to prevent the deterioration
of the various commercial districts within the municipality and is further
attempting to preserve real estate values, reduce the incidence of crime
and encourage residents and businesses to remain in their present
neighborhoods and to maintain their properties. The Township of East
Brunswick intends to regulate adult uses within the municipality in order
to prohibit the display of adult reading material within the open view
and reach of children under the age of eighteen (18) years. The East
Brunswick Township Council finds that such material is adverse to the
public peace, morals and good order of the Township. The Township Council
further finds that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare of the Township to restrict the display of adult reading material
and to adopt regulations toward that end. In addition, the Township of
East Brunswick wishes to discourage the attraction of transients into the
commercial areas of the Township of East Brunswick. The Township of East
Brunswick further finds that the location of adult entertainment activities
near shopping centers and public areas which are open to family groups
and children have an adverse effect on such persons and may contribute to
increased crime and juvenile delinquency. The Township further finds that
they tend to attract an undesirable quantity and quality of clientele. For all
of the foregoing reasons the Township of East Brunswick hereby regulates
obscene conduct and the distribution and promotion of obscene material.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Title 2C:34-2, 2C:34-3 and 2C:34-4 of the New
Jersey Code of Criminal Justice as presently stated and as subsequently
amended are incorporated herein as follows:
A. Obscene Material for Persons Eighteen Years of Age or Older:
Any description, narrative account, display, or depiction of sexual
activity or anatomical area contained in, or consisting of, a picture or
other representation, publication, sound recording, live performance,
or firm, which by means of posing, composition, format or animated
sensual details:
1. Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals.
2. Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, when
taken as a whole, and
§ 150-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 153-2
1:500
3. Is a part of a work, which to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme taken
as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
B. Obscene Material for Persons Under Eighteen:
Any description, narrative account, display, or depiction of a specified
anatomical area or specified sexual activity contained in, or consisting
of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live
performance or film which by means of posing, composition, format
or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with sufficient impact to
concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity.
1. Obscene Film:
Any motion picture film or preview or trailer to a film, not including
newsreels portraying actual current events or pictorial news of the
day, in which a scene, taken by itself:
(a) Depicts a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity,
or verbalization concerning a specified sexual activity; and
(b) Emits sensuality sufficient, in terms of the duration and impact
of the depiction, to appeal to prurient interest.
2. Specified Anatomical Area:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered.
3. Specified Sexual Activity:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
(b) Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate
sexual intercourse; or
(c) Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast.
4. Knowingly:
(a) Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
or film described herein; or
(b) Having failed to exercise reasonable inspection which would
disclose its character and content.
C. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this ordinance
shall, for the purpose of this ordinance have the meanings respectively
§ 153-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-2
1:501
§ 153-3. Prohibited Conduct.
ascribed to them by this section. [Added 7-14-80 by Ord. No.
80-269]
1. PERSON means any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
2. TOWNSHIP means the Township of East Brunswick, New Jersey.
3. DISTRIBUTE means to transfer possession of whether with or
without consideration.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene material; or
2. Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
3. Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing, explicit sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements or other
public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the
basis of their prurient appeal; or
4. Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
(a) His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region;
(b) Any device, costume or covering which given the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum,
anal region or pubic hair region; or
(c) Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
(d) Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to send or cause to be sent or to
bring or cause to be brought into this Township for sale or
distribution any device, designated or marketed as useful primarily
for the stimulation of human genital organs.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person in this Township to prepare, sell,
exhibit, or distribute or give away or offer to give away, or to have
in his possession with intent to sell, exhibit, distribute, give away or
offer to give away any device designed or marketed as useful
primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs. [Added
7-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-269]
§ 153-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 153-3
1:502
§ 153-3.1. Public Nuisance.
The following are hereby now declared to be public nuisances and are
hereby subject to the remaining provisions of Chapter 153.
§ 153-3.2. Procedures. [Added 7-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-271]
In the event that the East Brunswick Director of Public Safety finds that a
public nuisance exists with respect to any of the establishments referred
to in Section 153-3.1, the Township of East Brunswick shall follow the
procedures set forth in Section 153-4 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick, Notice of Obscene Material or Action and Section 153-5 of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick, Types of Proceedings.
§ 153-4. Notice of Obscene Material or Action.
7. The possession or exhibition forbidden by this ordinance shall not
apply to a possession or exhibition by a police officer, sheriff,
deputy sheriff or other peace officer, or any person under their
supervision and control, or any judge, jury or attache of a court, or
any attorney, or any member of a legislative body, municipal, state
or federal, when such possession or exhibition thereof is connected
with the prosecution or investigation of a violation or possible
violation of this ordinance or other law. [Added 7-14-80 by Ord.
No. 80-269]
B. This ordinance shall not apply to the viewing of any material in the
privacy of ones home or to any medium regulated by any public body.
A. Places where obscene films are exhibited are public nuisances.
B. Places of business where obscene publications constitute a principal
part of the stock and trade are public nuisances.
C. Massage parlors or model studios used for purposes of lewdness,
assignations or prostitution are places of public nuisance. [Added
7-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-271]
A. Actual notice of the obscene nature of such material, performance, or
activity may be given to a person involved in or responsible for such
from the Director of Public Safety on the basis of information lawfully
gathered and supplied to him by the Department of Public Safety or
citizens.
1. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person to
the alleged offender.
2. Such notice shall state that:
(a) In the opinion of the Department of Public Safety the activity
engaged in falls within the prohibition of section 153-3.
§ 153-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-4
1:503
§ 153-5. Types of Proceedings.
(b) That if such activity has not ceased within seven (7) judicial
days the Township of East Brunswick will take appropriate
legal action; and
(c) That a declaratory judgment proceeding as described in
Section 153-5 is available if a person engaged in the
challenged activity wishes to initiate the legal determination of
whether the activity is in fact obscene.
B. A person who promotes any obscene activity as prohibited in section
153-3 in the course of his business is presumed to do so with knowledge
of its content and character.
A. In Rem Proceedings.
1. The Director of Public Safety may apply to the Municipal Attorney
to institute an attachment proceeding against any material which is
alleged to be obscene in a sworn affidavit.
2. Upon filing of an application for attachment authorized in
subsection (1) of this section, the Director of Public Safety shall
immediately cause notice thereof to be served either personally or
by mail upon any person residing or doing business in the Township
who is known or believed by the Director of Public Safety to have
any of the following interests in material named in the complaint.
(a) The publisher; and
(b) The wholesaler, distributor, circulator; and
(c) Every retailer or dealer who has, or may have, possession of
any material identical to material named in the complaint.
B. Declaratory Judgment.
1. Any person receiving notice in writing from the Director of Public
Safety under section 153-4A that a specified activity is obscene may
bring action against the Township for a declaratory judgment to
determine whether such activity is obscene.
2. If it is adjudged and declared by the court that such activity is
obscene, then the Township Clerk may cause the publication of
such judgment in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township of East Brunswick and upon such publication all persons
residing or doing business in the Township of East Brunswick will
be presumed to have actual notice of the nature of the activity.
C. Criminal Prosecution.
1. The Municipal Attorney and the Director of Public Safety may
cause charges to be brought against any person presently engaging
§ 153-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 153-5
1:504
§ 153-6. Public Indecency and Nudity. [Added 2-28-83 by Ord. No.
83-497]
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or travel on any street, avenue,
highway, road, parking area, park or playground or other public place, or
to appear in any store or commercial location in the Township of East
Brunswick in a state of nudity, other than in a shower room or changing
area. A person shall be found in a state or nudity when his clothing or
absence of clothing completely exposes to the view of others his or her anus,
genitals, pubic area, or, in the case of a female, breasts below the areola.
§ 153-7. Penalties.
Chapter 158
PARKS AND PUBLIC LANDS
§ 158-1. Title. [Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 3-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-04]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Brunswick
Township Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Parks, Public Lands, School
Property and Indoor Public Places."
§ 158-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 6-11-01
by Ord. No. 01-19; 3-25-03 by Ord. No. 03-10; 6-20-05 by Ord. No.
in or who has engaged in any prohibited activity in violation of this
ordinance.
2. If the Municipal Attorney has given notice pursuant to section
153-4A then such criminal charges may be brought only after seven
(7) judicial days after receipt of said notice.
D. Injunction.
1. The Municipal Attorney may seek a temporary restraining order in
Superior Court in order to enjoin any obscene performance or the
service of patrons in violation of this ordinance.
E. Proceedings authorized by this Section shall be in addition to any
others provided by law.
A. Penalties shall be in accordance with applicable New Jersey Statutes,
specifically Section 2C:34-1 et seq.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance or who
shall do any act made unlawful by this ordinance shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for
not more than three months or both. [Added 7-14-80 by Ord. No.
80-269]
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-2
1:505
05-13; 07-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-17; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06;
11-13-17 by Ord. No. 17-35]
As used in this chapter, the following terms and their derivations shall have
the meanings indicated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
COUNTY PARK — A park, play area, natural area, reservation, field, beach,
recreation center or any other area the County of Middlesex owns or
controls, and devoted to or intended for active or passive recreation or
natural resource management.[Added 6-11-01 by Ord. No. 01-19]
DIRECTOR OF PARKS — The person immediately in charge of the
Department of Parks and its activities, and to whom all park rangers and
park employees of such area are responsible.[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27;
4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo,
or pipe (as pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3D-57)[Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-04]
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or
game.[Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-17]
INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE — A structurally enclosed place of business,
commerce or other service-related activity, whether publicly or privately
owned or operated on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, which is generally
accessible to the public, including; but not limited to: a commercial or other
office building; office or building owned, leased or rented by the state or
by a county or municipal government; public and nonpublic elementary or
secondary school building; board of education building; theater or concert
hall; public library; museum or art gallery; bar; restaurant or other
establishment where the principal business is the sale of food for
consumption on the premises, including the bar area of the establishment;
garage or parking facility; any public conveyance operated on land or water,
or in the air, and passenger waiting rooms and platform areas in any
stations or terminals thereof; health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.
1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.); patient waiting room of the office of
a health care provider licensed pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes;
child-care center licensed pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1
et seq.); race track facility; facility used for the holding of sporting events;
ambulatory recreational facility; shopping mall or retail store; hotel, motel
or other lodging establishment; apartment building lobby or other public
area in an otherwise private building; or a passenger elevator in a building
other than a single-family dwelling.[Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
§ 158-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-2
1:506
PARK — A park, play area, natural area, reservation, field, beach, recreation
center or any other area the Township owns, or used by the Township, and
devoted to or intended for active or passive recreation or natural resource
management.[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC LAND — Any land which the Township owns, or controls by lease,
easement or other conveyance.[Added 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
SCHOOL PROPERTY — School buildings and school grounds and includes,
with respect to public and nonpublic elementary and secondary schools:
land, portions of land, structures, buildings, and vehicles, owned, operated
or used for the provision of academic or extracurricular programs
sponsored by a school or a community provider and structures that support
these buildings, such as school wastewater treatment facilities, generating
facilities, and other central service facilities including, but not limited to,
kitchens and maintenance shops; Athletic stadiums, swimming pools, any
associated structures or related equipment tied to such facilities including,
but not limited to, grandstands and night field lights, greenhouses, garages,
facilities used for noninstructional or noneducational purposes, and any
structure, building or facility used solely for school administration;
playgrounds, and recreational places owned by local municipalities, private
entities or other individuals during those times when the school district has
exclusive use of a portion of such land.[Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-04]
SKATE PARK FACILITY — A designate play area or facility situated at
Community Park on Dunhams Corner Road in the Township of East
Brunswick devoted to or intended only for skateboarding and in-line skating
and designed with special ramps.[Added 3-24-03 by Ord. No. 03-10]
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device (as pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3D-57).[Added 6-20-05 by Ord. No.
05-13; amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
SPARKLING DEVICES AND NOVELTIES[Added 11-13-17 by Ord. 17-35]
—
a. Wood sticks or wire sparklers of not more than 100 grams of
pyrotechnic mixture per item;
b. Handheld or ground-based sparkling devices which are non-explosive
and no-aerial, which may produce a crackling or whistling effect, and
contain 75 grams or less of pyrotechnic composition per tube or a total
of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; and
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-2
1:507
§ 158-3. Regulations pertaining to the use of park property.
[Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 6-20-05 by Ord. No. 05-13;
7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-17]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
c. Snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, and trick noisemakers, which
include party poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of 25/
100 grains or less of explosive mixture.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC LANDS — The person who serves as
the Director of Parks as provided in Chapter 3, § 3-58 et seq. of the
Code of the Township.[Added 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99
by Ord. No. 99-27]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Brunswick.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the Township parks.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
The term shall include reptiles and birds.[Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-17]
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building; bridges; tables;
benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining
restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No
person over the age of six years shall use the restrooms and
washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any beach sand,
whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs
or plants, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or
other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such
lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
B. Trees, shrubbery, lawns.
§ 158-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-3
1:508
(1) Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any
tree or plant; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc. Climb any tree or wall, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or structures or upon
any other property not designated or customarily used for such
purposes. [Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
(3) Hitching of animals. Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree
or plant.
C. Wildlife. [Amended 7-25-05 by Ord. No. 05-17]
(1) Hunting. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall be
remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or
the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird.
(2) Feeding.
(a) No person shall feed any wildlife in any public park or on any
other Township property. [Added 7-25-05 by Ord. No.
05-17]
(b) Give or offer or attempt to give to any animal, reptile or bird
any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.
[Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
D. Endangered and protected species. Hunt, trap, kill, harm, collect,
remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or
offer to buy or accept as a gift any specimen or part of a specimen alive
or dead, of any of the species of animals, insects, and plants designated
as endangered or protected by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. [Added 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
E. Glass Beverage Containers. No person shall bring into any park nor
have in his/her possession any glass beverage container for any
purpose whatsoever. [Added 11987 by Ord. No. 87-874]
F. Smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited in any municipal park and
playground, except in areas specifically designated by the Township
and suitably equipped for that purpose.
Any person smoking in violation of this section shall be subject to the
following penalty, upon conviction:
(1) $50, plus costs, for a first offense.
(2) $100, plus costs for a second offense.
§ 158-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:509
§ 158-4. Regulations pertaining to sanitation.
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
(3) A third or subsequent offense shall subject to violations and
penalties set forth in § 158-12.
G. Regulations pertaining to smoking on school property, indoor public
places or events. [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
(1) Smoking is prohibited in an indoor public place.
(2) Smoking is prohibited in any area of any building of, or on the
grounds of, any public or nonpublic elementary or secondary
school, regardless of whether the area is an indoor public place or
is outdoors.
(3) No person attending an athletic and/or recreational event that
takes place on school property shall smoke in any area closer than
50 feet from the boundary of any athletic field and/or within 50 feet
of any of the event participants whether or not such participants
are engaged in event activities. No smoking shall take place in any
restrooms serving an athletic and/or recreational event on
Township property during the course of an athletic or recreational
event. Smoking is prohibited within 50 feet of any area where food
or beverages are served. This prohibition shall apply only to those
athletic or recreational events where any of the participants are 18
years of age or younger.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the courtyard at the municipal
complex located between the municipal building and the library
including the Veterans' Memorial and walkways to the parking lots
shall be considered prohibited smoking areas as there is a
reasonable anticipated presence of children involved in the various
recreational programs as well as the library.
(5) Violations and penalties. Any person smoking in violation of this
section shall be subject to the following penalty, upon conviction:
(a) $100, plus costs, for a first offense.
(b) $250, plus costs, for a second offense.
(c) A third or subsequent offense shall carry fines up to $500.
A. Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
§ 158-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-4
1:510
§ 158-5. Control of traffic. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27;
4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed
in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
these are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. State motor vehicle laws apply. Fail to comply with all applicable
provisions of the state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as
are contained in this chapter and other ordinances.
B. Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all police officers, Park
Rangers, and designated park employees, such persons being hereby
authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever
needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately
adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations
and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by
the Director of Parks. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-06]
C. Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
D. Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
five (5) miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director of Parks
may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-06]
E. Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any area except the
paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the
Director of Parks. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-06]
F. Parking.
(1) Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with
the posted directions there, at and with the instructions of any Park
Ranger or designated park employee who may be present.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637]
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:511
(2) Full-parking. Full-park on the road or driveway at any time. In
order to enjoy some special natural scenic feature, vehicles may be
parked with the two (2) left wheels near the right edge of the
paving for not more than fifteen (15) minutes. No stopping or
parking is permitted even briefly on the left-hand side of any road
or driveway.
(3) Night parking. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without
lights clearly visible for at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from
both front and rear on any driveway or road area except legally
established parking areas.
(4) Emergency procedure. Fail to immediately notify a Park Ranger or
park employee of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown
requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637]
(5) Double-parking. Double-park any vehicle on any road or parkway
unless directed by a Park Ranger.
G. Bicycles.
(1) Confined to roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular
road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be
permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area
or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
(2) Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the
road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be
kept in single file when two (2) or more are operating as a group.
Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable
regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of
any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicles
they may be meeting.
(3) Rider prohibited. Ride any other person on a bicycle.
(4) Designated racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle
rack when such is provided and there is a space available.
(5) Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set
against trees or in any place or position where other persons may
trip over or be injured by them.
(6) Night operation. Ride a bicycle on any road or path between thirty
(30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise
without an attached headlight plainly visible at least two hundred
(200) feet in front of, and without a red taillight or red reflector
plainly visible from at least one hundred (100) feet from the rear of,
such bicycle. [Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
§ 158-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-6
1:512
§ 158-6. Regulation of recreational activities. [Amended 7-26-99 by
Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
A. Bathing and swimming. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(1) Designated areas. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways
in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places
as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations
as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; nor shall any
person request any waters or places customarily designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, when such
activity is prohibited by the Director of Parks upon a finding that
such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No.
15-06]
(2) Certain hours. Frequent any waters or places designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except
between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the
Director of Parks for such purposes for each individual area.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No.
15-06]
(3) Structure on beach. Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any
beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind
unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or
structure from at least two (2) sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or
extensions or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened
from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other
object outside thereof.
(4) Costume. Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit as to
indecently expose his person or call forth merited criticism. No
person shall appear in bathing costume at any place in the parks
except within the limits of designated bathing places or areas, and
all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly accepted
standards.
(5) Bathhouses. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet
or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may
be provided for that purpose.
B. Boating. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord.
No. 15-06]
(1) Designated areas. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating by the Director of Parks.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:513
Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as
are now or may hereafter be adopted. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord.
No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
(2) Public docks. Use the public docks for dockage or other purpose
without first making arrangements for such accommodation with
the Manager of Parks, who shall assign space and collect
reasonable rental charges in conformity with established
regulations and rates. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
(3) Operation of boats. Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a
manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or
endanger the occupants of any other boat.
(4) Prohibition during closing hours. Launch, dock or operate any boat
of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at
night and opening hour the following morning; nor shall any person
be on or remain on, or in, any boat during the said closed hours of
the park.
C. Fishing. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No.
15-06]
(1) Commerce prohibited. Engage in commercial fishing or the buying
or selling of fish caught in any waters.
(2) General prohibition. Fish in any waters, whether fresh or salt and
whether by the use of hook and line, net, trap or other device,
except in waters designated by the Director of Parks for that use
and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be
prescribed by the Director of Parks. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord.
No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
(3) Where bathing. At any time fish in any area where bathing is
permitted.
D. Hunting and firearms. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No
person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air
rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of
weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety,
or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park
boundaries is forbidden.
E. Picnic areas and use.
(1) Regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated
for that purpose. Park Rangers and designated park employees
shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas
§ 158-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-6
1:514
§ 158-6.1. Rules and regulations for skate park. [Added 3-24-03 by
Ord. No. 03-10; amended 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum
use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply
with any directions given to achieve this end. [Amended 6-28-76
by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
(2) Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served."
(3) Nonexclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics,
to the exclusion of other persons; nor shall any person use such
area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are
crowded.
(4) Duty of picnicker. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers,
cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal
receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park
area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
F. Camping. Camp in other than designated camp sites for organized
camping, provided by the Director of Parks and used by groups of
persons under adequate supervision. No person shall set up tents,
shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight
camping; nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any
movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for
such purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the
like, without permit. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-06]
G. Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes, except in that area set apart for such forms of
recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games,
such as football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited except on the fields
and courts or areas provided therefor. Rollerskating shall be confined to
those areas specifically designated for such pastime.
H. Horseback riding. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails.
Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly
restrained and ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or
go unattended; nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6.1
1:515
§ 158-7. Municipal bathing area. [Amended 5-23-77 by Ord. No.
77-142-B]
Editor's Note: § 158-7 was originally adopted 8-9-49 and amended 2-27-67
by Ord. No. 67-69; 5-29-73 by Ord. No. 73-69-A; 5-5-75 by Ord. No. 75-69-B;
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-69-E Ord. No. 77-69-F, adopted 5-23-77, made the
section a part of this chapter.
A. Use of Skate Park Facility. The Skate Park Facility will be open to both
Township of East Brunswick residents and residents of the State of New
Jersey
B. Hours of Operation. The Skate Park Facility will be open from dawn to
10:00 p.m. daily unless otherwise indicated by the Director of Parks.
[Amended 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
C. Supervision. The Township will not provide on-site supervision.
D. Skate Park Facility Equipment. Only equipment installed by the
Township may be used within the Skate Park Facility.
E. Safety Equipment. The following safety equipment is required when
using the Skate Park Facility:
(1) Helmets; and
(2) Knee Pads; and
(3) Elbow Pads; and
(4) Wrist Guards.
The above equipment must be worn at all times. Failure to wear
said equipment shall be cause for immediate eviction from the
Skate Park Facility.
F. Signage. A sign will be posted at the Skate Park Facility entrance
specifying the aforementioned rules and regulations and such other
pertinent information as may deem appropriate.
A. Area designated. The premises commonly known as the "Dallenbach
Lakes," situated on Dunhams Corner Road in the Township of East
Brunswick is designated as the East Brunswick Community Beach. The
bathing area shall be operated by the Township as a municipal
swimming beach utility. [Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
B. Permit required. No person shall use the municipal bathing area for any
purpose without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Director.
[Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
C. Term of permit; Fees. The fees for the use of the swimming facilities are
governed by Chapter 3, § 3-59. [Amended 9-12-77 by Ord. No.
77-142-D; 2-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-115; 2-23-81 by Ord. No.
81-327; 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-404; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
§ 158-6.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-8
1:516
§ 158-8. Regulation of activities. [Amended 10-15-91 by Ord. No.
91-99; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
No person in a park shall engage in any of the following activities:
A. Intoxicating beverages. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27]
(1) Prohibition. Sell alcoholic beverages at any time in the park.
(2) Exceptions. At certain specifically designated recreation centers
where meals or lunches are served under concession privileges, the
sale of alcoholic beverages by such concessionaire will be
permitted under the strict regulation and control of the Director of
Parks. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made only in individual
drinks (not in original packages or otherwise in bulk) and shall be
served for consumption on the immediate premises of the
concession, said sales to be duly licensed pursuant to law.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637; 10-15-91 by Ord. No. 91-99; 7-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
(3) Drunkenness. Have entered under or be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
(4) Consumption of intoxicating liquor prohibited; exception. No
person in a park shall consume or possess intoxicating and
alcoholic beverages except by written permission of the Director of
Parks. [Added 8-22-77 by Ord. No. 77-142-C; 5-13-85 by Ord.
No. 85-637; amended 10-15-91 by Ord. No. 91-99; 7-26-99 by
Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
B. Fireworks and explosives. Brought or have in his possession or set off or
otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any sparkling devices
or novelties, firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or
explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them
into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that
in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. [Amended 11-13-17
by Ord. No. 17-35]
C. Domestic animals. No person in a park shall engage in any of the
following activities: [Amended 9-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-387]
(1) Fail to clean up and properly dispose of defecation left by a dog
under the control or ownership of such person.
(2) Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic
animal into areas other than the automobile parking concourses
and walks immediately adjacent thereto and into such other areas
as may be clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic
Animals Permitted in This Area." Nothing herein shall be construed
§ 158-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-8
1:517
§ 158-9. Regulation of commercial activities and signs.
No person in a park shall engage in any of the following activities:
as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas
where such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times
on adequate leashes not greater than ten (10) feet in length.
D. Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter
or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof
which may be reserved and designated by the Board for the use of the
opposite sex. Exception is made for children under six (6) years of age.
E. Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the Director of Parks. No
person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material
within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-06]
F. Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public"; nor shall
any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
G. Games of chance. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
H. Going onto ice. Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas
as are designated as skating fields, and provided that a safety signal is
displayed.
I. Loitering and boisterousness. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats
or benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
J. Exhibit permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
Director he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance
with any ordinance or rule. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
K. Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with
any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity
under the authority of a permit.
L. Use of drugs and other Controlled Dangerous Substances. No person in
a park shall possess, use, sell or distribute marijuana or any drug or pill
or other item which is a controlled dangerous substance, as defined by
Title 2C of New Jersey Statutes. [Added 9-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-387;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
§ 158-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-9
1:518
§ 158-10. Park operation policy. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
A. Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing; nor
shall be station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is
hereby made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and
under the authority and regulation of the Director. [Amended 6-28-76
by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
B. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire.
C. Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever; nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain users, as the Director shall find
reasonably necessary. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-637]
C. Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by Park Rangers or
Park Attendants shall be reported to the Director of Parks and Public
Works who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The
Director of Parks shall make every reasonable effort to find articles
reported as lost. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85
by Ord. No. 85-673; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord.
No. 15-06]
D. Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Director of Parks before
participating in park activities designated by the Director of Parks.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
(1) Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the Director. The application shall state:
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-673]
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
§ 158-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-10
1:519
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(e) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(f) Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a permit
hereunder when he finds: [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-142-A; 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-673]
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park.
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
(c) That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated
to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by
the Township.
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
at the day and hour required in the application.
(3) Appeal. Within two (2) days after receipt of an application, the
Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for
refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal in writing within two (2) days to the Township Council,
which shall consider the application under the standards set forth
in Subsection D(2) hereof and sustain or overrule the decision of
the Director within seven (7) days. The decision of the Township
Council shall be final. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-673]
(4) Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same
were inserted in said permits.
(5) Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or
persons to whom such permit shall have been issued.
(6) Revocation. The Director shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon
§ 158-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-10
1:520
§ 158-11. Enforcement. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-673; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by
Ord. No. 15-06]
good cause shown. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-142-A;
5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-673]
A. Officials. The Director of Parks, Park Rangers, Parks Foreman and
designated Department of Parks employees shall, in connection with
their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No.
15-06]
B. Ejectment. The Director of Parks, Park Rangers and designated
Department of Parks employees shall have the authority to eject from
the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. [Amended
7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
C. Seizure of property. The Director of Parks, Park Rangers and
designated Department of Parks employees shall have the authority to
seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used,
in violation of this chapter. [Amended 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27;
4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
D. Issuances of summons. The Director of Parks, Parks Foreman, Park
Rangers and designated employees of the Department of Parks shall
have the authority to issue summonses before the Municipal Court to
any persons acting in violation of this chapter. [Amended 7-26-99 by
Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-06]
E. Park Rangers as wildlife protectors. The Director of Parks and all Park
Rangers are designated protectors of all wildlife in parks and public
lands. The role and duties of Park Rangers as wildlife protectors will be
to: [Added 10-12-77 by Ord. No. 77-142-E; amended 5-13-85 by
Ord. No. 85-637; 7-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-27; 4-13-15 by Ord. No.
15-06]
(1) Enforce the hunting ban in East Brunswick parks and public lands.
(2) Cooperate with and assist the animal control officer with the
control and/or preservation of wildlife on private property in the
Township.
(3) Cooperate with state wildlife officers in promoting wildlife
conservation programs in the Township.
(4) Cooperate with and assist state wildlife officers in stocking fish in
Township waters and tributaries.
(5) Assist in wildlife related programs conducted by the Township.
§ 158-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-12
1:521
§ 158-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-13-78 by Ord. No.
78-302]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. Each day such violations are
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 158-12A. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-11-01 by Ord. No.
01-19; amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
The following fines shall be charged for violations of rules and regulations
governing the use of parks, public lands, school property and indoor public
places.
Title Fine 2nd Offense
Intoxicants/Alcoholic
Beverages
Alcohol permit required
$100.00 $200.00
Group Use/Meeting/
Exhibitions
Group Permits/Supervision of
Minors
$50.00 $100.00
Meetings, Exhibitions $70.00 $150.00
Amplified Music $50.00 $100.00
Pets/Horses
Dogs/Cats; unleashed, fecal
matter
$50.00 $100.00
Horses; unbridled, improperly
hitched
$50.00 $100.00
Refuse
Improperly disposing $100.00 $200.00
Natural Features/Wildlife
Harm to Natural Features $50.00 $100.00
Feeding Wildlife $50.00 $100.00
Fires/Fireworks
Fires $50.00 $100.00
Fireworks/Explosives $50.00 $100.00
Hunting/Fishing
Firearms/Weapons $50.00 $100.00
Hunting $50.00 $100.00
§ 158-12 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-12A
1:522
Title Fine 2nd Offense
Restricted Uses and Areas
Park Use $50.00 $100.00
Carnival Rides $50.00 $100.00
Game and Area Permits $50.00 $100.00
Swimming $50.00 $100.00
Boating $50.00 $100.00
Ice Skating $50.00 $100.00
Flying Objects $50.00 $100.00
Aims and Contributions $50.00 $100.00
Commercial Uses
Vending $100.00 $200.00
Advertising $50.00 $100.00
Gambling $25.00 $ 50.00
Vehicles/Parking
All provisions of Title 39 $50.00 $100.00
Restricted Traffic $50.00 $100.00
Speeding $50.00 $100.00
Obeying Rangers $100.00 $200.00
Careless Driving $75.00 $150.00
Vehicle Parking $50.00 $100.00
Obstruction of Travel $50.00 $100.00
Commercial Vehicles on Park
Property
$50.00 $100.00
Demonstrating and Instructing $50.00 $100.00
Hitch-hiking $50.00 $100.00
Washing Cars $50.00 $100.00
Towing or Projecting Load $50.00 $100.00
Disorderly Persons
Loitering $50.00 $100.00
Resisting, Impersonating,
Interfering
$50.00 $100.00
Harassment $50.00 $100.00
Indecent Exposure $50.00 $100.00
Hours of Operation
§ 158-12A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-12A
1:523
Title Fine 2nd Offense
Opening, Closing, After Park
Hours
$50.00 $100.00
Each day such violations are committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 158-13. Public lands. [Added 11-13-78 by Ord. No. 78-97]
§ 158-13.1. Smoking prohibited on all public land. [Added 3-18-13
by Ord. No. 13-10]
Smoking shall be prohibited on all public land, except in areas specifically
designated by the Township and suitably equipped for that purpose. For
purposes of this section only, public streets and highways as defined in Title
39 of New Jersey's Revised Statutes, including any sidewalks abutting same,
shall not be considered public land.
§ 158-14. Naming and memorializing of parks, public buildings and
lands. [Added 2-13-90 by Ord. No. 90-5; amended 10-25-93 by Ord.
No. 93-60; 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-79]
A. Restrictions. Public lands designated by the Township Council or
otherwise dedicated or restricted pursuant to law and pursuant to the
Recreation and Parks Master Plan as parks and play areas may not be
sold.
B. Reservations, natural easements and trails. Other public lands
designated by the Superintendent of Public Lands or his or her
successor as reservations, natural easements and trails may not be sold
unless the Township Council shall have made a determination that such
lands are not needed for public use, nor may they be converted for
other public uses without the adoption of a resolution of approval by the
Township Planning Board and the Township Council.
C. Undesignated open space. Public lands designated as undesignated
open space may not be sold or converted for other uses without the
written approval of the Township Council.
D. Public purpose areas. Public lands designated as public purpose areas
may not be converted for other public uses without the written approval
of the Superintendent of Public Lands and the Township Administrator.
E. Conversion of undesignated open space. Public lands designated as
undesignated open space may be used or converted for any reasonable
public use as determined by the Superintendent of Public Lands.
F. Conversion of lands to reservations. Portions of any park area, public
purpose area, natural easement or trail area or undesignated open
space area may be designated as a reservation by the Superintendent of
Public Lands.
§ 158-12A EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-14
1:524
§ 158-15. Drug Free School Zone maps. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No.
09-09]
In accordance with and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L.
1988, c. 44 and P.L. 1997, c. 181, the Drug-Free School Zone Maps,
consisting of one sheet, prepared by Gregory Potkulski, PE, Manager of
Engineering Services, dated March 17, 2009, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and boundaries of
the areas within the Township of East Brunswick on or within 1,000 feet of
any property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board.
§ 158-16. Maps to Continue in Effect. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No.
09-09]
The Drug-Free School Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 158-15 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the
location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which
is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article shall be
amended to approve amended Drug-Free School Zone Maps to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of school
property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 158-17. Notification of changes in school property. [Added 4-6-09
by Ord. No. 09-09]
The School Board or the Chief Administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial elementary or secondary school is hereby directed
and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Township
A. The Township Council has determined that it is in the best interest of
the residents of the community to establish a procedure for the naming
of public parks, buildings, and places and to establish recognition for
officials involved in acquisition, construction and dedication of these
facilities.
B. No park, public building or portion thereof, lands or place shall be
named after any living individual. [Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No.
93-79]
C. The name of any park or public lands shall include words which will
denote a general geographic area, where possible, in which it is located
within the Township. The name shall be established by ordinance
passed by Council.
D. Any plaque commemorating the park, public lands, or public facility, if it
includes names of mayors or members of Council shall include, at a
minimum, the names of all mayors and Council members who were
involved in the project from initial formal action by Council through the
completion of the acquisition or development at time of dedication.
§ 158-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-17
1:525
Engineer and the Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated
changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used
for school purposes.
§ 158-18. Copies of maps on file. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file as an
official record the original of the Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and
adopted pursuant to § 158-15 of this article and to provide at a reasonable
cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from
time to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such
copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept
on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of each such map
and of the ordinance enacting this article shall be provided without cost
to the Middlesex County Clerk and to the Office of the Middlesex County
Prosecutor.
§ 158-19. Additional provisions. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. The maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 158-15 of this article
were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions
arising under the criminal laws of this state, and, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7, these maps shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township of East Brunswick
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That each such school property is and continues to be used for
school purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of each such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the maps approved and adopted herein
as school property was owned by or leased to an elementary or
secondary school or school board and was being used for school
purposes as of March 17, 2009.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L. 1988,
c. 44 and P.L. 1997, c. 181, a prosecutor is not precluded from
introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to
establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute, including use
of a map or diagram other than the ones approved and adopted
pursuant to § 158-15 of this article. The failure of any map approved
§ 158-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-19
1:526
§ 158-20. Drug Free Public Park and Public Building Zone map.
[Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997 c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1) as amended by P.L. 1988, c. 44 and P.L. 1997, c. 181, the
Drug-Free Public Park and Public Building Zone Map prepared by Gregory
Potkulski, PE, Manager of Engineering Services, dated March 17, 2009,
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the Township of East Brunswick of property which
is utilized as public parks and public buildings, owned, leased or controlled
by the Township of East Brunswick, and of the areas on or within 500 feet
of said properties.
§ 158-21. Map to continue in effect. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No.
09-09]
The Drug-Free Public Park and Public Building Zone Map approved and
adopted pursuant to § 158-20 of this article shall continue to constitute
an official finding and record of the location and boundaries of areas on
or within 500 feet of the real estate comprising public parks and public
buildings owned, leased or controlled by the Township of East Brunswick
until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of the
public housing facilities, public parks and/or public buildings and drug-free
public areas within the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 158-22. Copies of map on file. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
The Township Clerk is directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the Drug Free Public Park & Public Building Zone Map approved and
adopted pursuant to § 158-20 of this article and to provide at reasonable
cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time
to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a
true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is
hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this article shall
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is,
in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to an elementary or secondary school or school
board or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L.
1988, c. 44 and P.L. 1997, c. 181, concerning the preparation, approval
and adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Maps have been complied with.
§ 158-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-22
1:527
be provided without cost to the Middlesex County Clerk and the office of the
Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 158-23. Additional provisions. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
The following matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 158-20 of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as
evidence in prosecution arising under the criminal laws of the State of
New Jersey, and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public parks and public buildings owned, leased or
controlled by the Township of East Brunswick.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is utilized in connection
with public parks and public buildings owned, leased or controlled
by the Township of East Brunswick.
(3) That such property continues to be used as public parks and/or
public buildings.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public parks and public buildings.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved map,
all of the property depicted on the map as drug-free public park and
drug-free public building area was owned, leased or controlled by the
Township of East Brunswick and was being used for public parks and/or
public buildings as of March 17, 2009.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 159-20 of this article. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for public parks and/or public buildings
and which is owned, leased or controlled by the Township of East
Brunswick, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any change in the location and
boundaries of such property which has not yet been incorporated into a
revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and
record that such property is not owned or leased by the Township of
East Brunswick or that such property is not used for public parks or
public buildings.
D. All of the requirements of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1)
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free public
area map have been complied with.
§ 158-22 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-24
1:528
§ 158-24. Severability. [Added 4-6-09 by Ord. No. 09-09]
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, phrase or sentence of this
article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, said article, section, subsection, paragraph, phrase
or sentence shall be deemed separable and shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 161
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 158-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-24
1:529

ARTICLE I
Peering into Windows
[Adopted 1-25-71 as Ord. No. 71-95-B]
§ 161-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall surreptitiously or sneakingly invade the privacy of another
by peering into the windows or other openings of private dwelling places;
and, in addition thereto, no person shall surreptitiously or sneakingly invade
the privacy of another by peering into the windows or other openings of
private or public facilities made available to an individual or the general
public as lavatory facilities or dressing rooms for no lawful purpose.
§ 161-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-1
1:531

ARTICLE II
Dangerous or Annoying Activities
[Adopted 5-8-51]
§ 161-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall engage in any sport, game or other activity which
endangers, frightens or annoys persons in any public place.
§ 161-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:533

ARTICLE III
Unlawful Activities in Commercial Establishments
[Added 10-19-09 by Ord. No. 09-24]
§ 161-3. Prohibited Acts.
No person shall act in a manner that violates the law inside of a store,
business or other commercial establishment or in the immediate vicinity of
a store, business or other commercial establishment.
§ 161-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-3
1:535
Chapter 163
POLICE DOGS
§ 163-1. Rules and Regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture,
torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used
by the Police Department of the Township of East Brunswick in the
performance of the functions or duties of such Department or to interfere
with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said Department or
any member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of
said Department or of any officer or member of said Department.
§ 163-2. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both,
at the discretion of the Municipal Judge of the Township of East Brunswick.
Chapter 165
PUBLIC PROPERTY, TRESPASSING
§ 165-1. Public Property, Trespassing.
No person shall trespass on or in any buildings or structures owned by
the Township of East Brunswick except at such times as such buildings or
structures are open to the public. Specifically, but not by way of limitation,
no one shall trespass on the roof of any building or structure owned by
the Township of East Brunswick unless such person shall have received
written authorization to do so from the East Brunswick Township Business
Administrator. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Section 1-15 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick.
Chapter 166
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 166-1. Adoption by reference of the New Jersey State Housing
Code. [Amended 6-12-17 by Ord. No. 17-25]
The New Jersey State Housing Code, as amended and supplemented from
time to time, is hereby adopted in the Township of East Brunswick for the
control of all residential and nonresidential structures and premises, and
each of the regulations and provisions of the above referenced New Jersey
§ 161-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-1
1:536
Housing Code are hereby adopted and made a part of the Code of the
Township of East Brunswick as if fully set forth herein.
§ 166-2. Public Record. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10;
6-12-17 by Ord. No. 17-25]
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file
in the Office of the Township Clerk and shall remain on file in such office for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 166-3. Deleted 6-12-17 by Ord. No. 17-25.
§ 166-3.1. Summons. [Amended 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-56; 5-26-92
y Ord. No. 92-17; 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10; 12-10-18 by Ord. No.
18-33]
A. Enforcement. The Property Maintenance Code of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be administered by the Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer, and/or his/her designee within the East Brunswick Department
of Planning & Engineering.
B. Notice Required for Certain Issues. If the Zoning and Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her designee is made aware of an unsafe
structure, hazard, nuisance, or other issue of the type that is not
defined with specificity within the code, the offending property owner
shall be made aware of the unsafe structure, hazard, nuisance, or other
issue by written notice. Such notice shall be served either in person, or
by certified mail, return receipt requested to the address of the
offending property owner.
C. Requirements of Notice. In all situations in which written notice shall
be made to address property maintenance issues present upon a
property within the Township, such notice shall be made being sure to
include the following:
(1) In writing, signed by the Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer or
his/her designee.
(2) Identifying with specificity the offending condition present upon
the property.
(3) An opportunity to cure within a reasonable amount of time
specified with certainty.
(4) Photographic or other visual evidence supporting the allegation
that the offending condition is present upon the property.
(5) Information that failure to cure within the specified time may lead
to issuance of a summons as well as all other remedies available to
the Township under law.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-3.1
1:537
§ 166-4. Buildings. [Deleted 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
§ 166-5. Application for Search Warrant. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord.
No. 99-10]
In addition to any other remedies which may be available, the Director
of Public Safety or his representative, upon affidavit, may apply to the
East Brunswick Municipal Court Judge for a search warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this ordinance exists on
the premises, and, if the Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the
affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist.
§ 166-6. Responsibility of Owners and Operators. [Amended 2-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-10]
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this Code, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge or
violation thereof, by reason of the fact that another person or entity is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 166-7. Unsafe Structures. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a nature
as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without
delay, the Zoning & Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee, may
order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation or condition
D. Summonses. Summonses for violation of this code shall be signed by
the Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee within
the East Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering. The
summons shall make specific reference to the code provision being
violated and details of the offending condition.
(1) Specific Violations. For any violation that is specifically defined
within the code, the property owner shall be in violation of that
provision, which the summons shall reference.
(2) All other violations. For all other issues that can only be generally
identified in the code due to the various forms such violations might
take, that property owner shall be in violation of this provision if
that owner fails to cure a hazard or nuisance within the specified
time as delineated in the Notice required under section
166.3.1(c)(iii).
E. Emergency Exception. Prior written notice shall not be necessary in any
situation that rises to the level of an emergency or imminent hazard to
public safety or welfare if left unmitigated or unresolved.
§ 166-3.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-7
1:538
within the period of time consistent with the hazard involved and with the
necessary measures necessary to remove the hazard; and, upon the failure
of the operator, owner or occupant to correct said condition, the Zoning &
Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee, may abate said condition.
§ 166-8. Lien to Recover Costs. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-10; 1-23-17 by Ord. 17-02]
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein or correction of a defect
on the premises or the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition to
conform to applicable ordinances of the Township of East Brunswick or the
laws of the State of New Jersey requires expenditures of the Township of
East Brunswick of moneys therefor, the Zoning & Code Enforcement Officer
or his/her designee, shall present a report of the work accomplished to the
governing body of the Township of East Brunswick along with a summary of
the proceedings undertaken to secure compliance including notices served
upon owners, operators, occupants or their agents, as the case may be,
by certified mail. The governing body shall then approve the expenses,
administrative fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) and costs, whereupon they
shall become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A
copy of the resolution approving the said expenses shall be certified by the
Township Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Township of East
Brunswick, who shall be responsible for the collection thereof; and a copy
of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner.
§ 166-9. Removal of Hazards and Nuisances. [Amended 2-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-10]
The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of all nuisances and any
hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing
the premises and free of unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing
shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall
be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards
which include, but are not limited to the following:
A. Rubbish. Broken glass, filth, garbage, trash, litter and debris.
[Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
B. Natural growth, brush, weeds, ragweeds, stumps, roots, and obnoxious
growths; or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or
deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitutes a hazard to
persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed
to prevent such conditions. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
C. Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice
and snow which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
D. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions, ice, uncleared snow and excretion of
§ 166-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-9
1:539
§ 166-10. Maintenance of Landscaping. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord.
No. 99-10]
Premises shall be kept in such a manner that lawns, hedges and bushes
shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown.
§ 166-11. Additional Requirements for Commercial Shopping Areas.
[Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
The owner and operator of every commercial area containing wholesale,
retail, restaurant or service establishments shall be responsible for
providing and/or maintaining the following:
pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots,
parking areas and other parts of the premises which are accessible to
and used by persons on the premises. All such holes and excavations
shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps repaired and other
conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions, with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be
the responsibility of owners and operators to take reasonable steps to
discover any such hazards or unsanitary conditions which may exist on
their premises. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
E. Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall
be maintained to eliminate any recurrent or excessive accumulation of
stormwater. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
F. Sources of infestation.
A. Turf grass and weeds shall not exceed more than 10 inches in height or
more than 10 inches in length if matted down over twenty five percent
of the grassed area on the subject property. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord.
No. 99-10]
B. Shrubs and Trees must be trimmed to eliminate impaired vision of
pedestrians on the sidewalks or of vehicular traffic and to avoid
impeding pedestrian movement. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
C. Heavily wooded properties may be maintained in a natural state.
[Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
A. The striping of parking spaces and directional arrows shall be
maintained on a regular basis in accordance with applicable Fire and
Traffic Safety regulations. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
B. A trash basket with at least a twenty gallon capacity shall be provided
for each one hundred fifty (150) feet of commercial frontage. These
baskets shall be placed in the walking or pedestrian area and shall be
provided with tight-fitting covers fitted with hinged doors. In no case
shall there be less than one (1) basket provided. [Amended 2-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-10]
§ 166-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-11
1:540
§ 166-12. Overcrowding. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
Section PM-405.5 If any room used for residential purposes is overcrowded,
the code official may order the number of persons sleeping or living in
said room to be reduced so that there shall be not less than the total
area required in Table PM-405.5 MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA
REQUIREMENTS.
TABLE PM-405.5
MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA REQUIREMENTS
MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA IN SQUARE FEET
SPACE 1-2 OCCUPANTS
3-5
OCCUPANTS 6 OR MORE
Living Room No requirements 145 175
Dining Room No requirements 100 120
Kitchen 50 70 85
Bedrooms MUST COMPLY
WITH SECTION
PM-405.3
§ 166-13. Maintenance of Lighting in Commercial Parking Areas.
[Added 12-26-89 by Ord. No. 89-87; amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-10]
The lighting in all commercial parking areas shall be maintained and
replaced immediately on an on-going basis. The owners and tenants of
commercial uses shall be responsible for the replacement of poles,
stanchions, bulbs, starters, ballasts and whatever else may be necessary to
keep all commercial parking areas fully lighted for the health, safety and
welfare of pedestrian and drivers, in conformance with site plan approval.
§ 166-14. Outside Storage - Commercial Properties [Added 2-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-10]
Outside storage restricted. Outside storage or display of merchandise shall
be forbidden in front of any commercial premises, on the pedestrian or
walkway area or in the parking area in front of the commercial premises.
Outside storage at the sides and rear shall be subject to the terms of
Planning or Zoning Board approval. Sidewalk sale or special event permits
C. Fencing between non residential and residential areas shall not be
removed and shall be maintained in good repair. [Added 2-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-10]
D. All conditions of site plan approval issued pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
§ 166-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-14
1:541
are required for outside display and sales of merchandise or other
materials.
§ 166-15. Outside Storage - Residential Properties. [Added 2-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-10]
A. Useful items must be stored within a fully enclosed structure (such as a
home, garage or shed) or screened from view from any adjacent
property by a wall or fence within the rear yard area.
B. Storage of useful items shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of
the rear yard.
C. Items must be stored in a such a manner as to discourage harborage of
rodents, insects and other pests.
D. Items Exempt from Screening Requirement
Firewood
Bar-B-Que grills
Bicycles
Children's toys
Garden hoses and sprinklers
Lawn ornaments:
Statues
Whirligigs
Flamingos
Birdbaths, etc.
E. Items That Require Screening include but are not limited to:
Lawn and garden equipment:
Garden tools
Lawn mowers
Wheelbarrows
Tools
Ladders
Saw Horses
Vehicle parts
Building material:
§ 166-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-15
1:542
§ 166-16. Definitions. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
All definitions in Chapter 132 and Chapter 228, Zoning shall also apply to
this Chapter.
USEFUL ITEMS — Household objects which may have a use now or in the
future. These items may include, but are not limited to: barrels, ladders,
carts, lawn mowers or other lawn and garden equipment, tires and
appliances.
UNIMPROVED LAND — Land in its natural state before development.
§ 166-17. Sidewalk/Parking Lot Sales. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-10; amended 6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-13]
§ 166-17.1. Permit Required. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10;
amended 6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-13]
No person shall engage in an outdoor sidewalk/parking lot sale event
without having first obtained a permit from the Director of Planning and
Engineering or his/her designee and which shall be prominently displayed
at the permitted premises.
Cement blocks
Lumber
Plywood, etc.
Storm windows and awnings
Dirt, sand and gravel (limit of 30 days)
F. All items should be stored behind the front building line.
G. Outside Storage - Residential Properties
Parking/Storage
Vehicles
1. Any motor vehicle must be parked on a parking area, such as a
driveway, or in a garage or carport. Vehicles are not to be parked
on the grass or in any area intended for landscaping.
2. An exception to this rule is recreational vehicles which may be
stored in the side or rear yard.
A boat, trailer, RV, or camper can be stored in either the side yard
or the rear yard of a residential area. It must be located behind the
front of the residence and in the yard adjacent to a street in the
case of a corner lot.
3. Parking of inoperable vehicles and/or vehicles that are not legally
licensed shall be regulated by Chapter 206, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 166-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-17.2
1:543
§ 166-17.2. Fee. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10; amended
6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-13]
The fee for a Sidewalk/Parking Lot Permit shall be $50.00 per each two
week period.
§ 166-17.3. Location of Sale. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10;
amended 6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-13]
The applicant shall present the Director of Planning and Engineering or his/
her designee with written permission from the property owner authorizing
the sale. The application shall set forth the proposed method of clean
up, a proposed layout of the outdoor display and sales area, the location,
intensity and direction of all outdoor lighting and a plan for parking and
traffic safety. Accompanying the application shall be a certificate of liability
insurance for the protection of the general public. The Director of Planning
and Engineering or his/her designee shall determine lighting, buffering
to protect nearby residences, and proper siting on a particular piece of
property and shall forward the application to the Director of Public Safety,
who shall determine the adequacy of parking and traffic safety, ingress and
egress and fire protection standards. If the application complies with the
determinations made by the Director of Public Safety and the Director of
Planning and Engineering or his/her designee, the Director of Planning and
Engineering or his/her designee shall issue the permit.
§ 166-17.4. Use of the Premises. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
If the applicant proposes to locate a tent on a premises, it may be utilized
only as a sales area and may not be occupied as living space. The use of a
tent will require approval of the Fire Official. No hook-up to water or sewer
is permitted. The applicant shall obtain an electrical permit if lighting is
needed. Signs shall be unilluminated and can be no greater than 15 square
feet in area. Signs must be placed at least 10 feet from the right-of-way. A
maximum of 3 signs is permitted on the premises. No separate sign permit
is required.
§ 166-17.5. Duration of Sale. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10;
amended 6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-13]
Each business operating in a separate location may obtain a Sidewalk/
Parking Lot Sale Permit for a maximum of ten (10) weeks per calendar year.
§ 166-17.6. Definitions. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-10]
a. SIDEWALK/PARKING LOT SALE — A promotional sales event
conducted by one or more businesses which is held outside the confines
of the commercial or manufacturing structures in which such business
is normally conducted and which sale involves the outdoor display of
merchandise which is normally displayed within the structures within a
paved or concrete area on the same lot as the structures. Sale events
§ 166-17.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-17.6
1:544
§ 166-18. Notice of Decision; Appeals. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-10]
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to preclude any interested
party from filing a complaint in Municipal Court, if the interested party is
dissatisfied with a written decision of the Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer
and/or his/her designee as it relates to the issuance of a summons. All such
complaints must be filed within 20 days of the interested party's receipt of
the Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer's and/or his/her designee's notice of
decision.
§ 166-19. Maintenance of vacant properties, structures, registration
requirements and fees. [Added 10-8-18 by Ord. No. 18-23]
§ 166-19.1. Definitions.
OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provisions of, or any other entity determined by the Township
of East Brunswick to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Shall mean any building or structure intended for or
having an existing commercial, industrial, mixed-use, single or multifamily
residential use, and which is not legally occupied or at which substantially
all lawful commercial, business, construction operations or residential
occupancy has ceased, or said structure is in such condition that it cannot
legally be occupied without repair, renovation, or rehabilitation; provided,
however, that any property that contains all building systems or components
in working order and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental, shall not be deemed vacant. Property determined to be "abandoned
property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., which shall include
commercial, industrial, single or multifamily, or mixed-use residential
structures are deemed to be vacant property for the purposes of this
section. However, the owner or owner's agent shall maintain and secure the
property even if the property, building, or structure has been placed for sale
or rental until such time as the property, building, or structure is sold or
rented and occupied.
§ 166-19.2. General requirements.
shall be conducted solely on private property and not encroach within
public rights-of-way.
b. OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES AREA — An area set aside outside of a
building or structure, used in conjunction with a business located
within the building or structure on the same property, for exhibiting in
an orderly manner finished products sold by a business located on the
same property.
§ 166-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-19.2
1:545
§ 166-19.3. Registration statement requirements; property
inspection.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner of any vacant property or structure shall provide access by the
Township's agent or representative to conduct an exterior inspection of
the building to determine compliance with the Municipal Code, following
reasonable notice, during the period covered by the initial registration or
any subsequent renewal.
A. Effective January 1, 2019, the owner of any vacant property or structure
as defined herein shall within sixty (60) days after the building or
structure becomes vacant property or within thirty (30) days after
assuming ownership of the vacant property or structure, whichever is
later, file a registration statement for said vacant property or structure
with the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by the Township
of East Brunswick for such purposes. The registration shall remain in
effect for a calendar year (January to December). The owner shall be
required to renew the registration annually due in January 1 as long as
the building or structure remains vacant property and shall pay a
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in subsection
166-19.4 of this section for said vacant property registered.
B. Any owner of any building that meets the definition of vacant property
prior to January 1, 2018, shall file a registration statement for that
property on or before March 1, 2019. The registration statement shall
include the information required under the appropriate subsection of
this section as well as any additional information that the Township may
reasonably require.
C. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer or any other
designated Township representative within thirty (30) days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Township for such purpose.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed an official record and
business record in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court
proceeding instituted by the Township of East Brunswick against the
owner, owners, or other responsible parties responsible for the building
or structure.
Editor's Note: Registration form located at the end of Section 166-19.
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process, in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the State of
New Jersey. The statement shall also include the name of the person
§ 166-19.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-19.3
1:546
§ 166-19.4. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be five hundred ($500.00)
dollars. The fee for the first renewal is one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars,
and the fee for the second renewal is one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars. The fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is
two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
Vacant Property/Building Registration Fee Schedule
Initial registration $500.00
First renewal $1,000.00
Second renewal $1,500.00
Any subsequent renewal $2,000.00
§ 166-19.5. Requirements for owners of vacant property.
The owner, owners, or the authorized agent of any building that has become
or is a vacant property, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting
rent for any such building that has become vacant shall, within thirty (30)
days. Shall enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry
(until the building is legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete) as provided in the applicable
provisions of the State of New Jersey and the Township of East Brunswick,
or as set forth in rules and regulations adopted by the Township of East
Brunswick to supplement those codes.
responsible for the maintenance and security of the property, if
different.
B. An owner who is a person who meets the requirements of this section as
to location of residence or office may designate him or herself as agent.
C. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
the owner or designated agent consents to receive any and all notices of
code violations concerning the registered vacant property and all
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
registered building by service of the notice or process on the authorized
agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized agent under the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the continuation
of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section until the
owner notifies the Township's agent or representative of a change of
authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual registration
statement. The designation of an authorized agent in no way releases
the owner from any requirement of this section.
§ 166-19.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-19.6
1:547
§ 166-19.6. Administration.
The Township of East Brunswick may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this section, as it deems necessary.
§ 166-19.7. Violations and penalties.
Editor's Note: The Registration Form for Abandoned/Vacant
Commercial or Residential Properties is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
Chapter 168
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 168-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. a local
redevelopment agency is hereby created and shall be known as the "East
Brunswick Redevelopment Agency".
§ 168-2. Membership, Terms, Vacancies
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this Section 166-19 or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be in addition to the payment of the
prescribed licensing fee subject to a fine of not less than two hundred
($200.00) dollars and not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
for each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this section shall be
recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the property and all
such legal fees associated with any reasonable cost recoverable from
the owner as well.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of subsection 166-19.2
through and including subsection 166-19.5 of this section, or such other
matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
Township of East Brunswick shall be deemed to be violations of this
section.
C. Nothing in this section is intended to nor shall be read to conflict or
prevent the Township of East Brunswick from taking action against
owners of buildings or structures found to be unfit for human habitation
or are unsafe structures as provided in applicable provision of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick, including but not limited to
provisions of the State or Township Building or Property Maintenance
Codes. Further, any action taken under any such code provision other
than the demolition of a structure shall relieve an owner from its
obligations under this section.
§ 166-19.6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 168-2
1:548
§ 168-3. Designation of Chairperson
The Redevelopment Agency shall select a chairman and a vice chairman
among the commissioners and shall employ an executive director who shall
be its secretary.
§ 168-4. Rules; quorum
§ 168-5. Interest in Project
A. The Redevelopment Agency shall consist of seven (7) commissioners
and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
Council.
B. Two (2) representatives from the Township Council will serve as a
Commissioner for a term of one year.
C. All original appointments to the Redevelopment Agency and all
subsequent appointments shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11. All future appointments shall be
for terms of five (5) years.
D. No more than two (2) commissioners shall be officers or employees of
the Township.
E. Any vacancy occurring in the office of commissioner, from any cause,
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but for
the unexpired term.
F. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of each
commissioner shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
G. A commissioner shall receive no compensation for his services, but shall
be entitled, upon receipt of prior approval of the governing body, to
reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the
discharge of the duties of commissioner, including traveling expenses.
H. All commissioners shall, within 18 months of appointment, complete the
two (2) mandatory courses for redevelopment agency commissioners:
Ethics and Principals of Redevelopment both offered on a regular basis
from Rutgers University, Center for Government Services.
A. The Redevelopment Agency shall have the power to establish bylaws
and rules for the conduct of its meetings.
B. Four (4) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting business and exercising powers and all other purposes.
C. Action may be taken by the Agency upon the affirmative vote of the
majority, but not less than four (4) of the commissioners present, unless
in any case the bylaws of the agency shall required a larger number.
§ 168-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:549
§ 168-6. Removal of Commissioner
For inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a commissioner
may be removed by the Township. A commissioner may be removed only
after he has been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days prior to
a hearing and has had the opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel.
In the event of the removal of a commissioner, a record of the proceedings,
together with the charges and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of
the Township Clerk.
§ 168-7. Executive Director
§ 168-8. Powers
A. No commissioner or employee of the Redevelopment Agency shall
acquire an interest, direct or indirect, in a redevelopment project or in
any property included or planned to be included in a project. No
commissioner or employee of the Redevelopment Agency shall have an
interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or proposed contract for
materials and services to be furnished or used in connection with the
project.
B. If any commissioner or employee of the Redevelopment Agency owns or
controls an interest, direct or indirect, in any property included or
planned to be included in a project, that individual shall immediately
disclose the same in writing to the Redevelopment Agency. The
disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the Agency.
C. Failure to disclose such an interest shall constitute misconduct in office.
D. A commissioner or employee required by this section to make a
disclosure shall not participate in any action by the agency affecting the
property with respect to which the disclosure is required.
A. The Redevelopment Agency shall employ an executive director who
shall have attained a degree from an accredited four year college or
university in public administration, social science or other appropriate
program, and shall have at least five (5) years' experience in public
administration, public finance, realty or similar professional
employment. A master's degree in an appropriate program may
substitute for two (2) years of that experience.
B. The executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioners
and may be relieved of his duties only after 120 days' notice. The
executive director shall assign and supervise employees in the
performance of their duties.
A. Upon the adoption of a redevelopment plan, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-7, the Redevelopment Agency may proceed with the
clearance, re-planning, development and redevelopment of the area
designated in that plan.
§ 168-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 168-8
1:550
§ 168-9. Professional Staff.
Chapter 169
RENT CONTROL
§ 169-1. Definitions. [Amended 4/4/05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
B. In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1
et seq. and the terms of the redevelopment plan, the Redevelopment
Agency may exercise the powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-8.
A. The Redevelopment Agency is required to comply with mandates of the
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. and all
requirements under Pay to Play Law, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4.
A. DWELLING — Includes any building or structure rented or offered for
rent to one (1) or more tenants or family units. Exempt from this
chapter are motels, hotels, and similar type buildings and buildings in
which up to one-third (1/3) of the occupied floor space is commercial.
Single and two-and-three-family units, as well as multi-family units are
included. Housing units newly constructed or rented for the first time
are exempted and the initial rent may be determined by the landlord.
All subsequent rents will be subject to provisions of this chapter.
B. AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by
the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of
New Jersey, County of Middlesex, and Township of East Brunswick,
whether occupied or unoccupied and actually offered for rent to
prospective tenants.
C. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — The Consumer Price Index for All Items
for New York/Northeast New Jersey for All Urban Consumers, as
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. [Amended 4-4-05 by Ord.
No. 05-05]
D. HARDSHIP — A situation wherein a landlord's net operating income
shall have decreased below a just and fair rate of return. A Just and Fair
Rate of Return Formula is set forth in Section 169-17 of this Ordinance.
E. GROSS RENTAL INCOME — The Total Rental Income derived by the
landlord from the rental of all rental units, which shall also include, but
not be limited to rents, garage rentals, commissions, vending machines,
laundromats, etc.
F. NET OPERATING INCOME — The difference between the gross rental
income and the necessary and reasonable operating expenses.
§ 168-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-1
1:551
§ 169-2. Establishment of Rent Leveling Board, Members,
Appointments, and Terms. [Amended 9-12-83 by Ord. No. 83-528;
4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of East
Brunswick. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Council. The membership of the Board shall consist of two (2) landlords
owning property in the Township of East Brunswick or their
G. OPERATING EXPENSES — Expenses incurred during the period which
were necessary for the efficient operation of a residential rental
property. The Rent Leveling Board will review these expenses to
determine the reasonableness under the circumstances. Debt service
costs, depreciation and amortization are excluded from necessary and
reasonable operating expenses.
H. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELIGIBLE FOR SURCHARGE — An
improvement, addition or alteration of housing space, plant or
equipment, not previously provided the affected dwelling, other than a
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or replacement of the housing
space, plant or equipment to its original condition, whether or not
mandated by law. The expenditure must be subject to an allowance for
depreciation under federal income tax provisions of more than one year,
or accelerated cost recovery system.
I. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX ENERGY ADJUSTMENT — A surcharge
which has been obtained by a landlord from a tenant based upon an
increase in energy costs prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Henceforth, there shall be no Consumer Price Index Energy
Adjustments for increases in energy costs.
J. SURCHARGES — Charges in addition to base rent, as specified by this
chapter, payable by the tenant to the landlord. Surcharges are not to be
considered part of the base rent when calculating percentage increases
based on the Consumer Price index.
K. BASE RENT — The rent paid upon initial occupancy plus any
percentage increases based on the Consumer Price Index as specified
in this chapter.
L. SERVICE OF NOTICE — Wherever a landlord is required to serve a
notice pursuant to this ordinance, service may be made either by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon an
individual 14 years of age or older who resides at the subject premises.
M. MULTIPLE DWELLING — Means any building or structure containing
four or more dwelling units, other than dwellings constructed for
occupancy by senior citizens and/or the disabled, rented or offered for
rent to 4 or more tenants or family units. [Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No.
88-922]
§ 169-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-2
1:552
representatives, two (2) tenants residing in the Township of East Brunswick,
and three (3) persons owning and occupying their homes in the Township
of East Brunswick. There shall also be three (3) alternate members, one of
whom shall be a landlord, one of whom shall be a tenant and one of whom
shall be a homeowner as defined above. The Mayor shall designate one of
the homeowners to serve as chairperson of the Board.
The alternate members of the Board are required to attend all meetings.
In the event a regular member does not attend a meeting, the alternate
member for that category shall have all of the powers of a regular member
for that meeting. Attendance by five (5) members or alternates shall
constitute a quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by
a majority of members present. Not more than one tenant member shall
reside in property owned by one of the landlord members, unless no other
tenants have indicated a willingness to serve, in which case more than one
such tenant may be appointed to the Board. The initial terms of office of the
Board members shall be one (1), two (2) or three (3) years to be designated
by the Mayor in making the appointment. The appointments shall be made
in such a manner so that the terms of approximately one-third (1/3) of the
members shall expire each year.
§ 169-3. Vacancies: Removal for Cause.
The Mayor may remove any members of the Board for cause on written
charges served upon the members and after a hearing thereon, at which
time the members shall be entitled to be heard either in person or by
Counsel. A vacancy on the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of
the term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 169-4. Rent Leveling Board Powers.
The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this Ordinance,
including but not limited to the following:
A. To prepare and forward to the Township Council of the Township of East
Brunswick such rules and regulations as it determines necessary to
implement the purposes of this Ordinance. Said rules and regulations,
however, shall not have the force and effect of law until they are
adopted by ordinance according to law, by the Township Council of the
Township of East Brunswick.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for an
increase in rental as hereinafter provided.
§ 169-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:553
§ 169-4.1. Meetings. [Added 4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
There shall be no official meeting dates. The Rent Leveling Board shall meet
on an ad hoc basis.
§ 169-4.2. Administrator. [Added 4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
The Housing Specialist of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby
authorized to serve as Administrator for the Rent Leveling Board. The
Administrator shall provide staff support to the Board. The Administrator
shall have all the powers granted to the Board, with the exception of those
powers in Section 169-4C and D above.
§ 169-5. Attorney. [Amended 4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
There is hereby created the office of Rent Leveling Board Attorney. The
Rent Leveling Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or
agree upon the rate of compensation of the Rent Leveling Board Attorney,
who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney. The Rent
Leveling Board Attorney, in return for the annual retainer set by the Rent
Leveling Board, shall attend all Rent Leveling Board meetings, prepare
all usual and routine resolutions and provide advice and counsel on legal
issues pertaining to this ordinance to the Board and its staff. The Rent
Leveling Board Attorney shall be appointed by the Municipal Attorney and
compensation shall be determined by the Department of Law.
§ 169-6. Establishment of Rent; Increases in Rent. [Amended
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
Establishment of rent between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
Chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by provisions of this
Ordinance.
D. To hold hearings or adjudicate applications from tenants for a reduction
in rental as hereinafter provided.
The Rent Leveling Board shall give ten (10) days written notice of
hearing to both the tenant and the landlord.
A. Rents may be increased no more than the percentage increase in the
Consumer Price Index for all items except real estate taxes for New
York/Northeastern New Jersey over the most recent twelve (12) month
period. This method of calculating permitted rent increases shall be
applicable to all increases sought by a landlord.
B. A landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant on a
standardized form provided by the East Brunswick Department of
Planning and Engineering, by certified mail, of the calculations involved
in computing the increase, including the most recent and pertinent
available Consumer Price Index and the Consumer Price Index twelve
(12) months prior thereto. No increase in rent as set forth above, shall
§ 169-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-6
1:554
§ 169-7. Unauthorized Increases in Rent Void.
A rental increase at any time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void. A rental increase in excess of
that authorized by the provisions of this Ordinance shall be void.
§ 169-8. Vacancy Decontrol - Initial Lease Excepted.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the lease or rental
agreement between the landlord and the initial or first tenant, nor shall
they apply to a new tenant after the apartment has been vacated, and the
landlord shall not be restricted in the amount of rent which he may charge
to such tenant. Any subsequent rent increases, however, shall be subject to
the terms and provisions of this Chapter.
§ 169-9. Surcharge for Increase in Property Taxes. [Amended
3-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-734]
become effective less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days
after notice thereof by certified mail is given to the tenant.
C. For leases of less than one (1) year, the landlord shall calculate the
percentage of rental increase by obtaining the ratio of the number of
months since the last rental increase divided by twelve (12) months.
This fraction shall then be multiplied by the Consumer Price Index
percentage increase for the previous twelve (12) month period in order
to determine the percentage of increased rental to which the landlord is
entitled.
A. The landlord may seek a Property Tax Surcharge from a tenant based
upon an increase in property taxes in the year in which the surcharge is
sought over the immediately preceding year. The Property Tax
Surcharge shall not exceed that amount authorized by the following
provisions:
(1) The landlord shall determine the increase in the present property
tax over the property tax of the previous year and divide that
increase by the total number of square feet in the dwelling or
dwellings to determine the tax increase per square feet therein.
(2) The tenant may thereafter be surcharged for his proportionate
share of the tax increase by multiplying the tax increase per square
foot by the number of square feet occupied by the tenant.
B. Specifically, the words "previous year" are intended to refer to the year
previous to that in which the landlord is seeking a Property Tax
Surcharge increase and to no other year. If a landlord has not
attempted to obtain a Property Tax Surcharge for property tax
increases from an immediately preceding year, the landlord shall be
deemed to have waived the right to seek such increase in any
subsequent year.
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-9
1:555
§ 169-10. Notice of Property Tax Surcharge.
A landlord seeking a Property Tax Surcharge shall notify the tenant by
certified mail of the calculations involved in computing the surcharge,
including the present property tax for the dwelling or dwellings, the
property tax for the dwelling for the previous year, the number of square
feet in the dwelling, the tax increase per square foot, the number of square
feet occupied by the tenant and the maximum allowable surcharge. No
surcharge as set forth above shall become effective less than thirty (30)
days after notice thereof by certified mail is given to the tenant. The
landlord may send notice of a property tax surcharge to the tenant at any
time after the new tax bill is received by the landlord.
§ 169-11. Payment of Property Tax Surcharge.
The tenant shall be permitted to pay the property tax surcharge as
determined under this chapter in twelve (12) consecutive equal monthly
installments.
§ 169-12. Property Tax Surcharge not Considered Rent for
Subsequent Increases.
The Property Tax Surcharge shall not be considered rent for purposes of
computing cost of living rental increases.
§ 169-13. Refund to Tenant in Case of Successful Tax Appeal by
Landlord.
In the event that a tax appeal is taken by a landlord and the landlord
is successful in said appeal and the taxes are reduced, the tenant shall
C. Property Tax Surcharge: Cumulative Intent. Landlords shall be allowed
to accumulate Property Tax Surcharges which have been passed
through to their tenants as allowed by this ordinance. A landlord must
notify his tenants of any increase in the Property Tax Surcharge
attributable to property tax increases incurred in the preceding 12
months, and the total cumulative Property Tax Surcharge in any given
lease.
D. Calculating Property Tax Surcharge in the Event of a Decrease in
Property Taxes Due to a Reduction in the Property's Assessed Value or a
Reduced Tax Rate. In the event there is a decrease in property taxes
due to a reduction in the property's assessed value or a reduced tax
rate, the existing Property Tax Surcharge will be decreased. Decreases
will be calculated and passed through in the same manner as increases
in § 169-9A. Reductions in Property Tax Surcharges will be applied
against previously imposed Property Tax Surcharges, in an amount not
exceeding such surcharges. If there were no such surcharges, then
there will be no reduction. The landlord may subtract administrative
costs, calculated at l l/2 times the cost of certified mail, return receipt
requested, from the reduction.
§ 169-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-13
1:556
receive one hundred percent (100%) of said reduction after deducting all
expenses incurred by the landlord in processing said appeal. Tax refunds
will be applied against previously imposed tax surcharges in an amount not
exceeding such surcharge, but if there was no such tax surcharge, then
the tax refund will not be payable to a tenant. The tenant refund shall
be calculated in the same manner that the Property Tax Surcharge was
calculated. In the same manner, existing property tax surcharges will be
lowered to reflect the reduced property tax.
§ 169-14. Conversion of Rental Units to Cooperatives or
Condominiums.
All tenants in occupancy at the time of conversion of rental units to
cooperatives or condominiums and all landlords of such rental units shall be
subject to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. No increase in taxes
caused by such conversion above the average increase in taxes throughout
the Township shall be passed on to tenants in occupancy at the time of such
conversion.
§ 169-15. Consumer Price Index Energy Adjustment Not Considered
Rent for Subsequent Increases.
Existing Consumer Price Index Energy Adjustments which have been
previously passed on to the tenant are to be kept separate from the base
rent when computing the cost of living rental increases. Should fuel costs
fall below the level in effect as of the date of this ordinance, renewing
tenants will have their Consumer Price Index Energy Adjustment surcharge
reduced accordingly. Should Consumer Price Index Energy Adjustment
surcharges be reduced to zero, they will be eliminated permanently.
§ 169-16. Capital Improvement Surcharge.
A. A landlord contemplating an optional capital improvement, as defined
in Section 169-1, Definitions, must file an application to the Board for a
surcharge prior to construction or installation if he seeks to impose a
Capital Improvement Surcharge upon the tenants. The application must
set forth the projected costs, the method of calculation, the method of
financing, the cost of financing, the useful life and a justification for
seeking the Capital Improvement Surcharge. If the Rent Leveling Board
is not satisfied with the justification, it may request additional
information or may reject the application based upon evidence
presented.
B. The landlord shall be required to send official notices to each tenant
affected by the application at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
scheduled before the Board. In addition, the Rent Leveling Office will
publish official notice of the Hearing date in the official Township
newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
C. Whenever application is made by the landlord for a Capital
Improvement Surcharge for improvements which are mandated by a
§ 169-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-16
1:557
§ 169-17. Rent Increases; Hardship.
In the event that a landlord claims a hardship in accordance with the
definitions set forth in this ordinance, he may apply to the Rent Leveling
Board for increased rental. The Board may grant the landlord a Hardship
Rent Increase subject to the terms of this Ordinance. Such increases shall
not be considered rent for purposes of computing cost of living rent
increases.
governmental authority, the landlord shall follow the procedures set
forth in paragraph A above unless the landlord can justify to the Board
why it was impossible to furnish notice and seek Board approval prior
to the installation or construction of the improvement.
D. The length of the surcharge shall be based on "the useful life" of the
improvement as defined by the manufacturer. The Housing Office will
verify the reasonableness of the "useful life" by surveying at least three
other manufacturers (if possible) as to their estimate of "useful life".
Payment shall be made by the tenant in equal monthly installments.
E. Where per apartment costs are known, they should be used as a basis
for apportioning the surcharge. When per apartment costs are
unknown, a pro-ration based upon square footage should be used.
F. The Capital Improvement Surcharge shall become effective no sooner
than the renewal date of the next lease and no time during a pending or
current lease.
G. The Capital Improvement Surcharge shall be kept separate from the
base rent when computing cost of living rental increase.
H. Only the initial investment and financing costs are eligible for the
Capital Improvement Surcharge. Repairs and replacements are to be
absorbed by the landlord as operating expenses and are not eligible for
the Capital Improvement Surcharge.
I. Formal notification shall be given by the landlord to the tenants of any
determination made by the Board upon an application for a Capital
Improvement Surcharge within ten (10) days of any determination. In
addition, the Rent Leveling Board will publish official notice of the
determination in the official Township newspaper within ten (10) days
of any determination.
A. In determining any hardship application, the Rent Leveling Board shall
consider financial factors which are to be submitted by the landlord.
The landlord shall submit a Profit and Loss Statement reflecting
information for three (3) years prior to the year of the application. A
landlord seeking an increase in rent shall provide a minimum of
financial factors as indicated on a standardized form provided by the
East Brunswick Department of Planning and Engineering, as well as
any other information pertinent as required under this Ordinance.
[Amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
§ 169-16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-17
1:558
§ 169-18. Hardship; Special Circumstances.
In applying the Net Operating Income formula, necessary financing shall be
considered upon applications.
B. The services of a financial consultant shall be provided for to assist the
Board in evaluating complicated accounting information. The financial
consultant fees shall be funded through an escrow account required of
landlords making hardship appeals. The escrow may be no more than
$1,000.00 for a landlord of more than 100 units and $500.00 for
landlords of less than 100 units. Any money not required for consulting
fees shall be refunded to the landlord.
C. Hardship appeals will be based on a Fair Rate of Return formula which
allows, with just cause, for the maintenance of a Dollar Net Operating
Income (NOI) with a cost of living increase on that portion of the NOI
which is the profit.
Only valid cause for loss of return of Net Operating Income shall be
permitted as the basis for a hardship application hereunder.
D. Hardships resulting from mandatory refinancing or resale will be
addressed by the Board as Special Circumstances as defined in Section
169-18.
E. The landlord shall be required to send by certified mail official notices
to each tenant affected by the application, at least ten (10) days prior to
the date scheduled for the hearing of the application by the Rent
Leveling Board. In addition, the Rent Leveling office will publish official
notice of the hearing date in the official Township newspaper at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Formal notification shall be given by
the landlord by certified mail to each affected tenant of any
determination made by the Board upon an application for a hardship
increase in rental within ten (10) days from the date of the
determination. In addition, the Rent Leveling office shall publish official
notice of the Board's determination in the official Township newspaper
within ten (10) days of the date of determination. The Rent Leveling
Board shall make a determination of any application within forty-five
(45) days from the conclusion of the last scheduled hearing.
A. The additional debt requirements attributable to necessary refinancing
will be permitted only at the expiration of the term of the mortgage, and
if the Board determines that the mortgage payments result from
refinancing terms which are commercially reasonable under the
circumstances.
B. This section applies only to the costs of refinancing of the unpaid
balance on a first mortgage or secondary financing which is part of the
original purchase, provided the same is the result of an arms length
transaction. The refinancing of junior mortgages shall not qualify.
§ 169-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-18
1:559
§ 169-19. Relief Provisions, Temporary in Nature.
The rules afforded by Sections 169-17 and 169-18 hereof are to be
temporary in nature and in authorizing that relief, the Rent Leveling Board
shall determine the period of time for which the temporary relief shall be
applicable. The duration of the Hardship Surcharge which may be granted
to a landlord shall be determined by the nature of the hardship for which
relief is sought.
§ 169-20. Protected Tenancy Status for Senior Citizens and Disabled
Tenants.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected
Tenancy Act (P.L. 1978 c. 225) of New Jersey, all eligible senior citizens and
disabled tenants shall be protected from eviction in rental housing units
which are converted to condominiums or cooperatives.
§ 169-21. Filing of Rent Rolls. [Amended 2-24-86 by Ord. No.
86-734]
At the request of the Rent Leveling Board or staff, landlords shall be
required to provide information on their rental units. This information
may include base rent, surcharges, number of bedrooms and/or any other
information pertinent to the Rent Leveling Ordinance.
§ 169-22. Rounding Off of Calculations.
In computing any percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, said
increase or decrease shall be calculated to the nearest one tenth of one
percent. All dollar calculations made in connection with the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be computed to the nearest cent.
C. In a circumstance where a new apartment owner is in a negative cash
flow position, the criterion to be used by the Board is whether the
mortgage payments resulted from a capitalization debt-equity ratio that
is commercially reasonable and is reasonably related to the acquisition
of the apartment complex for rental purposes.
A. The East Brunswick Township Housing Specialist in the Township
Department of Planning and Engineering shall serve as the
administering agent of this portion of the Ordinance. [Amended
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
B. The East Brunswick Township Rent Leveling Board shall serve as the
formal review Board to hear any appeals filed from either the landlords
or tenants pursuant to this Section of this Ordinance. Fees deemed
necessary to cover the cost of the appeal to the Township may be
established and available at the Rent Leveling Board office.
§ 169-18 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-23
1:560
§ 169-23. Exemption of Units Receiving (Federal Section 8,
Moderate Rehabilitation Program Subsidies or other) Federal
Subsidies. [Amended 4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to units participating in
Federal or State Programs or receiving Federal or State subsidies.
§ 169-24. Maintenance of Premises by Landlord.
During the term of this ordinance, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings or equipment in
the housing space and dwelling as he provided or was required to do so by
law or lease, at the date of the inception of the lease.
An individual tenant or a class of tenants who are not receiving substantially
the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture or furnishings or
equipment may appeal to the Rent Leveling Board for a determination as
to reasonable rental value of the housing unit or dwelling in view of this
deficiency. The tenant or class of tenants shall pay the reasonable rental
value as determined by the Rent Leveling Board in lieu of full payment of
rent until the landlord corrects the deficiency.
§ 169-25. Tax Rebate; N.J.R.S. 54:4-5.2.
The property tax reduction for residential rental property provided for in
N.J.R.S. 54:4-5.2 et seq. shall be divided by the total rentable square feet
contained within all mobile homes spaces or residential rental units on
such property to determine the annual property tax rebate or credit per
square foot for every residential unit in the entire property. The square
footage of each unit shall be multiplied by such property tax rebate or
credit for each residential unit. However, where one (1) or more residential
rental units, spaces or equivalent are occupied by the property owner or his
employees, the tax credit or rebate for the residential rental units on such
property shall be computed by first reducing the property tax reduction by
the proportion that the number of units occupied by the property owner or
his employees bears to the total number of residential units on the property.
§ 169-26. Extra Charges by Landlord; Regulation.
All charges paid by the tenant for use of facilities such as pools,
playgrounds, tennis courts, golf courses, tenants' association and other
recreational or like facilities and programs shall not be considered as
rent for purposes of the application of the regulatory provisions of this
ordinance.
§ 169-27. Appeals to the Township Council.
Any landlord or tenant affected by the findings and determinations of the
Board may appeal to the Township Council of the Township of East
Brunswick within twenty (20) days after the date of such determination. The
Township Council may extend the time within which to file an appeal by
§ 169-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-27
1:561
an additional thirty (30) days upon a showing of good cause. The Township
Council shall conduct a hearing based upon the record and transcript made
at the Rent Leveling Board meeting and shall permit oral argument and
submission of written argument but shall entertain no new evidence at the
time of the Council hearing.
§ 169-28. Waiver of Increases.
The landlord shall be determined to have waived his right to collect at a
future date any surcharges or rent increase(s) to which he may be entitled
under this chapter if said increase(s) is (are) not applied for at that lease
renewal.
§ 169-29. Penalty.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this Chapter, charge any
rents in excess of what he was receiving from the effective date of this
Chapter except for increases authorized by this Chapter. A willful violation
of this Chapter, including but not limited to, the willful filing with the Rent
Leveling Board of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable in
accordance with provisions of Section 1-15 of the Code of the Township of
East Brunswick. A violation affecting more than one (1) leasehold shall be
considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 169-30. Enforcement. [Amended 4-4-05 by Ord. No. 05-05]
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a violation of this ordinance,
including any member of the Rent Leveling Board or the Rent Leveling
Board as a body or the Rent Leveling Board Administrator, through its
chairman may, by himself/herself, or through his/her attorney, make, sign
and file a written complaint with the Clerk of the Municipal Court of the
Township of East Brunswick, which complaint shall set forth the basis
thereof and specify those sections of the ordinance violated. The Clerk of
the Municipal Court of the Township of East Brunswick shall thereafter
cause to be served a copy of the complaint upon the defendant pursuant to
the rules of court and set the matter down for hearing forthwith.
§ 169-31. Liberal Construction.
This ordinance being necessary for the Welfare of the Township of East
Brunswick and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes thereof.
§ 169-32. Exemption for Newly Constructed Multiple Dwellings.
[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-922; amended 4-4-05 by Ord. No.
05-05]
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to multiple dwellings
constructed after June, 1987, for a period of time not to exceed the period of
amortization of any initial mortgage loan obtained for the multiple dwelling,
or for 30 years following completion of construction, whichever is less.
§ 169-27 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-32
1:562
The owner of any multiple dwelling exempted from this Rent Leveling
Ordinance pursuant to this paragraph shall, prior to entering into any lease
with a person for tenancy of any premises located in the multiple dwelling,
furnish the prospective tenant with a written statement that the multiple
dwelling in which the premises is located is exempt from rent leveling
for such time as remains in the exemption period. Each lease offered to
a prospective tenant for any dwelling unit therein during the period the
multiple dwelling is so exempted shall contain a provision notifying the
tenant of the exemption.
The owner of any multiple dwelling claiming an exemption from rent
leveling shall, at least 30 days prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the newly constructed multiple dwelling, file with the
Municipal Construction Official, a written statement of the owner's claim
of exemption, including therein a statement of the date upon which the
exemption period so claimed shall commence, such information as may be
necessary to effectively locate and identify the multiple dwelling for which
the exemption is claimed, and a statement of the number of rental dwelling
units in the multiple dwelling for which the exemption is claimed.
The owner shall, at least 30 days prior to the date of the termination of
the exemption period afforded pursuant to this ordinance, file with the
Municipal Construction Official a notice of the date of termination of the
exemption period for the effected multiple dwelling.
§ 169-33. Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge. [Added
4-15-88 by Ord. No. 88-919]
State-mandated increases in tipping fees and/or solid waste removal carting
fees may be passed through by garden apartment landlords to tenants,
subject to action by the East Brunswick Township Council which would
provide reimbursement to landlords for such increases. Total increases
incurred by landlords in said costs will be passed through to the tenants as
a Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge on the following basis: 40%
of the increase payable to the tenant, and 60% of the increase payable to
the landlord.
A. The landlord may seek a Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge
from a tenant based upon state-mandated increases in garbage and the
surcharge is sought over the immediately preceding year. The Garbage
and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge shall not exceed that amount
authorized by the following provisions.
(1) The landlord shall determine the increase in the present garbage
and solid waste removal carting and tipping fees over the same fees
charged in the previous year, and divide that increase by the total
number of square feet in the dwelling or dwellings to determine the
Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge per square foot
therein.
§ 169-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-33
1:563
§ 169-34. Notice of Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge.
[Added 4-25-88 by Ord. No. 88-919]
A landlord seeking a Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge shall
notify the tenant of the calculations involved in computing the surcharge,
including the present garbage and solid waste costs for the dwelling or
dwellings, the garbage and solid waste removal costs for the dwelling for
the previous year, the number of square feet in the dwelling, the garbage
and solid waste removal fee increase per square foot, the number of square
feet occupied by the tenant and the maximum allowable surcharge. No
surcharge as set forth shall become effective less than thirty (30) days after
the notice thereof by certified mail is given to the tenant, and said increase
shall only be applied at time of lease renewal.
§ 169-35. Payment of Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge.
[Added 4-25-88 by Ord. No. 88-919]
The tenant shall be permitted to pay the Garbage and Solid Waste Removal
Surcharge as determined under this Chapter in twelve (12) consecutive
equal monthly installments. The tenant shall continue to pay the same
monthly surcharge until such time as the costs to the landlord are
decreased and notice of same has been given by certified mail to the tenant.
§ 169-36. Decreases in Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Fees.
[Added 4-25-88 by Ord. No. 88-919]
In the event there is a decrease in garbage and solid waste removal fees,
the existing Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge will be decreased.
Decreases will be calculated and passed through in the same manner as
increases in Section 37. Section 169-32. Garbage and solid waste removal
surcharges will be applied against previously imposed garbage and solid
waste surcharges in an amount not exceeding such surcharges. If there
were no such surcharges, then there will be no reduction. The landlord may
subtract from the reduction administrative costs calculated at 1-1/2 times
the cost of certified mail, return receipt requested.
(2) The tenant may thereafter be surcharged for his/her proportionate
share of the garbage and solid waste removal carting and tipping
fee increase by multiplying the increase per square foot by the
number of square feet occupied by the tenant.
B. Specifically, the words "previous year" are intended to refer to the year
previous to that in which the landlord is seeking a Garbage and Solid
Waste Removal Surcharge and to no other year. If a landlord has not
attempted to obtain a Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge for
increases from an immediately preceding year, the landlord shall be
deemed to have waived the right to seek such increases in any
subsequent year.
§ 169-33 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 169-37
1:564
§ 169-37. Garbage and Solid Waste Removal Surcharge Not
Considered Rent for Subsequent Increases. [Added 4-25-88 by Ord.
No. 88-919]
The Garbage and solid waste removal surcharge shall not be considered
rent for purposes of computing costs of living rental increases.
Chapter 172
SALES, GOING OUT OF BUSINESS
§ 172-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out, advertised, displayed
or in any way communicated to the public in such manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock or goods on
hand, the business will cease and be discontinued.
GOODS — Include any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
organization or entity of any kind.
§ 172-2. License required.
A license issued by the Township Clerk bearing a license number and the
date on which the license was issued shall be obtained by any person before
selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised, displayed
or in any way communicated to the public by any means as a going-out-ofbusiness
sale or a lost-our-lease sale. The license must be displayed on the
premises, and the license number must be included in all advertising.
§ 172-3. Restrictions; exemptions.
A. Established business requisite. Any person who has not been the owner
of a business advertised or described in the application for a license
hereunder for a period of at least six (6) months prior to the date of the
proposed sale shall not be granted a license, provided that, upon the
death of a person doing business in the township, his or her heirs,
devisees, legatees or representatives shall have the right to apply at
any time for a license hereunder.
B. Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale for one (1)
business, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the
application, within one (1) year past from the date of such application
shall not be granted a license for the same business or type of business.
§ 169-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-3
1:565
§ 172-4. Application requirements; fee.
C. Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder
operates more than one (1) place of business, the license shall apply
only to the one (1) store or branch specified in the application; and the
management of the East Brunswick store or stores shall not permit any
other store or branch to advertise or represent that it is cooperating
with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the
store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that
any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any
way in the licensed sale unless such other store or stores are also going
out of business.
D. Persons exempted. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or
affect persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction, persons acting in accordance with their powers
and duties as public officials, duly licensed auctioneers selling at
auction or any publishers of a newspaper, magazine or other
publication who in good faith publish any advertisement without actual
knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without
actual knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
A. Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale
regulated by this chapter shall make a written application under oath to
the Township Clerk, setting forth and containing the following
information:
(1) The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be sold.
(2) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
(3) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy to the extent known
at the time the application is filed.
(4) The date of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
(5) A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted,
including the duration of the sale and the proposed days and hours
of operation.
(6) A sworn affidavit stating that all merchandise being sold in the sale
is in stock, being liquidated, not being replenished and is regularly
a part of the store and not brought in for the purposes of the sale.
(7) The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with
the proposed content of any advertisement.
§ 172-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 172-4
1:566
§ 172-5. Effect of license; nontransferability; inspection.
B. Amendment to application. After application is made, the applicant may
amend the application with regard to additional means of proposed
advertising and additional information as to the manner in which the
sale will be conducted; however, any amendment shall be in the same
form and subject to the same requirements as the original application
as set forth herein.
C. Recordkeeping. All applications for a license shall be kept on file by the
Township Clerk, and record shall be kept by him of all licenses issued
upon such application.
D. License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the
Township Clerk with the application for license a license fee of ten
dollars ($10.).
A. License period. The license shall authorize sale or advertisement for
sale described in the application for a period of not more than ninety
(90) consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays included, following
the issuance thereof. [Amended 9-10-79 by Ord. No. 79-168]
B. Place of sale. The license shall authorize only one (1) sale described in
the application at the location named therein.
C. Goods for sale. No goods other than those present in inventory at the
time of the initial application shall be advertised or sold at a sale for
which a license is hereby required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, offer or expose for sale, or advertise for said sale, any goods which
are not the regular stock on hand at the store at a warehouse regularly
servicing the store, or to supplement, or to make any replenishments or
additions from any manufacturing, jobber, wholesale, warehouse or
storage building or from any other premises or from any source
whatsoever during the time of a going-out-of-business sale for which a
license is hereby required.
D. Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license hereunder for
a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the
Township Clerk all other business licenses issued solely by or under
township authority which he may hold at that time applicable to the
location and goods covered by the application for a license under this
chapter.
E. Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable, except to an executor or administrator of
the licensee in the event of his or her death. Any such transfer shall be
in writing, and a copy thereof filed with the Township Clerk.
F. Inspection by Township Clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person who is
either applying for a license or to whom such license has been issued to
fail or refuse to give the Township Clerk or any person designated by
him for that purpose all the facts connected with the stock on hand or
§ 172-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-5
1:567
§ 172-6. Duties of licensee.
A licensee hereunder shall:
§ 172-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 173
SEX OFFENDERS, REGISTRATION
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
the proper information respecting goods sold or any other information
that he may require in order to make a thorough investigation of all
phases connected with the sale in order to enforce this chapter.
A. Adherence to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the
period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods, except for goods which
are in transit, under contract for the location in question or which are in
storage at a warehouse if purchased before application for license.
B. Advertisement of property. Refrain from employing any untrue,
deceptive or misleading advertising and in any advertisement by
handbills, circulars, placards, signs, notices, newspapers or publication
or other advertising, including therein the number and date of the
license issued by the Township Clerk.
C. Adherence to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity
with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
D. Segregation of nonsale goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart
from the goods for sale and make such distinction clear to the public.
E. Cessation of business at conclusion of sale. The licensee shall not
continue the business beyond the date specified for such sale and shall
not, upon conclusion of such sale, continue the business under the same
name or under a different name in the same location or elsewhere in the
Township of East Brunswick.
A. A person not complying with the ninety-day deadline shall be subject to
a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.) per day for each day of operation
after said license has expired.
B. After ten (10) days of violations, the applicant shall be subject to
prosecution for fraud.
C. A person failing to obtain a license and conducting a going-out-ofbusiness
sale shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.) or ninety (90) days in jail, or both.
§ 172-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 173-1
1:568
§ 173-2. Registration and Obligation.
§ 173-3. Maintenance of Registry.
The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee shall maintain a registry
of convicted offenders containing the information required in § 173-2 of this
Ordinance in alphabetical order by street name, which registry shall be
available at all times for inspection by any person. A copy of the registry
shall also be forwarded by the Department of Public Safety to the East
Brunswick Township Board of Education.
§ 173-4. Severability.
A. CONVICTED OFFENDER — shall mean any person who has been
convicted of a violation of the following statutes: N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2,
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3 and N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4, where the victim of said crime
was a person under the age of eighteen (18).
B. PERMANENT RESIDENT — shall mean any person who resides within
the Township of East Brunswick for more than thirty (30) days in any
one year.
A. Any convicted offender who becomes a permanent resident of the
Township of East Brunswick shall upon obtaining permanent residence
status as defined in this Ordinance register at the East Brunswick
Township Police Department. At the time of Registration, the following
information shall be supplied by the convicted offender:
1. Name and social security number;
2. Street address;
3. Driver's license number;
4. Make, model and license plate number of any motor vehicle owned
or used;
5. Nature of each and every offense committed;
6. Date of each offense and date of each conviction;
7. Date of release from custody;
8. Prosecuting agency for each offense;
9. Age of victim for each offense;
B. Obligation to provide the information contained in subsection A above
shall be a continuing obligation and any change in any of the
information so supplied shall be immediately reported to the East
Brunswick Department of Public Safety.
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-4
1:569
Chapter 174
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
§ 174-1. Adoption of standard code by reference.
§ 174-2. Title of code. [Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-14]
The code established by this chapter is commonly known as the "Individual
Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1978)" as more particularly
set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1 et seq. and is hereafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 174-3. Copies on file.
Three (3) copies of the code have been placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain on file there for the use and examination
of the public.
§ 174-4. Permits and certificates of compliance required; fees.
[Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-14]
A. If any section, subsection or paragraph of this Ordinance is declared to
be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph
shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative
remain in full force or effect and no such determination shall be deemed
to invalidate the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this
Ordinance.
B. This Ordinance shall be liberally construed for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the people of this municipality.
A. Under the authority granted by N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6, a code is
hereby adopted regulating the following matters:
(1) The location, construction, use and maintenance of individual
sewage disposal systems.
(2) The method of emptying or cleaning sewage disposal systems.
(3) The issuance of licenses or permits to locate, construct, empty or
clean an individual sewage disposal system.
B. A copy of the code is annexed to and made part of this chapter without
the text being included herein.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a permit has been obtained from the Division of
Health.
B. No new individual sewage disposal system shall be placed in operation
and no new dwelling or building or addition to a dwelling or building
§ 173-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 174-4
1:570
§ 174-5. Amendments to standard code. [Added 10-12-76 by Ord.
No. 76-206-A]
Section 10.7 of the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey
(1963) is amended by the following: Applicants who submit plot plans
for properties which are designated by the Natural Resource Inventory
as marginal, or having a high water table and/or heavy clay strata
characteristics, will not be permitted to take percolation tests or soil logs
during the months of June, July, August and September.
§ 174-6. Fee for inspection for cleaning of subsurface disposal
systems. [Added 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 5-8-89 by Ord. No.
89-20]
The fee for inspection for cleaning of a subsurface disposal system shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each cleaning.
§ 174-7. Licensing of cesspool cleaners. [Amended 4-26-65 by Ord.
No. 65-17]
No person shall engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic tanks,
cesspools, privies or other places used for the reception and storage of
human excrement without having first obtained a license from the Division
of Health. The fee for such a license shall be twenty dollars ($20.) for each
vehicle used in the conduct of the business. The term of the license shall be
from July 1 of each year to June 30 of the following year. Licenses issued
after January 1 of the licensing year may be obtained for half the usual fee.
which relies upon such a system for sewage disposal shall be sold or
occupied until the Division of Health has issued a certificate that it
has been located and constructed in compliance with the code and the
terms of the permit issued.
C. The application fee for the location or construction of individual sewage
disposal systems shall be one hundred dollars ($100.) per proposed/
existing lot for the new construction of a sewage disposal system,
payable prior to site evaluation. The application fee for the alteration of
an existing sewage disposal system shall be fifty dollars ($50.), payable
prior to site evaluation. The application fee for the renewal of a license
to operate shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The fee is intended to defray
costs incurred by the township in reviewing sketches showing the
property to be served, location of proposed sewage disposal facilities
and number of bathrooms, as well as those costs incurred by the
township in witnessing the plan review and percolation test and
attending to the site inspection, construction inspection and issuance of
certificate of compliance. The application fee is nonrefundable and will
not be returned if the certificate of compliance cannot be issued.
[Added 2-24-75 by Ord. No. 75-206; amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV; 7-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-206-B; amended 2-11-91 by Ord.
No. 91-14]
§ 174-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8
1:571
§ 174-8. Appeals.
In the event that any application for a license, permit or certificate required
by this chapter is denied, suspended or revoked by the Division of Health,
the applicant may request a hearing before the Director of Health and
Welfare. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure
outlined in Chapter 3, Administration of Government, Article XV, and the
Director of Health and Welfare may alter, affirm or reverse the denial,
suspension or revocation. The Director shall announce his decision within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the hearing.
§ 174-9. Stop-work orders.
The Director of Health and Welfare may order all further work on any
individual sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in
violation of the code to be stopped immediately, except for work necessary
to remedy the violation. Once a stop-work order is issued and served upon
the permittee or any person working on or about the sewage disposal
system, no further work shall be done until the violation has been corrected
and the Director of Health and Welfare has lifted the stop-work order.
§ 174-10. Creation of septic system management area. [Added
8-27-79 by Ord. No. 79-157]
Septic tanks and other subsurface waste disposal systems are used
extensively throughout portions of the Township of East Brunswick. They
are an adequate and beneficial system of domestic waste disposal if
properly installed, operated and maintained and are an economically
feasible alternative to costly sanitary sewer systems. However, they
presently constitute a problem in the township because a large percentage
of the systems are not properly installed, operated and maintained or have
failed, causing potential pollution of ground and surface waters, potential
contamination of potable water supplies, foul odors, nuisance problems
and hazards to public health. Therefore, an East Brunswick septic system
management area is created, including those areas of the township where
septic systems are used extensively as specifically delineated on a Septic
System Management Area Map dated July 9, 1979, prepared by Carl E.
Hintz, P.P., and which is on file in the office of the East Brunswick Township
Clerk.
§ 174-11. Septic System Management Area Planning Commission.
[Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No. 79-157; deleted 9-27-10 by Ord. No.
10-22]
Chapter 177
SEWER CONNECTIONS
§ 174-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 177-1
1:572
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEWAGE — Any and all liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter
in suspension or solution, and the water carrying waste from the discharge
of toilets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks and dishwashers, or any
other source of water carrying bodily waste of human beings or waste
containing putrescible material.
§ 177-2. Required connections.
The owner of any house, building or structure located on a street along the
line of any sewer which is now in operation or is constructed in the future
in the Township of East Brunswick shall connect the drainage of all sources
of sewage in his house, building or structure to the sewer. Each house shall
have a separate connection to the sewer system.
§ 177-3. Exceptions. [Amended 3-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-27; 9-27-10
by Ord. No. 10-22]
Any single-family dwelling which, because of its location cannot drain into
a sewer line by gravity, may be granted an exception to use a pre-existing
individual sewerage disposal system which complies with all applicable
provisions of this Code as follows: Application shall be made to the East
Brunswick liaison to the Middlesex County Health Department, who shall
transmit the application to the Middlesex County Health Department and
the East Brunswick Sewer Utility. If both the Middlesex County Health
Department and the East Brunswick Sewer Utility approve the exemption,
the East Brunswick liaison shall issue a written exemption. A single-family
dwelling may be exempt from the requirement to connect with a public
sewer if requiring the connection would impose an unnecessary hardship
on the owner of the premises. No exemption will be granted if it would
result in the continuation of, or creation of, an unhealthy or unsanitary
condition. A single-family dwelling containing a washing machine or laundry
tub located in the basement prior to construction of the public sewer line
does not qualify for this exception, and the washing machine and tub
must be connected to the sewer line, even if pumping is required for the
tub and/or washing machine. If there is a change in the sanitary sewer
system that would eliminate the need for a pump or otherwise remove the
basis for the claimed hardship, the East Brunswick liaison, after receiving
written approval from the Middlesex County Health Department and the
East Brunswick Sewer Utility, shall send written notice to the homeowner
advising that the exemption has been rescinded. The homeowner will
thereupon be required to connect to the sewer system in accordance with
Section 177-2 of the Code.
§ 177-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:573
§ 177-4. Time limit for making connections.
Connections shall be made within thirty (30) days after the service of notice
as provided in § 177-5.
§ 177-5. Notice to connect required.
The Director of Health and Welfare shall give at least thirty (30) days' notice
to the owner of property affected before proceeding to award a contract for
the making of the connection or causing it to be made by the municipality
as provided in § 177-10.
§ 177-6. Contents of notice to connect.
A notice given under this chapter shall contain a description of the property
affected, sufficient to identify it, and a statement that if the connection is not
made within thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the township shall
make it or cause it to be made at the owner's expense under the authority
of N.J.R.S. 40:63-54. No special form of notice shall be required.
§ 177-7. Service of notice to connect.
§ 177-8. Filing of proof of service.
Proof of service shall be filed with the Tax Collector of the township within
ten (10) days after service is made.
§ 177-9. Defective notice shall not invalidate charges.
Failure to file proof of service, misstatement of the name of the property
owner or similar errors or omissions in the giving of notice shall not
A. Notices under this chapter shall be served as follows:
(1) Upon owners resident in the township, personally or by leaving the
notice at their usual place of residence with some member of their
family above the age of fourteen (14) years.
(2) Upon owners not resident in the township, personally or by mailing
the notice to the owner's last known post office address or by
service upon an occupant of the property or an agent of the owner
in charge of the property.
(3) Where service cannot be made under Subsection A(1) or A(2), the
notice may be served by publishing it once in a newspaper
circulating in the township. One (1) published notice may relate to
several different properties.
B. Owners who are infants or of unsound mind or the beneficiaries of
trusts shall be given notice by service upon their guardians or trustees.
Where there is more than one (1) owner of the same piece of property,
service upon one (1) owner shall be notice to all.
§ 177-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 177-9
1:574
invalidate any charge imposed for a sewer connection where an actual
benefit to the property results.
§ 177-10. Action upon failure to comply. [Amended 4-8-85 by Ord.
No. 85-653]
If any property owner fails to make the required connection with the sewer
system within thirty (30) days after being served with notice to do so,
the Township Council may cause the connection to be made under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works and Water Resources or may
award one (1) or more contracts to make it.
§ 177-11. Awarding of contracts to make connections.
Contracts for the making of sewer connections shall be awarded in the same
manner and after the same advertising as any other municipal contract.
In lieu of awarding separate contracts for the making of each connection,
the Township Council may award one (1) contract for the making of all
connections which the township may desire to have made within a period of
one (1) year or less.
§ 177-12. Recording costs. [Amended 4-8-85 by Ord. No. 85-653]
When any sewer connection is made by the township or under a contract
awarded by the township, an accurate record of all expenses shall be kept.
Where several properties are involved, the expense shall be apportioned
among them. Upon completion of the work, a sworn statement as to the
expenses incurred shall be filed with the Township Clerk by the Director
of Public Works and Water Resources. The Township Council shall examine
the statement and, if it is properly made, shall confirm it and file it with the
Township Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall record the sewer connection
charge in the same manner in which assessments are recorded.
§ 177-13. Cost to become a lien.
Every sewer connection charge shall, from the time of its confirmation, be
a first lien upon the property affected and shall bear interest and penalties
and be collected and enforced in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements.
§ 177-14. Payment in installments.
The Township Council may, by resolution, provide for the payment of sewer
connection charges in installments. In that event they shall be payable, bear
interest and be collected and enforced in the same manner as assessments
for local improvements.
§ 177-15. Toilets required.
All buildings or structures in the Township of East Brunswick used by
human beings as dwellings or for eating, sleeping, working, recreation or
§ 177-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-15
1:575
entertainment purposes shall be provided with toilets of the flush or watercloset
type, which shall be maintained in a sanitary and proper working
order at all times. All buildings or structures subject to the provisions of this
section which do not have toilets or in which the toilets are not in sanitary
and proper working order are declared to be a nuisance and unfit for human
habitation, and the Director of Health and Welfare may order such buildings
to be vacated until the terms of this section have been complied with.
§ 177-16. Tampering with sewers prohibited.
No person shall alter, plug up or otherwise tamper with any culvert, drain,
drainage ditch, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, appurtenances, manhole or
catch basin.
Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted as Section I-40 of a
General Police Ordinance, adopted 5-8-51 and as Sec. 4-10 of the Revised
General Ordinances.
Chapter 181
SHADE TREES
§ 181-1. Definitions.
§ 181-2. Responsibility.
§ 181-3. Policy.
It shall be the policy of the Township to maintain and preserve all existing
Street trees and Park trees within the Township. Only upon an Act of God or
the consensus of the Division of Parks personnel may a Street tree or Park
tree be removed.
§ 181-4. Methods of Preservation.
A. STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation located in the public right-of-way along all streets, avenues,
and medians within the Township of East Brunswick.
B. PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all woody vegetation located
in parks, reservations, open space areas, and public purpose areas
owned by the Township of East Brunswick.
A. The Division of Parks is responsible for the planting, maintenance, and
management of Street trees and Park trees located within the Township
of East Brunswick as defined in Chapter 3-59 of the Township Code.
A. Trees that are heaving sidewalks and curbs will have the roots in
question "ground down" by the Parks Division at the property owners
request. The responsibility and cost to repair the sidewalks, if
necessary, will be at the property owners expense.
§ 177-15 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 181-4
1:576
§ 181-5. Reasons for Removal.
§ 181-6. Replacement Procedures.
Additional precautions may be implemented to insure that sidewalk and
curb problems will not reoccur. Examples would be realignment of the
walk itself and the installation of root retardant fabric.
B. Trees that are interfering with vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian flow
will be placed on a maintenance schedule to be pruned.
A. Act of God.
1. Lightning.
2. Disease.
3. Wind Damage.
4. Insect Infestation.
5. Any other naturally occurring event resulting in death or
irreversible decline.
B. Safety and Welfare.
1. A tree in which the area it is located in is deemed unsafe due to its
interference with vehicular sight distance (refer to AASHTO
standard).
2. The area provided for growth is such that the potential after all
reasonable and practical preservation techniques have been
considered, is insufficient and presents a hazard to the health and
welfare of the community.
3. The extent of roots which must be removed in order to correct
sidewalk heaving is such that the tree would become a potential
hazard.
C. The tree severely interferes with the growth and development of a more
desirable tree.
A. The Township shall attempt to replace all trees removed in the
proximate location through the annual appropriations for shade trees
unless:
1. Existing canopy created by other existing trees prevents
satisfactory growth.
2. The planting area is less than 72".
3. Lack of proper sight distance prevents installation.
4. Overhead utilities or underground utilities prevent proper growth.
§ 181-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-6
1:577
§ 181-7. Plantings in New Subdivisions.
B. If trees cannot be placed in the right-of-way for any of the above they
may be planted on the residents side of the sidewalk under the
following conditions:
1. No other location is feasible.
2. The approval by the Planning Department and Parks Division is
granted.
3. The property owner is in agreement.
4. The area between the sidewalk and curb is less than 72".
5. The area provides ample space for full development of tree.
6. The property owner agrees to sign a right-of-entry agreement and
assumes maintenance responsibilities for the tree.
C. Distance from Utilities and Site Structures:
Street Trees shall be planted no closer than 10' to any driveway, fire
hydrant, or utility pole.
D. Spacing:
The spacing between street trees will be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in appendix A of this policy. No trees may
be planted closer together than the following; small trees 30'; medium
trees 40', and large trees 50'; except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape Architect.
E. Property owners are prohibited from planting street trees in the
Township right-of-way.
F. The size of replacement trees will be a minimum of 1 1/2" - 1 3/4" in
caliper, bare root material.
A. All new plantings will be paid for and installed by the developer and
held under bond for a period of two (2) years after the date of
installation, (Performance Bond release) guaranteeing survival.
B. Location of all said trees will follow standards created by the Planning
Department (refer to appendix).
C. Species of all new plantings and replacement plants will be selected
upon the approved plant list provided by the Planning Department
(Refer to Appendix).
D. The size of all new plantings will be a minimum of 2 to 2.5 inch caliper,
12' to 14' in height, balled and burlapped.
E. Developer shall be responsible to install root growth barrier fabric
along curb line and sidewalk at each planting site.
§ 181-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 181-7
1:578
Editor's Note: The Appendix is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Chapter 185
SOIL REMOVAL
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REDISTRIBUTION — Any change or alteration in the grade of any property.
SOIL — Earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without regard
to the presence or absence of organic matter.
§ 185-2. Permit required; exceptions.
F. All trees shall be planted outside the right-of-way, on private property,
no closer than 6' from any curb, pavement, or sidewalk.
A. No person shall excavate or cause to be excavated, changed or altered
or allow the excavation, change or altering of any soil, or change or
alter the grade of any property within the Township of East Brunswick
without having first obtained a permit from the Planning Board. Both
the owner and the operator of the property shall have the responsibility
to remove that portion of soil which was caused to be excavated,
changed or altered within thirty (30) days after due notice is given. A
person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provisions of the East Brunswick
Township Code. Each day during which a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. [Amended 2-8-71 by Ord. No.
71-91-A; 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-83; 9-22-80 by Ord. No. 80-288; 7-22-85 by Ord. No. 85-681]
B. Subsection A shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) The excavation of soil for use on the premises from which it is
taken, provided that this does not involve any substantial change in
the topography of the premises.
(2) The excavation of soil in connection with the construction or
alteration of the basement or foundation of a building.
(3) Any business or industry operating within the Township of East
Brunswick, at the time of the passage of this chapter, engaged in
the mining or processing of sand, clay or similar material.
§ 181-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:579
§ 185-3. Applications; information required. [Amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-91-E; 1-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-83; 9-22-80 by Ord. No.
80-288]
Applications shall be made to the East Brunswick Planning Board and notice
shall be given of the hearing in accordance with the Land Use Procedures
set forth in Section § 132-61 of this Code and the application shall be
accompanied by the following:
§ 185-4. Consideration of application. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-83; 9-22-80 by Ord. No.
80-288]
A. A map of the premises showing the present contour lines and the
proposed future contour lines resulting from the intended excavation or
redistribution of soil.
B. The grades resulting from the intended removal or redistribution of soil
in relation to the topography of the premises. This information may be
included in the map required by Subsection A.
C. The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of the work.
A. In considering the application, the East Brunswick Planning Board shall
be guided by the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Any other factor which is relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the Township of East Brunswick.
B. If, after considering the above factors, the East Brunswick Planning
Board determines that the proposed removal or redistribution of soil
will not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the Township
of East Brunswick or its inhabitants, he shall issue the necessary
permit. Otherwise he shall deny the application and shall notify the
applicant. Notice of the grant or denial of the application shall be given
to the applicant within a reasonable time after the application is filed.
C. In the event the premises from which soil removal is proposed is located
within a residential zone, application to the Planning Board for a soil
removal permit shall not be considered by the Planning Board until
after the applicant receives preliminary subdivision approval or
preliminary site plan approval, as the case may be, from the East
Brunswick Planning Board. Soil mining or soil removal operations shall
§ 185-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 185-4
1:580
§ 185-5. Appeals. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78
by Ord. 78-83; 9-22-80 by Ord. No. 80-288; 4-24-89 by Ord. No.
89-12]
If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the
East Brunswick Planning Board to the Township Council by filing a notice
in writing to that effect with the Township Clerk within ten (10) days after
receiving notice of the decision of the Engineer of the Township of East
Brunswick and the Director of Planning and Engineering. The Council shall
set a time and place for a hearing and shall so notify the applicant. The
decision of the Council rendered after a hearing shall be final.
§ 185-6. Bond requirements. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-83; 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
Before the permit is issued the applicant shall file with the Township
Engineer a bond executed by the applicant as principal and a surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety. The
amount of the bond shall be determined by the Engineer of the Township
of East Brunswick and the Director of Planning and Engineering, but in
no event shall be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and shall be
conditioned as follows:
be specifically prohibited within all residential zones, provided,
however, this shall not prevent the removal of soil within residential
zones if it is determined by the Planning Board, upon granting
preliminary or final subdivision approval or preliminary or final site
plan approval, that it is necessary to remove a small quantity of soil
to provide the construction of dwellings in conformity with the natural
terrain and topography of the land. In making such a determination,
the Planning Board shall be guided by the standard that it is the
determination of the Township of East Brunswick that the removal of
soil within a residential zone shall be limited to a minimal amount which
may be necessary to reasonably develop the land in question. Nothing
contained herein shall entitle a property owner to utilize 100% of the
land for building purposes.
D. Applications for Extension. All applications to extend the soil removal
permit shall be made to the East Brunswick Planning Board, which shall
render a decision based upon the criteria and standards set forth in the
Soil Removal Ordinance.
A. That the permittee will complete the work authorized by the permit in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
chapter on or before the date of completion set forth in the application.
B. That the applicant will repair any public street, structure or land which
may be damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:581
§ 185-7. Regulations.
Silt removal or redistribution conducted under a permit issued under this
chapter shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
Chapter 189
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
A. Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions.
B. Lands shall be graded so as to conform to the approved contour lines
and grades and shall be cleared of debris.
C. The top layer of soil to a depth of six (6) inches shall not be removed
from the premises but shall be set aside and respread over the premises
when the remainder of the soil has been removed.
D. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or the depositing
of soil upon surrounding lands, streets or municipal facilities.
§ 185-7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 185-7
1:582
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 2-28-61]
§ 189-1. Removal required. [Added 3-27-67 by Ord. No. 67-73;
amended 6-27-11 by Ord. No. 11-13]
§ 189-2. Depositing snow or ice upon streets prohibited.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street in the
township, it being the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all
persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulates within the private property belonging to that person upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 189-3. Removal by township. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-95-F; 6-27-11 by Ord. No. 11-13]
In case such snow or ice shall not be removed from sidewalks, streets or
Private Streets or shall be cast or deposited thereon or placed upon the
sidewalks or street by the owner, tenant, occupant, or Private Owner of any
A. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises abutting or bordering upon any street in the Township of East
Brunswick shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of
such streets or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or ashes, within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same
shall fall or be formed thereon. [Amended 6-27-11 by Ord. No.
11-13]
B. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises used by the public or business invitees shall remove all snow
and ice from the sidewalks, streets and parking areas used by the public
in the transaction of business thereat and, in the event of ice which may
be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the same to
be thoroughly covered with de-icing material, within twelve (12) hours
of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon. [Amended
6-27-11 by Ord. No. 11-13]
C. The developer, homeowners association, condominium association or
other owner ("Private Owner") of real property that abuts or borders a
private street or public street that has not been accepted by the
Township ("Private Street") shall remove all snow and ice from such
Private Street or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with de-icing material, within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the
same shall fall or be formed thereon. [Added 6-27-11 by Ord. No.
11-13]
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:583
premises as herein above provided, the same shall be removed forthwith
and under the direction of the Director of Public Works, and the cost of
such removal as nearly as can be ascertained shall be certified by the
Director of Public Works to the Director of Finance. The governing body
shall examine such certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause such
cost to be charged against the applicable real property, and the amount
so charged shall forthwith become a lien and a tax upon the real property
and be added to, recorded and collected in the same way and manner as
the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon the premises and shall bear
interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same
manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or fines or any
other penalty for violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall not
constitute any bar to the right of the Township of East Brunswick to collect
the cost, as certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the manner herein
authorized.
§ 189-3.1. Enforcement. [Added 6-27-11 by Ord. No. 11-13]
This section of the Code is administered by the Zoning & Code Enforcement
Officer and the Department of Public Safety at whose discretion orders to
remove snow and ice consistent with this Article shall be issued in the event
a snow or ice condition is deemed a hazard to the public safety or welfare.
§ 189-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-3.1
1:584
ARTICLE II
Street Excavations
[Adopted 10-13-64]
§ 189-4. Definitions. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPROVED ROAD — Any road surfaced with a pavement such as asphalt,
concrete, bituminous concrete, or similar pavement and any road having a
concrete base.[Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Township of East Brunswick as
a public street, as well as any state or county road or highway over which
the township has acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Any cinder, dirt or gravel road without oil
treatment and all other roads under the jurisdiction of the Township of East
Brunswick.
§ 189-5. Permit required. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-6. Application procedure; information required. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by
Ord. No. 08-11]
Applications for a road opening permit shall contain the following
information:
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a road opening permit. [Amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord.
No. 08-11]
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the application for permit is made
simultaneously with the commencement of the work or as soon
thereafter as is practical. The permit, when issued, shall be retroactive
to the date on which the work was begun.
C. Road opening permits may be issued to other public bodies without fee.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No.
81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
§ 189-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-6
1:585
§ 189-7. Issuance and terms of permit. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Manager of Engineering
Services or his/her designee and in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
§ 189-8. Contents of permit; filing. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 9-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-59;
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the
Company performing such construction, the names of the Companies that
will be providing construction equipment for both on or off site use for the
transportation of materials, the location where the excavation or tunnel is
to be made, the dimensions of the opening and the period during which the
permit shall be valid.
§ 189-9. Fees and deposits. [Amended 9-30-74 by Ord. No. 74-91-C;
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 5-22-89
by Ord. No. 89-24; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
C. The Township of East Brunswick Tax Map block and lot number of the
property for the benefit of which the opening is to be made.
D. Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
E. Character and purpose of the work proposed.
F. Time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
G. Each application shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the location
and dimensions of all openings. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
H. The names of streets that will be utilized by the Applicant's
Construction Vehicles to and from the worksite and other sub
contractors who may provide vehicles by either hire and or lease
arrangements with the Applicant.
I. Certificate of Liability Insurance naming the Township of East
Brunswick as an additional insured. [Added 7-7-08 by Ord. No.
08-11]
A. A fee must be paid when the application is made. The applicant shall be
charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.) for each permit. In addition, the
applicant shall post cash or certified check deposit according to the
following schedule [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]:
(1) Opening an improved road: Two thousand dollars ($2,000.)
[Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-9
1:586
§ 189-10. (Reserved) [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-11. (Reserved) [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-12. Insurance. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by
Ord. No. 08-11]
No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished satisfactory
proof of insurance against injury to persons and damage to property caused
by any act or omission of the applicant, his agents, employees or
subcontractors done in the course of the work to be performed under the
permit. The insurance shall cover all hazards likely to arise in connection
with the work, including but not limited to collapse and explosion, and
shall also insure against liability arising from completed operations. The
limits of the policy of insurance shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.) for
injury to any one (1) person, three million dollars ($3,000,000.) for injuries
to more than one (1) person in the same accident, and an aggregate of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.) for property damage for a single incident.
Requirements of this section may be waived in the case of public utilities
upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting
claims against it up to the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which
would otherwise be required.
§ 189-13. Rules and regulations for excavations. [Amended 7-7-08
by Ord. No. 08-11; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
All permits issued under this Article shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
(2) Opening an unimproved road, opening in the right-of-way, behind
the curb, or opening the unpaved shoulder of the road in the public
right-of-way: Two hundred dollars ($200.).
(3) A deposit of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.) shall be charged for
a tunneling operation.
B. The deposit set forth above is predicated on an excavation which
involves a perpendicular trench four (4) feet wide from the center of the
street to the curbline. Where an excavation of greater area is required,
an additional deposit proportioned to the increased size of the
excavation shall be required. Where the excavation is to be made in a
heavily traveled street or where for any other reason it is necessary for
a police officer to be stationed near the excavation to direct traffic, the
applicant shall compensate the Township Police Department for the
expense of stationing the police officer at the excavation. [Amended
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
C. The deposit set forth above shall not be returned until the construction
work is accepted by the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her
designee. [Added 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-13
1:587
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and,
during the hours of darkness, shall be provided with proper warning
lights. This regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any
other precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property.
B. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Director of Public Safety.
The Department of Public Safety shall be informed of all street closings
at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance.
C. For just cause the time limit during which the permit shall be valid may
be extended by the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her
designee. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by
Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
D. No work shall be done in such a manner as to interfere with any water
main or sewer line or any connection with either of the same from any
building unless that is the purpose of the excavation or permission has
been obtained in advance from the Township Department or agency
having jurisdiction over such property. No work shall be carried on in
such a manner as to result in damage or destruction of any property of
the Township of East Brunswick or Sewer Utility unless this is
necessary for completion of the work and permission has been obtained
in advance from the head of the township department or agency having
jurisdiction over such property. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11;
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and shall
be compacted by tamping or other suitable means. Where the Manager
of Engineering Services or his/her designee determines that the
excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill
the excavation with suitable material which shall be placed in layers not
exceeding six (6) inches in depth and thoroughly compacted. Upon
completion of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess material
and leave the premises in a clean condition.
If the Township determines that any backfilled excavation has settled or
caved in, it shall so notify the permittee, who shall promptly continue
backfilling until the Township determines that settlement is complete.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-84; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
F. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one (1) part cement to ten (10) parts
sand.
G. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted is not performed in accordance with the
§ 189-13 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-13
1:588
§ 189-14. Regulations for restoration of surface. [Amended 7-7-08
by Ord. No. 08-11]
In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in
accordance with the following rules, regulations and requirements:
§ 189-15. Conditions of permit. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
regulations set forth in this section and any other regulations that
may be established then the Township may complete the work itself
and restore the surface of the street. The cost of completing the work
and restoring the street shall be charged to the permittee and may
be deducted from his deposit or recovered by an action in any court
of competent jurisdiction. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her
designee has determined that settlement of the subsurface is complete
and the area properly prepared for restoration. [Amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08 by Ord.
No. 08-11]
B. The street surface shall be restored so as to extend six (6) inches
beyond the excavation on all sides.
C. When any foundation is restored by the use of portland cement
concrete, the same shall consist of a mixture by volume of one (1) part
of portland cement, two (2) parts of sand and four (4) parts of gravel or
stone, so as to attain a compressive strength of four thousand five
hundred (4,500) pounds per square inch after twenty-seven (27) days.
[Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
D. All foundations and surfaces of Class A improved roads shall be
restored with the same type of material and to the same depths as
existed prior to the making of the excavation.
A. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the entity to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No.
08-11]
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
forty-five (45) days from the date of issuance of the permit. If work is
not commenced within that time, the permit shall automatically
terminate unless extended in writing by the Township. The Department
of Planning and Engineering shall be notified 24 hours prior to the start
of any work and upon completion of the improvements. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08
by Ord. No. 08-11]
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the Township, must be kept in
§ 189-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-15
1:589
§ 189-16. (Reserved)
§ 189-17. Specifications for barricades and signs. [Added 2-9-76 by
Ord. No. 76-91-D]
The permit holder shall conform to the requirements in the current manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices Part VI when required by the township
to provide barricades and/or signs.
§ 189-18. Traffic safety precautions. [Added 2-9-76 by Ord. No.
76-91-D]
Prior to the issuance of a road opening permit the applicant shall contact
the Public Safety Department, Traffic Safety Division, for instructions on the
traffic safety precautions to be taken.
possession of the person actually performing the work and shall be
exhibited on demand to any duly authorized employee of the Township
of East Brunswick. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 10-12-81 by Ord. No. 81-409; 7-7-08
by Ord. No. 08-11]
D. Revocation of permit. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
(1) A permit may be revoked for any of the following reasons
[Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11:
(a) Violation of any provision of this Article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances.
(b) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(c) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which
endangers life or property which creates any condition which
is unhealthy, unsanitary or declared by any provision of this
Code to constitute a nuisance.
(2) The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as that set
forth in Chapter 135, Licenses, Article I, for the revocation of
licenses, except that the initial hearing shall be before the Manager
of Engineering Services with a right of appeal to the Township
Council; and the Manager of Engineering Services may provide
that the revocation shall not become effective if the permittee
corrects the violation within a specified period of time. [Amended
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
E. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case the Township
Council may by resolution impose special conditions to which the
issuance of the permit may be subject or may decide that any provision
of this Article shall not apply or shall be altered.
§ 189-15 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-19
1:590
§ 189-19. Notice of street improvement; work requiring excavation
must be completed. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
Before any street is improved or paved, the Township Clerk shall give notice
to all persons owning property abutting on the street and to all public
utilities and authorities operating in the township that the street is about
to be paved or improved. All connections and repairs to utilities in the
street and all other work which requires excavation of the street shall be
completed within thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice. The time for
the completion of the work may be extended in writing by the Manager of
Engineering Services upon application by the person performing the work.
This section shall not excuse any person from the requirement of obtaining
a permit as provided in § 189-5.
§ 189-20. Special permission required for excavations in recently
improved streets.
A. Except in case of an emergency, no person to whom notice was given as
provided in § 189-19 shall be issued a permit to excavate the street to
which the notice related for a period of five (5) years unless its issuance
is approved by the Township Council.
B. Subsection A shall not apply in any case where the excavation is made
necessary by the occurrence of some event which could not have been
foreseen at the time that notice was given or where the public health or
safety requires the performance of the work in question.
§ 189-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-20
1:591

ARTICLE III
Mapping of Facilities Under Streets
[Adopted 10-13-64; deleted 7-7-08 Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-21. (Reserved) [Deleted 7-7-08 Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-22. (Reserved) [Deleted 7-7-08 Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-22
1:593

ARTICLE IV
Right of Way Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 10-9-67 as Ord. No. 67-91; amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No.
08-11]
§ 189-23. Permit required. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove or cause to be
constructed or removed any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter or
any part thereof within any public right-of-way in the Township of East
Brunswick without first having obtained a permit to do so from the Manager
of Engineering Services or his/her designee.
§ 189-24. Submission of application; information required.
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84;
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
Applications for a permit under this Article shall be made to the Township
by the owner of the premises or his agent upon forms provided by the
township and shall contain the following information
§ 189-25. Fees and charges. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-91-E;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) shall be charged for each permit, and
in addition thereto, the applicant shall pay the cost of all tests which the
Manager of Engineering Services or his/her designee deems necessary. The
fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed, and the cost of all
proposed tests shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Township deems necessary in order to
determine whether the work will comply with this Article. [Amended
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-26
1:595
§ 189-26. Specifications. [Amended 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-451;
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-27. Notice for inspection and testing. [Amended 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No.
08-11]
The applicant shall notify the Department of Planning and Engineering at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of pouring or laying any
sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter.
§ 189-28. Exceptions. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
This Article shall not apply to:
§ 189-29. Maintenance and repair required. [Added 7-22-74 by Ord.
No. 74-91-B; 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
A. All materials and work shall be in accordance with the current NJDOT
Specification Manual and the Township specifications on file in the
Department of Planning and Engineering. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-91-E; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-84; 7-7-08 by Ord. No.
08-11]
B. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with township specifications.
C. No concrete sidewalk shall be placed or covered with blacktop.
D. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and
replaced. The breaking and recapping of curbing is specifically
prohibited.
E. New or replacement sidewalks in all historic districts shall be
constructed of brick in accordance with township specifications on file
in the office of the Department of Planning and Engineering.
[Amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
F. New or replacement curbing in all historic districts shall be constructed
of Belgian block in accordance with township specifications on file in
the office of the Department of Planning and Engineering. [Amended
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
A. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters
in a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guaranties required by the approving authority. [Amended 7-7-08 by
Ord. No. 08-11]
B. The repair or replacement of less than eight (8) lineal feet of an existing
sidewalk.
§ 189-26 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-29
1:596
A. The sidewalk and curb shall be kept in good repair by the owner or
owners of the property in front of which the said sidewalk and curb are
located.
B. In accordance with the notice procedures provided in this section, any
sidewalk or curb on any public street which is out of line or grade, or
broken or out of repair, or is otherwise in need of construction or repair
shall be re-laid to line or grade or the broken portions thereof shall be
repaired or reconstructed by the owner or owners of the land in front of
which any such improvement, reconstruction or repair is to be made.
This section shall not apply to any sidewalk or curb during the period it
is covered by a performance or maintenance bond or any sidewalk or
curb which was installed incorrectly by a developer or contractor over
which the township has or had control.
C. Whenever the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her designee
determines that such sidewalk or curb work is necessary, a notice shall
be served upon such owner or owners directing completion of the work
within sixty (60) days after service of said notice. The notices shall
specify in sufficient detail the character of the improvement,
reconstruction or repair to be made. It shall set forth a description of
the property affected sufficiently definite to identify the same and shall
otherwise comply with the requirements of N.J.R.S. 40:65-1, etc. for
such cases made and provided. The notice shall give opportunity to
such owner or owners to be heard and to offer satisfactory reasons to
the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her designee why such
work should not be done. Service of the notice and proof of service
thereof shall be made in accordance with the requirements of N.J.R.S.
40:65-1, etc. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
D. If, in the absence of any good and sufficient reason why such work
should not be done, said owner fails to make such improvement,
reconstruction or repair within sixty (60) days after service of the notice
aforesaid, then the Manager of Engineering Services or his/her
designee may have the work done at the cost and expense of said owner
or owners, and an accurate account of the cost thereof shall be kept.
The cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner or owners of the
land in front of the improvement or repair, and a report thereof shall be
filed with the Township Clerk. The governing body, after notice to the
owner or owners, shall confirm said report and file it with the Tax
Collector. Such sidewalk or curb assessment shall bear interest from
the time of confirmation and shall be a lien on the real estate assessed
and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes and other legal
assessments. [Amended 7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
E. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall impose an obligation upon the
Township of East Brunswick, the Manager of Engineering Services or
any other Township employee to survey existing sidewalks, to
determine whether repairs are necessary, or to cause any sidewalk to
be reconstructed or repaired. [Added 7-13-87 by Ord. No. 87-849;
7-7-08 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 189-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-29
1:597

ARTICLE V
Vacation of Streets and Other Public Rights-of-Way
[Added 10-24-83 by Ord. No. 83-539]
§ 189-30. Mandatory Procedures on Vacations of Streets and Other
Public Rights-of-Way. [Amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
Whenever there shall have been a dedication of land as a public street or
other public right-of-way in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-19 and the same
has not been accepted or opened by the Township of East Brunswick and the
governing body shall have received a request to vacate and extinguish the
public right arising from such dedication, the procedures in this Ordinance
shall be followed and are deemed to be mandatory. The request to vacate
shall be transmitted to the Director of the Department of Planning and
Engineering who shall make or cause to be made a visual inspection of the
lands which are proposed to be vacated. He/she shall submit a report to
the East Brunswick Planning Board based upon his/her findings which shall
include a review of tax maps and title information to the extent available.
The Planning Board, in its discretion, may hold a hearing as to the proposed
vacation upon giving written notice to all persons residing or owning
property within 1000 feet of the lands to be vacated which notice shall be
either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. The
Planning Board shall recommend to the Township Council either that the
request to vacate be granted or that it be denied, setting forth its findings.
If the Planning Board recommends that the street or public right-of-way be
vacated, the Township Council may, at its discretion, adopt an ordinance
proposing the vacation of the lands in question subject to state statutes.
At least one (1) week prior to the date set for second reading of the
ordinance, the Township Clerk shall mail by ordinary mail a copy of the
ordinance adopted on first reading to all persons residing or owning land
within 1000 feet of any portion of the lands to be vacated and the Township
Council may, in its discretion, adopt or refuse to adopt the ordinance on
second reading.
§ 189-31. Recording of Documentation.
No ordinance vacating a public street or other right-of-way shall be deemed
to have been completed until the vacation ordinance and the map showing
the area which has been vacated shall have been recorded by the Township
Clerk in the Middlesex County Clerk's Office.
§ 189-32. Reimbursement.
If a request to vacate a public street or other right-of-way has been made
by a property owner or property owners, such property owner or property
owners shall, on a pro rata basis, reimburse the Township for all mailing
and publication costs incurred by the Township.
§ 189-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-32
1:599
Chapter 192
DESIGN GUIDELINES & STANDARDS
§ 189-32 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 189-32
1:600
ARTICLE I
General Design Guidelines and Standards
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines and standards for site
plan, P.U.R.D. and subdivision design and associated improvements, and
to guide the approving authority in the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40-55D-2
municipalities are permitted to adopt regulations which will promote a
desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangements.
§ 192-2. Requirements. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
Effective June 3, 1997 certain site improvements as specified by state
statute and associated with residential site plans, subdivisions or P.U.R.D.'s
shall be regulated by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C.,
Title 5, Chapter 21). Any required improvements not provided for within
this chapter shall be designed in accordance with professionally recognized
design standards and constructed in accordance with accepted engineering
and planning practice. Prior agreement between the approving authority
and the applicant shall be provided for standards not covered in this
ordinance.
Except for those site improvements associated with residential development
and governed by the provisions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21) should it be demonstrated that the
minimum requirements herein, in a particular situation are not adequate to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the township
the approving Board may apply more stringent requirements based on the
advice of its professionals and accepted engineering and planning practice.
§ 192-3. Responsibility for Design.
The developer shall be responsible for and bear the entire cost of any and all
investigations, tests, reports, surveys, samples, calculations, environmental
assessments, designs, researches or any other activity necessary for the
completion of the design. In those cases not covered by these standards,
sufficient precautions shall be taken to assure that the design implements
the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance and the Township
Master Plan. Any decision of the Planning or Zoning Board regarding the
suitability or sufficiency of any design proposal, taken upon advice of its
professionals and subject to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be
deemed conclusive and shall govern.
§ 192-4. Waiver of Requirement. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No.
97-25]
The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:601
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the township. However, if
the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning or Zoning Board
may permit such exemption(s) and waiver(s) as may be reasonable, within
the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards
established by this chapter, the Township Zoning Ordinance and Township
Master Plan. Waivers of Residential Site Improvement Standards shall
follow the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21.
§ 192-5. Definition. [Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-06]
Design objectives provide a framework for sound planning while design
standards set forth specific improvement requirements.
All other words and phrases are defined in Township Code 132-3,
Definitions as well as Township Code 228-3 Definitions and word usage.
§ 192-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-5
1:602
ARTICLE II
Design Objectives
In project design and in reviewing all development applications, the
following principles of subdivision and site design shall apply:
§ 192-6. Site Analysis.
Assessment of site characteristics, such as general site condition; geology
and soil; topography; climate; ecology; existing vegetation, structures and
road networks; environmental features; visual features; adjacent sites and
uses; environmental hazards, such as noise, pollution, etc. and past and
present use of the site.
§ 192-7. Building and Parking Layout.
The design layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed so as to
provide an aesthetically pleasing design as well as an efficient arrangement.
Particular attention shall be given to public safety and emergency vehicle
accessibility, impact on surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands. Streets, lots, parking areas, and buildings
shall be designed and arranged to reduce unnecessary impervious cover
and to mitigate adverse effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, glare,
drainage and utilities on neighboring properties. Buildings shall be spaced
so that adequate privacy and security is provided. Pedestrian and vehicular
traffic movements within and adjacent to the site shall be planned with
particular emphasis on the provision of, and efficient layout of, parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading, safe movement of people, goods
and vehicles from access roads within the site, between buildings and
between buildings and vehicles. On each application for site plan approval
the Planning Board shall determine where parking islands are required
in parking lots. In arriving at its determination, the Planning Board shall
consider internal traffic circulation, protection for lighting stanchions, sign
and other structures, size of the proposed paved portion of the parking lot,
intensity of use of facility, desirability of landscaping islands and overall
safety of the area.
§ 192-8. Access to Streets.
Access to the site from adjacent streets shall be designed so as to interfere
as little as possible with traffic flow on these streets and to permit vehicles
rapid and safe ingress to and egress from the site.
§ 192-9. Environmental Features, Grading.
Locate development to preserve the natural features of the site, to preserve
areas of environmental sensitivity and to minimize negative impacts and
alteration of natural features. Design buildings, lots and sites to reduce cut
and fill, to avoid flooding and adversely affecting ground water quality and
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-9
1:603
aquifer recharge. Conservation easements may be required along drainage
and stormwater courses and around ponds, marshes, bogs, streams and
other watercourses and along steep slopes or around significant stands of
trees. Such easements are intended to preserve the stabilizing vegetation
to prevent erosion.
§ 192-10. Street System.
Design street system to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of
traffic. Design the street system to have a logical pattern; to respect natural
features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape.
§ 192-11. Parking.
A sufficient number of on-site parking spaces shall be provided to avoid
parking congestion on adjacent sites and streets. Parking stalls shall be
sized to provide sufficient space for access to vehicles without damage to
property.
§ 192-12. Lighting.
Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons and
vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights shall be arranged so
as to minimize glare and reflections on adjacent properties.
§ 192-13. Buffering.
Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to minimize
off-site glare from headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, to
screen the movement of people and vehicles, and to shield activities from
adjacent properties when necessary. Buffering serves as a protective barrier
and serves to reduce air pollution, dust and litter. Buffering shall provide
a year-round visual screen in order to minimize adverse impacts between
adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing, berms, evergreens,
shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the
stated objectives.
§ 192-14. Landscaping.
Whereas it has been noted that well designed landscape plantings and
existing natural landscaping can reduce air pollution; regulate solar
radiation and wind control; influence the type and speed of pedestrian and
automobile traffic flow; cut visual discomfort by screening out glare and
reflection; prevent soil erosion; and produce an aesthetic appearance, it is
the intent of this ordinance to provide proper guidelines and specifications
for preserving the natural character of the land and vegetation consistent
with the legal and purposeful use and development of all residential,
commercial and industrial land.
Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site design and shall be
integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and buffering
§ 192-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-14
1:604
requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, ground cover,
perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture and art in an imaginative manner.
Landscaping shall be provided in public areas, on recreation sites, and
adjacent to buildings to screen parking areas, to mitigate adverse impacts,
and provide windbreaks for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings,
streets, and parking. Plants or other landscaping material selected shall
best serve the intended function, and shall represent materials appropriate
for local soil conditions, water availability, and environment. Plant material
used should not be of an exotic variety requiring substantial maintenance
or material highly subject to pollution, salt damage along highways and
current insect disease manifestations. The type and amount of landscaping
shall vary with the type of development, and shall be used to accent site
entrances with special landscaping treatment. The impact of any proposed
landscaping plan at various seasonal time intervals shall be considered.
§ 192-15. Drainage and Utilities.
Storm drainage facilities shall be an integral part of the development, and
shall be arranged to utilize as much of the natural drainage pattern as
possible. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply, garbage
disposal and public utilities shall be reviewed and considered. Particular
emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of existing systems, and the
need for improvements, both on-site and off-site, to adequately and safely
carry run-off and sewage, and to maintain an adequate supply of water at
sufficient pressure and quality. Utilities shall be located underground so as
not to affect the streetscape.
§ 192-16. Refuse Disposal and Storage.
Refuse disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent collection, vermin and
rodent protection and aesthetic considerations.
§ 192-17. Signs.
Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious with
other signs on the site and located so as to achieve their purpose without
constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 192-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-17
1:605

ARTICLE III
Subdivision Design Review Standards
§ 192-18. General.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the municipality. Where either, or both,
an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. Streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown
on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered
in the review and approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or
Official Map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the
final plat in accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44 and shall be
designed so as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the design
standards in the following sections.
§ 192-19. Development Pattern.
The arrangements and right-of-way widths of streets not shown on the
Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets.
§ 192-20. Internal Streets.
Minor streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic; the right-ofway
width shall be measured from lot line to lot line; and the Planning Board
shall determine the width of the public right-of-way and paved portion
thereof. In no event shall the width of the right-of-way be less than fifty
(50) feet and the width of the paved portion less than thirty (30) feet. All
streets, whether private or public, shall meet the minimum standards for
public streets set forth in this Chapter and in the Master Plan.
Subdivisions which adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street width
requirements of Township Codes shall dedicate additional width along
either one (1) or both sides of the street. If the subdivision is along one (1)
side only, one-half (1/2) of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
The arrangement of streets shall conform to the circulation element of the
Master Plan or Official Map for the community.
§ 192-21. Blocks.
Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as
to accommodate the lot sizes required in the area by the Zoning Chapter
of this Code and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
§ 192-22. Lot Dimensions.
§ 192-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-22
1:607
§ 192-23. Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
All subdivisions shall be designed so as to minimize changes in existing
grades and to preserve natural features, such as trees greater than four (4)
inches in diameter, wooded areas, brooks, hilltops, views and vistas, rock
outcrops, as well as environmentally sensitive areas including wetlands,
steep slopes, areas with seasonal high water table within one and a half
feet of the surface and water bodies. In addition to the provisions of this
subsection the developer shall also be required to comply with all the
provisions of the township ordinance regulating the removal or destruction
of trees.
§ 192-24. Open Spaces.
Planned unit residential developments and residential cluster developments
shall be required to provide open space as specified in the zoning ordinance.
Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreational
facilities in accordance with National Recreation Association standards to
serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall
be designed to preserve important site amenities and environmentally
sensitive areas. Stormwater detention facilities are not considered as part
of the required open space unless the approving agency finds that such a
facility is designed to also serve as an open space amenity. Direct access
shall be provided to open space from the residences.
§ 192-25. Easements.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Chapter of this Code.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets, and the rear lot line dimension shall
not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the width of the front lot line
dimension.
C. Each lot shall front upon an approved street.
A. Where new utilities will not be installed within public right-of-ways, the
developer shall provide appropriate easements in accordance with the
standards required by the appropriate utility.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or
channel, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way, conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, floodplain or wetland buffer and further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever
possible, watercourses shall be located along rear or side lot lines.
Where necessary, the applicant shall obtain approval of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 192-22 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-25
1:608
C. Where detention or retention basins are proposed within a subdivision,
there shall be provided an easement conforming with the grading,
physical and structural features of the basin.
§ 192-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-25
1:609

ARTICLE IV
Design and Performance Standards Applicable to All Development
§ 192-26. Aprons.
The apron is the area between the street pavement and the back edge of the
sidewalk or the street right-of-way.
§ 192-27. Bikeways. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
§ 192-28. Buffers.
A. Materials.
Materials shall conform to the N.J.D.O.T. Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction in effect at the time of construction.
1. Thickness for residential uses.
The concrete shall be six (6) inches thick with a 6" x 6" #4 wire
mesh over an approved subbase for aprons leading to residential
uses.
2. Thickness for non-residential uses.
The concrete shall be eight (8) inches thick with a 6" x 6" #4 wire
mesh over a subbase of four (4) inches of stone for aprons leading
to non-residential uses.
A. Requirement.
Separate bicycle paths shall be required if paths have been specified
as part of the adopted Master Plan. At the discretion of the Board,
bikeways or easements for future installation thereof shall be required,
depending upon factors such as the location of the development in
relationship to other populated areas or its location with respect to
other bikeways within the Township, whether existing or proposed, and
adopted by the Planning Board or reflected on the Master Plan.
1. Bicycle Paths.
Bicycle paths shall not exceed a grade of six percent (6%), except
for short distances, and shall be not less than five (5) feet wide for
one-way travel and eight (8) feet wide for two-way travel. Bicycle
paths shall be constructed with a base consisting of a minimum of
four (4) inches of gravel, crushed stone or slag on the subgrade
and a surface course of three (3) inches of FABC-1. Where separate
bike paths intersect streets, the curbing shall be ramped for bicycle
access to the street grade. Bicycle-safe inlet grates shall be used in
the construction of all residential streets.
§ 192-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-28
1:611
A. Materials.
Buffering may consist of fencing, combinations of plant material that
are effective in all seasons, berms, rocks, boulders, significant
indigenous existing vegetation, mounds or combinations to achieve the
stated design objectives.
B. Requirement.
Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential zone or use, where a
multi-family development abuts a single-family development or singlefamily
zoning district, where reverse frontage design is required, or
along all residential lot lines abutting an arterial or collector road the
following buffer area and landscaping requirements shall apply:
A strip of land in no case less than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
Buffer areas shall be uniform in width and continuous.
C. Design.
Arrangement of planting in buffers shall provide maximum protection
between adjacent properties and avoid damage to existing plant
material. The design shall be aesthetically pleasing by mixing masses
of appropriate evergreen and deciduous material highlighting color,
texture, size and seasonal interest. Indigenous material shall be used
to achieve design objectives where appropriate. Buffers shall promote
succession of plant material.
D. Planting Specifications.
All plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural
standards.
E. Screening.
Parking areas, garbage collection and utility areas, and loading and
unloading areas shall be screened around their perimeter by a buffer
strip a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
F. Prohibition.
No structure, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be
permitted in the buffer area, except access drives from public streets
and permitted signs.
G. Maintenance.
Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds, tall grass and dead trees by the owner. Any fences and screen
planting shall be maintained permanently, and any plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one (1) year. Access shall be
provided for maintenance purposes.
§ 192-28 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-29
1:612
§ 192-29. Building Exterior.
All non-residential buildings shall have a finished architectural facade on all
sides.
§ 192-30. Clearing.
All clearing, excavation and embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the approved plan and applicable requirements of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications, approved Soil Erosion and Siltation Control
Plan and N.J.D.E.P. Rules and Regulations. No excavated material may be
removed from or added to a site except in accordance with an approved site
plan, subdivision or soil removal plan.
§ 192-31. Critical Areas.
In all developments the following critical areas shall be preserved as
undeveloped open space: wetlands as defined by New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, field verified by an on-site inspection; significant
trees defined as the largest known individual trees of each species in New
Jersey as listed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) Bureau of Forestry and large trees which are 90% or more of
the diameter of the known largest tree; lands in the floodplain as defined
in NJDEP in its Stream Encroachment Manual; steep slopes in excess
of twenty-five (25%) percent as measured over a 10-foot interval unless
appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion, and
resident safety are taken to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer;
habitats of rare, threatened or endangered vegetation and wildlife species
as identified on federal or state lists; and historically significant structures
and sites as listed on the federal or New Jersey Registers of Historic Places.
All site plans, subdivisions and general development plans shall comply with
the following requirements:
1. Each development plan shall identify and map on-site critical areas.
Such mapping shall depict the location of each critical area in relation
to the proposed development. Each critical area shall be distinguished
graphically and the total acreage of each critical area within each lot
shall be noted.
2. Critical areas shall be delineated as follows:
a. Tidal wetlands as defined by N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and as
delineated in the field with the delineation boundary verified in
writing by NJDEP.
b. Freshwater wetlands as defined by N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq. and as
delineated in the field with the delineation boundary verified by
N.J.D.E.P. through a Letter of Interpretation, presence/absence
letter or other written communication.
§ 192-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-31
1:613
c. Buffer or transition areas for tidal and freshwater wetlands as
required by N.J.D.E.P.
d. Location of significant trees as determined by field survey
indicating by notes the diameter at four feet and tree species.
e. Location of the 100 year floodplain boundary and floodway.
f. Areas of slope exceeding 25% as measured over a 10 foot vertical
change in grade.
g. The presence of potential habitat on the property of concern or
adjoining properties within 200 feet of rare, endangered or
threatened vegetation and wildlife based on written
communication with the New Jersey Natural Heritage Program.
The project site shall be indicated on USGS topographic
quadrangle map by the applicant and the map forwarded to the
Natural Heritage Program requesting information on the potential
presence of habitat for rare, threatened or endangered vegetation
and wildlife species.
3. Each development shall be designed to protect and prevent disturbance
of Critical Areas during construction and subsequent use of the
property. The following standards shall be adhered to:
a. Principal nonresidential buildings and accessory buildings and
structures, including open or enclosed parking, shall be setback at
least twenty (20) feet from the boundary of any required freshwater
wetland transition area or tidal wetland buffer area.
b. Where any yard of a residential development is within a freshwater
wetlands transitional area or tidal wetland buffer area, the
required yard setback shall be maintained between the building or
structures and the transition area/buffer area boundary.
c. All efforts to preserve significant trees are to be made including, as
appropriate, site redesign, use of tree wells, and other methods as
specified in the landscaping section of this ordinance.
d. Within the 100 year floodplain only activities permitted by
N.J.D.E.P. shall be permitted.
e. No development, grading or other alteration or disturbance is
permitted in areas with steep slopes in excess of twenty-five (25%)
unless such action is approved by the Township Engineer in view of
appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability,
erosion and resident safety which are reflected on the site plan.
f. If the presence of potential habitat for rare, threatened or
endangered vegetation and/or wildlife species has been identified
on-site or on adjoining properties by the New Jersey Natural
Heritage program, care should be taken during site design to
§ 192-31 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-31
1:614
§ 192-32. Curbs and Gutters. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-20;
8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
§ 192-33. Driveways.
preserve as much of this habitat as possible and to limit disruptions
to habitat on adjoining parcels.
g. Wherever and whenever possible, registered historic structures or
sites should be preserved and incorporated into the site design.
Alterations should be kept to a minimum.
A. Required.
Monolithic concrete, granite (Belgian) block curbs and gutters, or
combination concrete curb and gutter, as directed by the approving
authority, shall be installed along all edges of pavement.
B. Barrier Free Access.
Curbing abutting sidewalks shall be depressed and shall be designed
to provide barrier-free curb ramps constructed in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
C. Size and Specifications.
Size and specifications shall be in accordance with N.J.D.O.T. Standard
Specification for Road and Bridge Constructions in effect at the time of
construction. (See standard detail on file in the Department of Planning
and Engineering.)
D. Timing of Curb Construction.
In areas with bituminous concrete pavement, required curb shall be
constructed prior to the construction of the bituminous base courses.
Any required repairs to curbs which are not suitable for acceptance
shall be made prior to construction of the final pavement wearing
course.
A. Residential.
1. Grade.
The maximum grade of a driveway shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) and the minimum grade shall not be less than one percent
(1%) unless specifically approved by the Township Engineer.
2. Pavement Specifications.
All driveways within the Township right-of-way shall be paved with
material approved by the Township Engineer. Pavement for
§ 192-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-33
1:615
driveways shall be three inch bituminous stabilized base course
and a two inch bituminous surface course of material in
conformance with NJDOT standards.
3. Width.
The minimum width for a driveway for single-family dwelling shall
be twelve feet (12). The minimum width shall be twenty feet (20)
for a two car garage.
4. Driveway Depressions.
At each driveway without curb return radii, the curb shall be
depressed to form a driveway opening. The depression shall be
equal in length to the width of the driveway plus three (3) feet on
either side.
At driveways with curb return radii, the curb depression shall
accommodate the exterior limits of the radii. The depression shall
be smoothly formed to maintain a lowered curb face across the
depression of at least one (1) inch, but not more than one and
one-half (1 1/2) inches. The bottom of the curb shall be lowered to
maintain full curb depth across the depression.
B. Nonresidential.
1. Grade.
The maximum grade of a driveway shall not exceed ten percent
(10%) and the minimum grade shall not be less than one percent
(1%) unless specifically approved by the Township Engineer.
2. Pavement Specifications.
Pavement for driveways shall have five (5) inches bituminous
stabilized base and two (2) inches bituminous surface course of
material in conformance with N.J.D.O.T. Standard Specification for
Road and Bridge Constructions in effect at the time of construction.
3. Width.
Driveways shall provide curb return radii of not less than fifteen
(15) feet for all right turn movements. Driveway width shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) feet for one-way driveways and twentyfour
(24) feet for two-way driveways.
4. Driveway Depressions.
At driveways with curb return radii, the curb depression shall
accommodate the exterior limits of the radii. The depression shall
be smoothly formed to maintain a lowered curb face across the
depression of at least one (1) inch, but not more than one and
one-half (1 1/2) inches. The bottom of the curb shall be lowered to
maintain full curb depth across the depression.
§ 192-33 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-34
1:616
§ 192-34. Easements.
§ 192-35. Grading of Land.
A. Location.
Easements for utility and drainage installations shall be along side
and/or rear property lines where possible. These easements shall be
of sufficient width to accommodate the facilities, including access for
maintenance, but shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width.
Easements with subsurface conduits shall be a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet wide.
B. Mapped.
All easements shall be shown on the plat and site plan and shall
be clearly labeled and dimensioned as to permit accurate location of
easement limits. The purpose of the easement shall be stated on the
map.
C. Internal Grading.
Internal grading of a lot as by swale, berm or other topographical
feature designed to intercept or direct waters shall either be
designated within an easement on the map to be filed or be dedicated
by recorded instrument in such a way as to give notice to future owners
of the property and ensure continued maintenance of the drainage
feature. No overland swales shall be permitted across adjoining
properties.
D. Conveyed by Deed.
All easements shall be conveyed by deed to the Township of East
Brunswick or the proper authority and shall be approved by the
Township Attorney and Township Engineer or designees.
E. Staked.
The boundary line of any easement shall be monumented at its
intersection with all existing or proposed street lines.
F. Conservation Easements.
Easements shall be dimensioned on the plat and site plan according
to the limit of the natural conditions or such other configuration
appropriate to the area being placed in the easement and the design
of the development. Maintenance of conservation easements shall be
limited to rubbish and dead trees that pose a safety problem.
A. Requirement.
Sites shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to prevent
undesirable ponding of surface water. Grading shall be performed in a
manner which will minimize damage to, or destruction of, trees. Topsoil
§ 192-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-35
1:617
§ 192-36. Guiderails.
Guiderails, pipe railing, or other appropriate barricades, shall be designed
and placed at drainage structures, streams, embankment limits, curves
and other required locations as specified by New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
shall be provided and/or redistributed on the graded surface as cover
and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. Grading plans shall have
been submitted and approved with the subdivision plat or site plan, and
any departure from these plans must be approved by the Approving
Authority. Grading shall be designed to prevent or minimize damage to
structures or improvements when major storms exceeding the 100 year
storm design of the storm drainage system occur.
B. Drainage.
The site shall be graded to a storm drainage collector system of interior
drainage, designed in accordance with the standards for storm
drainage facilities and suitable drainage easements shall be provided.
C. Removal of Obstructions.
All tree stumps, masonry and other obstructions shall be removed and
recycled according to Township or County standards.
D. Lot Grading.
The minimum slope for lawns shall be two (2) percent and for smooth
hard-finished surfaces three-quarters of one percent (.75%).
The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation shall be sloped
away from the building at a slope of not less than one unit vertical in
twelve units horizontal (1:12) for a minimum distance of eight (8) feet.
A minimum of fifteen (15) feet behind the rear of any residential unit
shall be graded at a maximum of ten (10) percent so as to provide a
usable rear yard.
E. Siltation prevention.
The developer shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any
siltation of streams during construction. The developer shall provide
adequate provisions in accordance with the "Standard for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey" to prevent any and all deposition
of silt or other eroded material in any stream or water course. Such
provisions shall be shown on the approved plan including, but not
limited to, construction and maintenance of siltation basins or holding
ponds and diversion berms throughout the course of construction.
§ 192-35 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-37
1:618
§ 192-37. Homeowners Association.
A homeowners association may be established to own and maintain common
open space and common property designed within a development. The
developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will
govern the association, to be submitted with the application for the
preliminary approval. If established, the organization shall incorporate the
following provisions:
§ 192-38. Landscaping. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22;
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
A. The association shall be established before the units are sold.
B. Memberships shall be mandatory for each buyer and any successive
buyer.
C. Open space restrictions shall be permanent.
D. The association shall be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes,
the maintenance of recreation detention, retention and other facilities
and any other obligations assumed by the organization.
E. Owners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost; the assessment levied
by the association can become a lien on the property if allowed in the
master deed establishing the association.
F. The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed
needs.
G. The association shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, including a copy of the covenant,
model deeds and articles of incorporation.
A. Landscape Plan Required.
Site plan and subdivision applications shall include a separate, detailed
plan, drawn to a scale of no less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet,
of all proposed landscaping, buffering, screening and existing trees to
remain and be removed and all of the following items:
1. Plant listing, including:
a. All plant material to be used shall be keyed to plan(s) and
defined by botanical and common name.
b. Quantity to be used.
c. Size of material to be planted.
d. Ultimate sizes of each plant and time to reach maturity.
e. Characteristics, i.e., fall color, flowering, ornamental factors.
§ 192-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:619
f. Plant delivery method, i.e., container, balled and burlapped.
[Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
2. Information required for design must include:
a. Location, species and size i.e., caliper, of all existing plant
material to remain on site.
b. Indication of screening and buffer plantings required by
ordinance.
c. Location and spacing of each plant to be planted, shown to
scale.
d. Methods to be used in welling, staking and guying, mulching
and wrapping according to township standards.
e. Ground covers to be used in design, which may be indicated as
a mass planting, but spacing must be defined in plant list.
f. A means of screening utility boxes using evergreen plant
material where they appear at ground level.
g. Existing and proposed contours.
h. Plants and sizes of plants scheduled for removal.
3. Name, signature, seal and address of person, firm or organization
preparing landscape plans. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No.
93-22]
4. Placement and size of street trees shall be indicated along all
thoroughfares in accordance with township standard
specifications. A listing of acceptable street trees is on file with the
Department of Planning and Engineering. [Amended 5-10-93 by
Ord. No. 93-22]
5. Soil type and condition.
6. Description of physical site conditions of consequence, i.e.,
exposure, ground water level, urban vs. rural.
B. Protection of existing vegetation. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No.
93-22; 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
1. A four (4') foot high protective barrier shall be installed at the drip
line of each plant, group of plants or area of vegetation that is to
remain on the site and maintained throughout the duration of
construction. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 5-24-10 by
Ord. No. 10-11]
2. Barriers shall not be supported by the vegetation they are
protecting but shall be self-supporting. [Amended 5-24-10 by
Ord. No. 10-11]
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-38
1:620
3. Trees designated to remain on the construction site are to be
indicated on the site plan or subdivision plan as a clearing limit
area beyond which no disturbance shall occur. The barrier shall be
installed before a tree removal permit will be granted and/or before
any excavation or construction is begun. [Amended 5-10-93 by
Ord. No. 93-22]
4. No soil, soil stockpiling, storage of building materials or equipment
operation shall be permitted within the drip line or within eight (8)
feet, whichever is greater, of any existing tree trunk. [Added
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; amended 5-24-10 by Ord. No.
10-14]
5. Any clearing within the drip line or within eight (8') feet of any
vegetation to remain must be done by hand or with hand operated
equipment. [Added 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
C. Grading of land near trees. The grade of land located along the drip line
shall not be raised or lowered more than six (6) inches unless
compensated for by welling or retaining wall methods and in no event
be less than eight (8) feet from the trunk. [[Amended 5-10-93 by Ord.
No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
1. Tree wells.
For existing trees the well shall be the size of the drip line of the
tree. Wells are to be constructed of suitable material subject to
the Township Engineer's approval. Any well wall four feet (4') or
greater in diameter shall be designed by a licensed engineer with
calculations provided. Tree well details are to be field inspected to
determine specifications on a case by case application. In no event
shall a well be constructed arbitrarily without consent from the
Department of Planning and Engineering.
2. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls are to be constructed around each tree or group
of trees immediately after grade is lowered. This retaining wall is
to be constructed of a suitable material deemed appropriate by the
Township Engineer. Design calculations which have been signed
and sealed by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and approval. The walls shall be
located after a field inspection to determine the location of the wall
to insure maximum survivability.
3. Clearing near tree trunks.
Any clearing within the drip line of a tree must be done by hand. No
equipment is to be driven over this area, and no building materials
are to be stacked against the trees or within the area of the barrier.
4. Trees are not to be used as supports or for stockpiling.
§ 192-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:621
No tree is to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utilities or
any other device. Topsoil is to be stockpiled in an area outside of
the drip line from any tree designated to remain.
D. Specifications for new plantings of trees and shrubs. [Amended
5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
1. Only nursery-grown plant materials will be acceptable and shall
conform with the standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen.
2. Prior to the installation of all plant material, the results of physical
and chemical tests of the subsoil and topsoil shall be submitted to
the Director of Planning and Engineering to assess soil composition
and if the pH is acceptable for proposed planting.
3. Trees and shrubs shall be planted only when the soil is frost-free
and friable.
4. All material shall be guaranteed for one year from date of planting.
5. The use of and planting of bare root material shall be prohibited.
[Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
6. All material shall be planted so that the top of the root ball is no
higher or lower than the existing/finished grade dependent upon
soil conditions. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; amended
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
7. Minimum size of material at time of planting shall be 2-1/2 inches in
caliper for shade trees, 5-6 feet in height for evergreens and
ornamentals, and 18-24 inches in height or spread for most shrubs.
[Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
8. Upon establishment of plant material at a site (approx. 1 growing
season) all stakes, guying, tree wrapping, and saucers shall be
removed. [Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
9. The use of nylon twine on the root balls of proposed plant material
is prohibited. All burlap shall be pulled back 1/3 at time of planting.
[Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
E. Specifications for ground covers and mulch. [Amended 3-11-96 by
Ord. No. 96-6]
1. All planting beds must be mulched. The type to be used shall be
noted on the site plan. Minimum required depth of placement is
three (3) inches but shall not exceed four (4) inches. A NJDEP
approved chemical preemergence selective herbicide and/or a
permeable landscape fabric shall be used to reduce weed growth.
The chemical to be used shall be specified on the site plan and used
according to directions.
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-38
1:622
2. Ground covers are required in place of grass in small and restricted
areas, such as tree and shrub beds and planters. Suitability of
material is subject to the approval of the Planning and Engineering
staff.
F. Design specifications. [Amended 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
1. Planting Strips.
Planting strips shall be provided between adjoining parking lots
providing control of vehicular movement from one parking lot to
the other.
2. Parking lot island specifications.
a. Where parking islands are to be planted, they shall be of a
minimum width of six (6) feet from interior edge of curb to
curb.
b. Parking islands are permitted in any parking lot but shall be
required in all parking lots providing for more than thirty (30)
parking spaces. Planted islands shall be provided within
parking areas at a ratio of one (1) island per thirty (30) parking
stalls. [Amended 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
c. All single-parking curbed island planters must be a minimum of
six feet by twenty feet and double-parking curbed island
planters a minimum of six feet by forty feet. The minimum
depth of acceptable backfill in such planters must be two (2)
feet for shrubs and four (4) feet for trees, unless poor drainage
conditions exist which would require modifications.
G. Planting Procedures. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
1. Tagging.
Each tree planted must be tagged with a durable label bearing the
following information and must be inspected and approved prior to
removal:
a. Genus, species, variety and plant patent number if a patented
tree.
b. Cultural requirements, including watering and fertilization.
2. Staking. Trees shall be staked in the following manner: [Amended
5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
a. Three (3) stakes shall be driven a minimum of two (2) feet into
undisturbed soil outside the planting hole. [Amended 5-10-93
by Ord. No. 93-22]
b. Stakes when driven shall be one-half to two-thirds (1/2 to 2/3)
the height of the tree measured from ground level.
§ 192-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:623
c. Stakes shall be two (2) inches in diameter, minimum, at the
narrowest end.
d. Stakes shall be placed in line with prevailing winds.
e. Stakes shall be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge
galvanized wire with visible safety flagging covered with
rubber or plastic hose where wire is likely to come in contact
with the tree trunk. An alternate may be any of the
commercially available materials designed for staking trees
upon approval of the Township. The loop in contact with the
tree shall be loose enough to permit growth and prevent
grinding and girdling for two (2) years but shall be tightly
bound to the stake to prevent slipping.
3. Wrapping.
Each tree shall be wrapped with an expandable paper or cloth
treated to last at least one (1) year.
a. This wrap shall extend from the ground level up the trunk to
the first branches.
b. This wrap is to prevent sun scald and shall be attached or
fastened at each end with a material that will permit tree
growth without girdling.
4. Saucer.
A ring of packed soil shall be placed around the finished planting
hole of each tree.
a. The saucer shall be a minimum of six (6) inches higher than the
finished grade.
b. Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top end and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
c. Saucers are to be designed to catch and hold the maximum
amount of water, either from natural precipitation or irrigation.
5. Mulching.
a. A three-inch minimum to four-inch maximum layer of mulch
shall be applied around each individual or group of trees and
shrubs.
b. A "mulch" shall be considered a shredded organic material that
is not readily subject to movement by wind or water.
c. Untreated new wood chips are not acceptable because of the
bacteria drawing available nitrogen from the soil, thus
preventing its use by the plants it is intended to protect. The
use of marble chips is specifically prohibited.
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-38
1:624
6. Edging.
A physical edging of steel or other durable material with the
minimum dimensions of four (4) inches by one-eighth (1/8) inch
shall be installed flush with the grade where planting areas abut
turf areas. This is to perpetually delineate planting beds and reduce
bed maintenance.
H. General specifications.
1. Only first quality nursery-grown materials that meet the standards
of the American Association of Nurserymen shall be acceptable.
2. In the event that the season is not appropriate, a cash escrow equal
to double the cost of completing the work to be done, plus ten
percent (10%), as estimated by township personnel, of said
landscaping installation, must be posted with the township to
ensure that the installed landscaping complies with the
requirements set forth.
I. Tree Removal. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by
Ord. No. 96-6; 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
1. Permit Required.
No person shall remove or destroy or cause to be or allow to
be removed or destroyed any tree without first obtaining a tree
removal permit. Tree removal permits shall be issued by the
Director of Planning and Engineering or his/her designee. A permit
is required for the removal of all trees of six (6") inch caliper or
larger. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 5-24-10 by Ord.
No. 10-14]
2. Permit Application.
Applications for a permit shall be made to the Township
Department of Planning and Engineering and shall contain the
following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the owner of the property from which
the tree(s) are to be removed.
c. Location on the property of the tree(s) to be removed,
indicated on a plan. If the tree removal permit is for a single
family residence the plan shall consist of a tree location sketch.
For any other properties subject to the requirements of this
ordinance the tree location plan shall be indicated on a survey
prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor. [Amended 3-11-96 by
Ord. No. 96-6]
§ 192-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:625
(1) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to be removed,
specifically by an assigned number, and the caliper of each
tree. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by
Ord. No. 96-6]
(2) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to remain, specifically by
an assigned number. [Amended 3-11-96 by Ord. No.
96-6]
(3) The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line (i.e.,
where the four foot high standard wood snow fence will be
erected). [Amended 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
(4) For any clearing greater than two acres a representative
five (5%) percent of the wooded areas proposed to be
cleared shall be inventoried. The representative 5% shall
be determined by agreement between the Director of the
Department of Planning and Engineering or his/her
designee and the applicant. Where less than two acres is
proposed to be cleared all trees to be removed shall be
inventoried. [Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
(5) All trees greater than twenty (20) inches in caliper or any
specimen trees (i.e., any unique or remarkable tree or
species) to be removed shall be indicated on the plan.
[Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
d. Any other information which may reasonably be required to
enable the application to be properly evaluated.
3. Exemptions. The following properties and uses shall be exempt
from the requirements of obtaining a tree removal permit and the
provisions of this code: [Added 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
a. Existing residential properties 15,000 square feet or less in
area and removing one (1) tree in any given one (1) year
period.
b. Any property under a woodland management plan provided the
woodland management plan is on file and certified by the local
tax assessor.
c. Public entities, local utilities, Local, County, State and Federal
Authorities maintaining property, easements or right of ways in
the normal course of business or as required by State and
Federal regulations.
d. The removal of individual tree limbs or branches as long as the
habit and viability of the tree remains.
4. Where an application is made in connection with the construction
of a building or other improvement, no building permit shall be
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-38
1:626
issued until the tree removal permit has been granted. [Amended
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
a. Existing Residential Property. If the application is for an
existing residential dwelling or a homeowners association and
discloses that the total number of trees to be removed or
destroyed on the property or open space area in question, and
those which are the subject of the application, is ten (10) or
less, the permit may be issued without replacement trees
required. Within a one year period permits may be issued for
removal of no more than ten (10) trees on the same property
without replacement trees being required. Any tree removal
occurring where a homeowners association exists must obtain
approval by the ruling body of the association prior to
obtaining a tree removal permit. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord.
No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6
b. New Residential Development.
1. If the application is for a new residential development
(subdivisions), up to fifty (50%) percent of the trees may be
removed for the purpose of clearing for the building
envelope, driveways and yard space for the building lots
only without replacement trees required. [Amended
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
2. For new residential development where tree removal is to
occur within public or private roadways/right-of-ways,
drainage facilities, parking areas or proposed open space
all trees are subject to replacement in accordance with
this section of the ordinance. [Added 3-11-96 by Ord.
No. 96-6]
c. Agricultural Operations. Agricultural operations are exempt
from replacement requirements providing the property in
question is farmed for a minimum of five (5) years after the
date of clearing. An application must be submitted prior to
clearing. If the property is developed for any other use before
the five (5) years expires, the replacement obligation will be
enforced according to the new use of the property. [Amended
5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
d. Nonresidential Development.
All commercial and industrial developments are required to
replace all trees removed in accordance with this section of the
ordinance.
5. Inspection Required.
A representative of the Department of Planning and Engineering
shall inspect the trees which are the subject of the application, the
§ 192-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:627
drainage, and other physical conditions existing on the property,
and on adjacent properties.
No hazardous trees shall be permitted to remain on a property
beyond completion of a project and/or the release of a performance
bond. An inspection of replacement trees and removal of
potentially hazardous, dead or dying vegetation will be required
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of a
performance bond. [Amended 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
6. Tree Escrow Fund Established.
A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established by the Township to
promote environmental enhancement programs such as tree
planting, tree preservation, park development, landscaping and/or
other related projects on or within Municipally owned properties
or facilities. A separate trust account shall be established for this
purpose. Appropriations from the Tree Escrow Fund shall be
authorized by the Mayor and Council and shall be used for a
municipal purpose through the recommendation of the Department
of Planning and Engineering. [Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]
7. Replacement Tree Value Calculations.
The replacement value of all trees to be removed where
replacement trees are required by this ordinance shall be
calculated as follows: [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22;
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
a. Dead and diseased trees are not counted as trees to be
replaced. The value of proposed shade, ornamental, evergreen
and shrub material shall be deducted from the calculated
amount for replacement trees. The value of the proposed
landscape material shall be calculated based upon average
area costs for plant material.
Trees to be Removed Replacement Trees
Caliper $/Tree
greater than 6"
up to 12"
$250.00
greater than 12"
up to 18"
$500.00
greater than 18"
up to 24"
$750.00
greater than 24" $1,000.00
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-38
1:628
b. The applicant will receive a one for one replacement tree
credit should stands of ten (10) or more trees greater than 6
inches in caliper be preserved within tree removal areas.
[Added 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; amended 5-24-10 by
Ord. No. 10-14]
c. Should the value of the trees to be removed be greater than the
material value of the proposed landscaping then the
outstanding balance shall be provided with additional shade
tree plantings on site unless one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist [Amended 3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6]:
1. The site in question can not physically accommodate the
total replacement amount of trees. The applicant shall
contribute an amount equal to the calculated monetary
value of removed trees minus the value of the proposed
landscaping to the Township Tree Escrow Fund.
[Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by Ord.
No. 96-6]
2. The Department of Planning and Engineering determines
that the installation of additional multilevel plant material
(i.e., canopy trees, understory trees, shrubs, and ground
covers) will increase leaf area, and therefore be more
beneficial in terms of photosynthetic production, the total
dollar amount for the replacement of the removed trees
can be applied to this method, subject to final approval by
the Township. This method of replacement is to be
implemented as an additional supplement to the landscape
plan. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22; 3-11-96 by
Ord. No. 96-6]
8. Fees.
Upon application for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall be
charged the following fees: [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22;
5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
a. For existing single family homes when on properties greater
than 15,000 square feet or removing more than one (1) tree:
five ($5) dollars per tree.
b. For new residential building lots: twenty ($20) dollars per tree
up to a maximum of five hundred ($500) dollars per lot.
c. For all other properties: twenty ($20) dollars per tree up to a
maximum of one thousand ($1000) dollars for each acre.
9. Time Limit.
All tree removal permits shall be limited to one (1) year from date
of issuance. If the approved tree removal has not occurred within
§ 192-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:629
§ 192-39. Lighting. [Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
one (1) year a new permit must be applied for and is subject to the
payment of new fees. [Added 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
J. Violation.
Failure to obtain a valid tree removal permit or after proper delineation
of clearing limits and the placement of the tree protection barrier in
accordance with this Chapter any additional tree disturbance occurs,
the developer or property owner shall be required to replace any tree
removed improperly based on the following schedule [Amended
3-11-96 by Ord. No. 96-6; 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-14]
1. The developer shall provide and install in accordance with
Township standards one (1) additional 2 1/2 inch caliper/12-14 foot
tall acceptable shade tree balled and burlapped for each 1 inch
diameter of the tree unnecessarily removed.
2. At the developer's option, a 4-6 inch caliper new shade tree may be
provided and installed at a ratio of 1 new tree per 4 inches of
diameter of the tree unnecessarily removed. All material must be
guaranteed for one year at time of planting.
K. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or failing to
perform in accordance with the terms of the Planning Board/Zoning
Board approval, or the terms of the tree removal permit shall be subject
to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I, with
provisions of fines of up to one thousand ($1,000) dollars per day for
each offense. A violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be
abated within five (5) days after written notice has been served, either
by certified mail or personal service. Each day that a violation continues
thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. Violations and penalties
will be enforced by the Director of the Department of Planning and
Engineering or by his/her designee.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
In addition to other remedies, the Building Inspector or other proper
municipal official may institute any appropriate legal action to prevent
a continuing violation of the terms of this chapter.
A. Required.
Lighting shall be located along streets, access drives, parking areas,
sidewalks, pedestrian paths, at intersections, and where various types
of circulation systems merge, intersect or split. Pathways, sidewalks,
and trails shall be lit. Stairways, walkways and sloping or rising paths
require illumination, as do building entrances and exits.
§ 192-38 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-39
1:630
§ 192-40. Loading Areas.
B. Style.
The style of light fixture and appurtenance shall be consistent with the
style and type of the architecture of the buildings. LED or other energy
efficient lighting shall be used when feasible.
C. Height.
Mounting height shall not exceed the height of the building or twentyfive
(25) feet, whichever is less.
D. Standards.
Distribution of lighting shall be even throughout the site. All lighting
shall be designed to provide a minimum of 0.50 footcandles and an
average of 0.75 footcandles throughout all vehicular and pedestrian
areas. Spillage of light from a property may be no greater than 0.1
footcandles. All lighting must be directed into the site. All lighting shall
be provided by stanchion mounted fixtures or bollards and serviced
underground. Building mounted fixtures, where the light source is
visible, are prohibited.
E. Manufacturer's Specifications.
The manufacturer and manufacturer's number of all proposed fixtures
must be shown on the plans.
F. Detail Required.
A detail of the proposed light fixture and pole shall be incorporated on
the plan.
G. Isofootcandles Plotted.
A point by point lighting analysis with a maximum grid of ten (10')
foot by ten (10') foot shall be provided on a lighting plan indicating
footcandle levels of existing and proposed lighting.
A. Required.
Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient
amount to permit the transfer of goods and products in other than a
public street or public parking area and shall be adequately screened
from the view of adjoining properties or streets.
B. Exclusive of Off-Street Parking.
Loading spaces shall be provided as an addition to off-street parking
spaces and shall not be considered as off-street parking spaces.
C. Size.
Loading spaces shall be at least 15 feet wide and 60 feet in length.
§ 192-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-41
1:631
§ 192-41. Monuments.
Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by N.J.R.S. 46:23-9.11
and shall be placed in accordance with the statute. In addition, all additional
property corners shall be set with iron pins.
§ 192-42. Open Space.
Deed Restrictions.
Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate
covenants and deed restrictions approved by the Board attorney that ensure
that:
§ 192-43. Parking. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-20; 8-25-97 by
Ord. No. 97-25; 11-24-14 by Ord. No. 14-13]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
1. The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future.
2. The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose
specified.
3. Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the open
space.
4. Common open space shall not be turned into a commercial enterprise
admitting the general public at a fee.
A. Angle of Stalls.
The angle of stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements
specified below. The preferred angle of stall is ninety degrees.
B. Size of Stalls.
Each off-street parking space shall be nine feet wide by eighteen (9 x
18) feet in length. Each parallel parking space must be a minimum of 8
feet wide by twenty two (8' x 22') feet in length.
C. Aisle Width.
The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual parking
stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements specified below.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
45 18
60 18
75 22
§ 192-41 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-43
1:632
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
90 24
D. Driveway Width.
The driveway to a parking lot access aisle shall be a minimum width of
eighteen (18) feet for a one way aisle, and twenty-four (24) feet for a
two way aisle.
E. Curbing.
The perimeter of all parking areas and internal islands shall have
continuous concrete curbing with a six inch face or an alternative
approved by the Township Engineer. Concrete wheel stops are
prohibited. The curb returns for all parking areas shall have a minimum
of five (5) foot radius.
F. Striping.
All parking spaces shall be marked with four-inch white lines painted in
a hairpin design. The hairpin shall have a minimum width of twelve (12)
inches from the centerline of each stripe, and the parking space shall
have a minimum width of nine and five-tenths feet between the center
line of adjoining hairpins.
G. Back-up Areas.
Back up areas with a minimum depth of five feet shall be provided in all
parking lots where there are dead-end aisles.
H. Overhang.
Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, an additional two feet of
sidewalk shall be provided in order to accommodate parked vehicles
overhanging or extending over the sidewalk.
I. Barrier Free Parking Spaces. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-20]
1. Size.
Such spaces shall be in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act. (See standard detail on file in the Department of
Planning and Engineering.)
2. Access.
Access shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Curb ramps shall be provided between the parking
area and adjoining sidewalks.
3. Markings.
§ 192-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-43
1:633
§ 192-44. Public Utilities. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
Each space shall be identified with a clearly visible sign displaying
the international symbol of access and the following wording:
"These spaces reserved for physically handicapped drivers." In
addition penalty plates are required.
J. Pavement Specifications.
Pavement for parking lots shall have a minimum of four (4) inches
bituminous stabilized base and two (2) inches bituminous surface
course of material in conformance with N.J.D.O.T. Standard
Specification for Road and Bridge Constructions in effect at the time
of construction placed upon a subbase approved by the Township
Engineer.
For industrial sites and areas subject to truck traffic the pavement shall
have a minimum of five (5) inches bituminous stabilized base and two
(2) inches bituminous surface course of material in conformance with
N.J.D.O.T. Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Constructions in
effect at the time of construction placed upon a subbase approved by
the Township Engineer.
A. Required.
All public services shall be connected to approved public utility systems
where they exist.
B. Underground Installation.
The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utility's distribution supply lines and
service connections. The connections shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariff as the same are then on file with the
State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
C. Written Instrument Required, existing overhead lines.
The developer shall submit to the approving authority, prior to the
granting of approval, a written instrument from each serving utility
which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this section;
provided, however, lots which abut existing streets where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service connections
have heretofore been installed may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service
connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a
§ 192-43 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-44
1:634
§ 192-45. Retaining Walls.
Retaining walls installed in slope control areas shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete or other reinforced masonry or of other construction
acceptable to the Township Engineer and adequately designed and detailed
on the plans to carry all earth pressure, including any expected surcharges.
Timber retaining structures will not be permitted within the right-of-way
of public roads. All proposed retaining walls over four (4) feet in height
shall require calculations to support the design of such walls prepared and
certified by a Professional Engineer. All such calculations shall be submitted
to the Township Engineer.
§ 192-46. Screening of Equipment.
result of the development, any replacement, relocation or extension of
existing overhead lines shall be underground.
D. Screening.
Where natural foliage is not sufficient to provide year-round screening
of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground,
other than utility poles, the applicant shall provide sufficient fencing
and/or live screening to conceal such apparatus year-round.
E. Exemption.
Any installation under this section to be performed by a servicing utility
shall be exempt from the requirement of performance guaranties, but
shall be subject to inspection and certification.
A. Required.
When the effective operation of a building or structure, or equipment
within a building or structure, necessitates placing machinery, motors,
generators or similar devices for cooling, heating or generating
purposes, outside of or on top of any structure, they shall be screened
from public view. Screening shall be at least as high as the object being
screened. Screening may consist of the following:
1. Densely planted evergreen shrubs, or approved equal.
2. A solid and uniform fence on all sides of said equipment with
suitable landscaping to accent the structure.
3. A masonry wall on four (4) sides of said equipment with suitable
landscaping to accent the structure.
4. Extensions of parapet walls or mansard roof lines or structural or
ornamental screens or baffles, or
5. Any similar type of solid or uniform screening, which will prevent
exposure of such equipment to public view.
§ 192-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-46
1:635
§ 192-47. Sewage Collection and Disposal Systems. [Amended
8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25; 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
§ 192-48. Shade Trees. [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
B. Maintenance Opening.
The above requirements shall not be construed to prevent an opening in
any required screening for maintenance purposes. However, any such
opening shall be made as inconspicuous as is possible so as not to
present any unsightly display of said equipment to public view.
A. Sanitary sewers shall not be required in that portion of the municipality
known as the Septic System Management Area.
B. In all areas of the municipality other than the Septic System
Management Area, sanitary sewers shall be installed and shall be
connected to an existing municipal sewage system. All sewers shall be
designed to handle all present and probable future development in the
area, and the plans and specifications shall be approved by the East
Brunswick Sewer Utility prior to the issuance of any building permits.
No sewage disposal system, other than the municipal system referred
to herein, shall be permitted. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
A. Required.
Shade trees shall be planted and maintained by the developer. The
number, type and location of shade trees shall be determined by the
township. A listing of acceptable shade/street trees is on file with
the Department of Planning and Engineering. Prior to any planting a
test pit shall be dug to determine the perc rate and soil conditions.
[Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-22]
B. Location.
Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets in accordance
with the approved landscape plan. Trees shall either be massed at
critical points or spaced evenly along the street, or both as approved by
the approving authority. No tree shall be planted within 72" of the curb
or sidewalk and unless authorized shall not be planted in the Township
R.O.W.
C. Spacing.
When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along streets,
spacing shall depend on tree size as follows:
§ 192-46 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-48
1:636
Tree Size
(height in feet)
Planting Interval
(in feet)
Large trees (40+) 50
Medium-sized trees (30-40) 40
Small trees (to 30) 30
When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees can
be spaced between the larger trees. If a street canopy effect is desired,
trees may be planted closer together, following the recommendations
of the Township Landscape Architect. The trees shall be planted so as
not to interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, or
street lights.
D. Planting Specifications.
All trees shall be placed in a proper manner and in a good grade of
backfill, according to accepted horticultural standards.
All shade trees shall be watered weekly through the first growing
season. The developer shall construct a six (6) inch deep earth saucer
around each tree to hold water and fill with a suitable mulch. Trees
shall be nursery grown, insect and disease free, balled and
biodegradable burlap, pruned and shaped, of the required height and
planted according to acceptable horticultural standards. Shade trees
shall be of substantially uniform size and shape and shall have straight
trunks. Ornamental trees need not have straight trunks only at the
direction of the Township Landscape Architect. All trees shall be
planted according to nursery standards.
A hole in which a tree is to be planted shall be in each case, a minimum
of one-third (1/3) larger in width and in depth than the existing root
ball of the particular tree to be planted. The hole for a tree to be
planted shall contain proper amounts of topsoil and peat moss. When
determined by the Department of Planning and Engineering that a soil
test indicates special needs the planting requirements will be modified
as a condition of board approval.
E. Planting Procedure.
The following tree planting procedure shall be followed:
1. Excavations shall not be less than thirty (30) inches deep and thirty
(30) inches in diameter. A suitable area shall be provided by
loosening the soil to a depth of 12" below the excavation. Planting
soil shall be typically composed of a thorough mixture of one part
peat, one part humus, one part of parent soil, all mixed thoroughly
(unless soil tests indicate special requirements to be determined by
Planning and Engineering staff).
§ 192-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-48
1:637
§ 192-49. Sidewalks, Walkways, Pedestrian Walks. [Amended
8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
2. Each tree shall be given a minimum of twenty (20) gallons of water
at the time of planting.
3. Trees shall be staked with three (3) stakes driven a minimum of two
(2) feet into undisturbed soil outside the planting hole. Stakes when
driven shall be one-half to two-thirds (1/2 to 2/3) the height of the
tree measured from ground level. Stakes shall be two (2) inches in
diameter, minimum, at the narrowest end. Stakes shall be placed in
line with prevailing winds. Stakes shall be attached to the tree with
twelve-gauge galvanized wire covered with rubber or plastic hose
where wire is likely to come in contact with the tree trunk. An
alternate may be any of the commercially available materials
designed for staking trees upon approval of the Township. The loop
in contact with the tree shall be loose enough to permit growth and
prevent grinding and girdling for two (2) years but shall be tightly
bound to the stake to prevent slipping. [Amended 5-10-93 by
Ord. No. 93-22]
4. Upon completion, removal of all planting debris is required. The
area must be left in a neat and orderly condition in accordance with
good and acceptable planting practices.
5. Notice shall be given to the Township Landscape Architect or
designee three days prior to the start of planting so the stock may
be inspected for variety, condition, size and quality.
A. Required.
Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed and installed on both sides
of each street in accordance with specifications promulgated by the
Department of Planning and Engineering.
B. Barrier Free Access.
At such points of intersection between sidewalks and streets as the
Township Engineer shall decide, the sidewalk shall be constructed so as
to slope gradually, to street level, at a gradient of not more than one (1)
foot in twelve (12) feet, wherever possible, so as to provide ramp access
for handicapped persons between the sidewalk and the street. The curb
depression shall be a minimum width of three (3) feet. Construction
shall be in accordance with standards prescribed by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
C. Width.
§ 192-48 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-49
1:638
§ 192-50. Sight Easements. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide. When the Approving
Authority determines that a sidewalk may be subject to unusually heavy
pedestrian traffic or intended equally for bicycles it may require that its
width be increased to either six (6) or eight (8) feet. In parking areas
where sidewalks about the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk area,
the sidewalk shall be widened by two (2) feet.
D. Materials.
Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or brick material, as
determined by the approving authority.
E. Concrete Specifications.
Materials shall conform to the N.J.D.O.T. Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction in effect at the time of construction.
F. Other Materials.
Other material specifications shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
G. Subgrade.
The sidewalk subgrade shall be a six inch thick granular soil material
approved by the Township Engineer and compacted prior to the
placement of any sidewalk as directed by the Township Engineer.
H. Sidewalk Location.
In residential developments, sidewalks shall be placed in the right-ofway,
parallel to the street, unless an exception has been permitted
to preserve topographical or natural features, or to provide visual
interest, or unless the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian
system provides safe and convenient circulation.
In planned developments and cluster developments, sidewalks may be
located away from the road system to link dwelling units with other
dwelling units, the street, and on-site activity centers such as parking
areas and recreational areas. They may also be required parallel to the
street for safety and other reasons.
I. Pedestrian Easements.
Pedestrian way easements ten (10) feet wide may be required by the
Approving Authority through the center of blocks to provide circulation
or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping, or other community
facilities.
§ 192-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-50
1:639
§ 192-51. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
All applications shall comply with the standards for Soil Erosion & Sediment
Control in New Jersey by the New Jersey State Soil Conservation
Committee. All plans shall incorporate soil erosion and sediment control
programs phased according to the scheduled progress of the development,
including anticipated starting and completion dates. The purpose is to
control soil erosion and sediment damages and related environmental
damage by requiring adequate provisions for surface water retention and
drainage and for the protection of exposed soil surfaces in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community.
If no board approval or Freehold Soil Conservation Service approval is
A. Required.
Sight easements shall be provided at each quadrant of an intersection
of streets or streets and driveways and shall be shown on the plan. Any
development requiring site plan or subdivision approval shall provide
adequate sight easements at each driveway with the driveway classified
as a local street for purposes of establishing distances.
B. Dedicated; easement.
The area within sight easement shall be kept as part of the lot and
identified as a sight easement. The wording of the sight easement shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Board Attorney.
C. Clearance.
No grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained higher
than thirty (30) inches above the center-line grade of the intersecting
street or driveway or lower than ten (10) feet above their center lines,
excluding street name signs and official traffic regulation signs. Where
any intersection involves earth banks or vegetation, including trees,
the developer shall trim or selectively thin trees and grade to provide
adequate sight distance. Within these sight easements, plantings
should be restricted to low spreading varieties of plants and shrubs.
D. Area.
The sight easement is that area bounded by the intersecting street
center lines and a straight line which connects sight points located on
each of the two (2) intersecting street center lines. The sight easement
distances shall be in accordance with A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets 1984 by American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials.
E. Lot Area.
Portions of a lot set aside for the sight easement may be calculated
in determining the lot area and may be included in establishing the
minimum setbacks required by the zoning provisions.
§ 192-50 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-51
1:640
required the applicant shall submit a plan conforming to all aspects of this
section.
A. General Design Principles.
1. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land
disturbances and shall be in operation during all stages of the
disturbance activity. The following principles shall apply to the soil
erosion and sediment control plan:
a. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall
be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
b. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
c. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its
exposure shall be kept within practical limits.
d. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable
stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed critical
areas during construction or other land disturbances.
e. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff
resulting from modified soil and surface conditions during and
after development or land disturbance.
f. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
g. Sediment shall be retained on site.
h. Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures
shall be installed prior to any on-site grading or land
disturbance.
2. All lots where fill material is deposited shall have clean fill and/or
topsoil deposited which shall be graded to allow complete surface
draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems or natural
drainage courses. No regrading of a lot shall be permitted which
would create or aggravate water stagnation or a drainage problem
on site or on adjacent properties. Grading shall be limited to areas
shown on an approved site plan or subdivision. Any topsoil
disturbed during approved excavation and grading operations shall
be redistributed throughout the site.
3. Excavation of soil other than as required for the construction of
approved structures and supporting facilities, such as but not
limited to streets, driveways and parking areas, shall be prohibited.
Regrading of property so as to redistribute topsoil throughout the
site from areas excavated shall be done to minimize or eliminate
the erosion of soil.
§ 192-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-51
1:641
§ 192-52. Solid Waste & Recyclable Storage & Disposal. [Amended
12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-74]
B. Maintenance.
All erosion and sediment control measures installed shall be maintained
for one (1) year after completion of the improvements or until such
measures are permanently stabilized as determined by the Township
Engineer, whichever is longer.
A. Required.
Solid wastes and recyclables, if stored outdoors, shall be placed in
metal receptacles within a screened refuse area in accordance with the
standard details on file in the Department of Planning and Engineering
and subject to the following minimum standards:
1. The screened refuse area shall not be located within any front yard
area.
2. The refuse storage area shall be surrounded on all sides. All
commercial and industrial refuse storage area facilities shall be
constructed of masonry material. All refuse storage areas shall
contain swinging cedar gates and address the need for storage of
recyclables. The height of the storage receptacle and stored refuse
shall not exceed the height of the refuse storage area.
3. A five (5) foot minimum width landscaping area shall be provided
along the fence or wall enclosing the refuse storage area. The
landscaping to be provided shall be shown on the site plan
submitted for approval. The planting shall be placed so at maturity
the plants do not encroach upon the refuse container, nor result in
an opening less than ten (10) feet for vehicle access.
4. The opening in the enclosed refuse area should be located to
minimize the view of refuse from adjoining properties or public
streets.
5. If located within or adjacent to a parking area or access drive, the
enclosed refuse area shall be separated from such parking areas or
access drive by curbing.
6. The enclosed refuse area shall not be located so as to interfere with
traffic circulation or the parking of vehicles.
7. All refuse and recyclables shall be deposited in containers
maintained within the refuse area. No containers shall be
maintained anywhere on a site except in a refuse area meeting
these requirements.
8. If outdoor storage of solid waste and recyclables is not proposed,
the site plan submission shall detail the methods proposed for
accommodating solid waste within the structure. The Approving
§ 192-51 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-52
1:642
Authority may require that a suitable area be set aside, but not
improved, for a future solid waste storage area meeting these
requirements even if indoor accommodations for solid waste are
proposed.
B. Multifamily Housing Developments. [Added 12-13-93 by Ord. No.
93-74]
1. In any new multifamily housing development an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentiallygenerated
recyclable materials shall be provided. The dimensions
of the recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling
bins or containers which are of adequate size and number, and
which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located.
The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers
shall be determined in consultation with the municipal recycling
coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan
adopted pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of the municipal
master plan, adopted pursuant to section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
2. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
3. The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles
shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from
parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers
placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
4. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located
in an outdoor recyclable area, shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
5. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to
the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped
with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
6. Screening shall be provided in accordance with 192-52A above
around any outdoor recycling area.
§ 192-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:643
§ 192-53. Storm Drainage Facilities. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No.
97-25; 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-05; 7-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-16]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
A. Scope and Purpose.
1. Policy Statement.
Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction
through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be explored
before relying on structural strategies. Structural strategies should
be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management
strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies
include both environmentally sensitive site design and source
controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or
from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should
be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential
pollutants. Multiple stormwater management strategies may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for
water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for "major development,"
which is defined in Chapter 132-3 as "Any development or
redevelopment that provides for disturbance of one quarter (1/
4) acre of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of
soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation".
3. Applicability.
a. This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(1) Non-residential major developments; and
(2) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(3) All major developments undertaken by East Brunswick
Township
4. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered an integral part of
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:644
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by
any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This ordinance
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. General Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards herein. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
3. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protections's (NJDEP) Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147
through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
4. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
Groundwater Recharge, Stormwater Runoff Quantity, and
Stormwater Runoff Quality requirements of this Section:
a. The construction of an underground utility line provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
b. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:645
c. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
5. The applicant may be required by the approving authority to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may
exist either previously to, or as a result of the application. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where
feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate
width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the Township
construction standards and specifications.
6. All storm drainage shall be piped underground, except that where
it is not feasible to pipe, open ditches may be constructed.
(a) Where storm drainage is piped, an easement of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet shall be shown on the approved plan and
conveyed to the township.
(b) Where the storm drainage flows in an open ditch, an easement
of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be shown on the approved
plan and shall be conveyed to the township. The ditch shall be
constructed so as to prevent erosion, be easily maintainable
and shall be provided with safety features as it may deem
necessary to protect and safeguard the public.
7. The applicant's Engineer shall also determine and identify to the
Approving Authority the effect of each application on existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the application.
Studies may be required of the applicant and, as shall be
appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements.
8. Where in the opinion of the Township Engineer, underdrainage is
required, the subdivider shall install subbase underdrains or Type
F underdrains in accordance with the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications of 1989 as amended and supplemented; and shall be
of the size specified by the Township Engineer.
If in the opinion of the Township Engineer, and existing conditions
exist, the applicant may be required to construct a (supac or
equivalent filter fabric) lined ditch backfilled with 3/8" washed
stone, with a minimum slope of 2% and concrete porous wall pipe
set in the stone and connected to a downgrade inlet. Construction
of such underdrains shall be in accordance with the standard
details on file in the Department of Planning and Engineering.
All underdrain systems constructed within a site or subdivision
shall be provided with a clean-out in accordance with the standards
details on file in the Department of Planning and Engineering.
9. Subbase outlet drains when necessary, shall consist of stone
pockets and/or trenches lined with filter fabric and filled with 3/8"
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:646
broken stone, washed gravel or blast furnace slag, and discharge
into an inlet or other appropriate facility or area. Subbase outlet
drains shall be 6" c.m. pipe fully coated with half of pipe and end
cap perforated or extra strength porous wall pipe with appropriate
cap.
Subbase outlet drains will be required at low points in roadways
and at other locations where necessary.
10. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of this Section may be obtained for the enlargement
of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that each of
the following conditions are met:
a. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
b. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with this Chapter's Erosion Control,
Groundwater Recharge, Stormwater Runoff Quantity and
Quality Design and Performance Standards (hereafter the
Design and Performance Standards) to the maximum extent
practicable;
c. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of the Design and Performance Standards,
existing structures currently in use, such as homes and
buildings, would need to be condemned; and
d. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands which do not include existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings within the
upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements
of the Design and Performance Standards.
11. A waiver from strict compliance with the Township stormwater
management design and performance standards may be obtained
conditioned upon the positive recommendation of the Township
Engineer and the applicant paying their fair share towards the
implementation of the mitigation project(s) described in the
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan adopted March 9, 2005.
The mitigation project(s) to be funded shall be selected by the
Township Engineer and shall be implemented in the same HUC 14
drainage area as the proposed development. The exact amount of
the contribution shall be calculated by the Township Engineer and
shall be based on the cost to comply with the particular standard
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:647
for which the waiver or waivers are requested in proportion to the
area/extent of site development proposed.
C. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Measures.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the Design and Performance
Standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this Section into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration from preconstruction
to post construction;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that comply with this Section's standards to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm
drain inlets;
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:648
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(j) Swales may be constructed in which there need be no outlet
facilities and which will impound water drainage only from
other landscaped areas. The water impounded in these areas
will be left to evaporate and percolate and the swales shall
otherwise be seeded and maintained in lawn area. Minimum
slope if grass or rip rap shall be two (2) percent. Minimum
slope if concrete shall be .75 percent.
(k) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the Design and Performance
Standards shall be subject to a conservation restriction filed
with the Middlesex County Clerk's office, or subject to an
approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or
an equivalent stormwater management measure approved by
the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
D. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge.
1. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
a. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following runoff coefficient calculation methods:
(1) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds; or
(2) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
b. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded
land use with good hydrologic condition. A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition
may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:649
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
has existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park) with good
cover (if the land use type is woods) or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
c. In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
d. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site.
e. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
2. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
E. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
1. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
a. Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:650
b. Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning.
c. Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be structurally sound,
durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent
with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
d. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half
inches in diameter.
e. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
detailed herein.
f. The pipe size shall be determined by acceptable drainage
design procedures. In no case shall the pipe size in a surface
water drainage system be less than fifteen (15) inches in
diameter.
g. All pipe terminations shall be provided with poured concrete
headwalls or precast concrete end sections in accordance with
the approved preliminary plat or plan. Poured concrete
headwalls shall be wing-type headwalls with aprons and cut-off
walls in accordance with the construction details contained
herein. Flared end sections shall be provided with cut off walls.
h. Storm drain pipes running longitudinally along streets shall
not be located under curbing. They shall be reinforced
concrete pipe conforming to ASTM Designation C-76,
reinforced arch culvert conforming to ASTM Designation
C-506 or reinforced concrete elliptical pipe conforming to
ASTM Designation C-507. Joints shall be made with O-ring
rubber gaskets.
i. No concrete pipe shall be laid on grades exceeding ten (10%)
percent. Elliptical concrete storm drain pipes will be jointed
using a preformed bituminous mastic pressure-type joint
sealer.
j. All storm drains shall be laid in a straight line between inlets,
manholes or other structures, except that the use of the fittings
or factory curved or mitered pipe may be allowed by the
Township Engineer when necessary to accommodate existing
geometry or utilities.
k. Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems shall comply with the following
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:651
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph,
"solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this
standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (noncurb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on stormsewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
l. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, a NJDOT
Type "N-EcoCurb Piece" with "Dump No Waste, Drains To
Waterway" nameplate shall be utilized.
m. These standards which control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets do not apply in the
following instances:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in this Chapter's Stormwater Runoff Quality
Standards are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of
pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to
prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through one of the following:
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:652
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between
the bars, to the elevation of the water quality design
storm as specified in this Chapter's Stormwater
Runoff Quality Standards; or
(d) Where the NJDEP, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
2. Stormwater management guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by this ordinance.
3. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
Stormwater Quality requirements of this ordinance, provided the
pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Design
and Performance Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
b. The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge
calculations within this Chapter, either:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:653
maintain 100 percent of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction
to post-construction for the 2-year storm is
infiltrated.
This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within an "urban redevelopment area".
c. The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(1) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with Department
approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan
and areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such
as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(2) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
d. The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts
include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or
seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial ponding,
flooding of basements, or interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
2. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for Stormwater
Runoff calculations within this Chapter, complete one of the
following:
a. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff
hydrographs for the two, 10, and 100-year storm events do not
exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
b. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the
site for the two, 10, and 100-year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:654
c. Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction
peak runoff rates for the 2, 10 and 100 year storm
events are 50, 75 and 80 percent, respectively, of the
preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only
to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable
to the portion of the site on which the proposed development
or project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be
applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
d. In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis
in accordance with (1), (2) and (3) above shall only be applied if
the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
G. Calculations for Stormwater Runoff Quality.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80 percent of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:655
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain Stormwater Best
Management Practices (BMP) designed in accordance with the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, NJDEP, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80 percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B B (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs,
and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:656
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Extended Detention Basin 40 - 60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 192-53E3.
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60 - 80
Wet Pond 50 - 90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80 percent TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the Design and Performance standards listed herein.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
H. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
1. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
2. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape
Provisions
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:657
(1) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six inch spacing between the bars. Trash racks shall
be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as
appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one-inch (1")
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water
quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than one-third (1/3)
the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3)
the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between
bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches.
(2) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
(3) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(4) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
lbs/ft. sq.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(2) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
lbs./ft. sq.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions mean the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management
basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
(1) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure.
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:658
(2) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be
four to six feet in width. One step shall be located
approximately two and one-half feet below the permanent
water surface, and the second step shall be located one to
one and one-half feet above the permanent water surface.
See Standard Detail on file in the Department of Planning
and Engineering.
(3) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
3. Waiver from Safety Standards.
a. A waiver from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written
finding by the appropriate municipal reviewing agency that the
waiver will not constitute a threat to public safety.
I. Maintenance and Repair.
1. General Maintenance- The design engineer shall prepare a
maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of a major development. Maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain:
a. Specific preventative maintenance tasks and schedules
(1) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be
performed to maintain the function of the stormwater
management measure, including repairs or replacement to
the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence
repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and
repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(2) The party responsible for maintenance shall maintain a
detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance
for the structural stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of the development, including
a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
(3) The party responsible for maintenance shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per
year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:659
(4) The party responsible for maintenance shall retain and
make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority
over the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation
required herein.
b. Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris,
or trash removal;
c. Name, address, and telephone number of the party or parties
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement).
(1) If the maintenance plan identifies a party other than the
developer (for example, a public agency or homeowners'
association) as having the responsibility for maintenance,
the plan shall include documentation of such party's
agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater
management facility to such party under an applicable
ordinance or regulation.
(2) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual
property in a residential development or project, unless
such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project.
(3) If maintenance is not the responsibility of a public agency,
the maintenance plan and any future revisions shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on
which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan
must be undertaken.
3. A two year maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be required to be posted for all stormwater
management facilities that are not dedicated to East Brunswick
Township or another governmental agency.
4. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible party in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible party shall have fourteen (14) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the municipal engineer or designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance
and repair for good cause. If the responsible party fails or refuses
to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost
thereof to the responsible party.
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:660
J. Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting Required. [Added 7-20-09 by
Ord. No. 09-16]
1. Private Storm Drain Inlets - Existing storm drain inlets which are in
direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property shall be
required to be retrofitted to prevent the discharge of solids and
floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
2. Applicability - For the purpose of this retrofitting requirement
"Storm Drain Inlets" means an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes but not limited to, a grate
inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
3. Prohibited Conduct - No person in control of private property
(except a residential lot with one single family house) shall
authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of
individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with
an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet:
a. Already meets the private storm drain inlet design standards
cited in Section 4 below to control passage of solid and
floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard cited in Section
4 below prior to the completion of the project.
4. Design Standards - Private storm drain inlets which are in direct
contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or
alterations of facilities on private property shall comply with the
following standards. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
a. The following grates shall be used whenever a grate in
pavement or another ground surface is used to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface
water body under that grate:
1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:661
2) A different gate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7) square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever a curb-opening inlet is used, the clear space in that
curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb
opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two
(2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
5. Exemptions - This standard does not apply:
a. Where the Manager of Engineering Services or designee
agrees that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome by using
additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these
standards;
b. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g. end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
1) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and
one and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply
for outfall netting facilities); or
2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
c. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars; or
d. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
K. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Amended 7-20-09 by Ord. No.
90-16]
§ 192-53 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-53
1:662
1. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the following documents which are available from Maps
and Publications, NJDEP, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
a. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as: bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
b. (Reserved)
c. The NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual, as amended.
d. The NJDEP website at www.njstormwater.org.
2. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
a. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained
from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
b. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306;
and
c. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625, (609) 292-5540.
L. Penalties.
Any party who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains,
or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of the Zoning Chapter of the
East Brunswick Township Code.
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-54
1:663
§ 192-54. Street Lighting.
All streetlights shall be installed on ornamental standards with
underground wiring. They shall be of a style and design compatible with the
nature and design of the subdivision and shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Streetlighting shall conform to the current standards prescribed by
the Illuminating Engineers Society, with respect to type and number of light
stanchions, spacing intervals, location, wattage, shielding and design and
shall be installed so as to provide adequate lighting without spillage and to
prevent hazard to drivers or nuisance to adjoining property owners.
§ 192-55. Street Signs. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
The number and location of all street signs and other signs needed to
regulate and control traffic or for warning purposes shall be determined
by the Planning Board in cooperation with the Director of Public Safety.
However, there shall be at least two (2) street signs furnished at each fourway
intersection and one (1) street sign at each T-intersection. Prior to the
issuance of a construction permit the applicant shall pay to the township the
current rate including installation for each sign, as it has been determined
by the Director of Public Safety and filed with the Township Clerk. The
Township shall provide and install the signs.
§ 192-56. Streets and Highways. [Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No.
97-25]
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
A. Required.
All developments shall be served by paved streets with an all-weather
base and pavement with an adequate crown.
B. Utilities Installed.
No streets shall be accepted unless all the utilities for each prospective
building lot have been installed to the edge of the right-of-way. All
utilities, drains and other facilities located under the road paving shall
be installed prior to the placing of any road surfacing material.
C. County Roads.
Wherever a county road passes through or borders a subdivision, the
developer shall provide and dedicate to the county such additional
land as may be necessary for the widening of the right-of-way to
accommodate anticipated traffic in the reasonably foreseeable future,
as projected by the County Planning Board.
D. Major Arterials.
§ 192-54 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-56
1:664
Subdivisions abutting major arterials or controlled access highways
shall provide a marginal service street or shall have lots backing on
to such streets and highways, with a buffer strip for planting or some
other means of separation of through and local traffic as the Board may
determine appropriate.
E. Minor Arterial Streets.
On minor arterial streets the right-of-way width shall be measured from
lot line to lot line and shall be determined by the Planning Board, but
in no event shall the right-of-way be less than seventy (70) feet or the
paved portion less than fifty (50) feet.
F. Major Collector Streets.
On major collector streets the right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall be determined by the Planning Board,
but in no event shall the right-of-way be less than seventy (70) feet or
the paved portion less than fifty (50) feet.
G. Minor Collector Streets.
On minor collector streets the right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall be determined by the Planning Board,
but in no event shall the right-of-way be less than sixty (60) feet or the
paved portion less than thirty-six (36) feet.
H. Local Streets.
On local streets the right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line
to lot line and shall be determined by the Planning Board, but in no
event shall the right-of-way be less than fifty (50) feet or the paved
portion less than thirty (30) feet.
I. Streets not on Master Plan.
The arrangements and right-of-way widths of streets not shown on
the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets.
J. Reserve Strips.
No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been given to the governing body under conditions
approved by the Board.
K. Existing Streets.
Subdivisions which adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
street width requirements of this subsection shall dedicate additional
width along either one (1) or both sides of the street. If the subdivision
§ 192-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-56
1:665
is along one (1) side only, one-half (1/2) of the required extra width shall
be dedicated.
L. Grade.
The grade of any street shall not exceed eight percent (8%) except
where the Municipal Engineer determines that a steeper grade would
help preserve trees or other worthwhile natural features, in which case
the grade shall not exceed ten percent (10%). The minimum grade shall
be 0.75%.
M. Vertical Grade.
All changes in vertical grade shall be connected by vertical curves
of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight
distance in accordance with AASHTO Standards.
N. Intersections.
No street or road shall be located within two hundred (200') feet of
any existing street or road intersection. Street intersections shall be as
nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case shall be at an angle
of less than sixty degrees (60o).
The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with
a curve having a radius of not less than fifty (50), except in the case of
minor streets where the radius shall not be less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
All street jogs at intersections shall provide for at least one hundred
fifty (150) feet between the nearest right-of-way lines.
A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves.
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than ten degrees (10o) and not more than forty-five degrees
(45o), they shall be connected by a curve with a center-line radius of not
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet for minor streets, three hundred
(300) feet for collector streets and five hundred (500) feet for major
arterials and controlled access highways. When connecting street lines
deflect from each other at any one point by more than forty-five degrees
(45o), they shall be connected by a curve with a center-line radius of
not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet for minor streets, one hundred
(100) feet for collector streets and six hundred (600) feet for major
arterials and controlled access highways.
O. Cul-de-sac.
Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than one thousand
(1,000) feet measured from the centerline of the intersection to the
centerline of the bulb and shall not have more than twenty (20) lots.
Culs-de-sac shall provide a turnaround at the end with a curb radius
§ 192-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-56
1:666
of not less than forty-five (45) feet in residential subdivisions and
eighty (80) feet in industrial subdivisions. A R.O.W. radius of ten (10)
additional feet shall be provided in both cases. If a dead-end street is
of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided, together
with appropriate performance guaranties for its removal and reversion
of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
P. Street Names.
No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. All street names must
be approved by the Planning Board.
Q. Driveway Access.
In all residential zones, development bounded by any arterial or
collector street shall control access to said streets by having all
driveways intersect minor streets. Where the size, shape, location or
some other unique circumstance may dictate no other alternative than
to have a driveway enter an arterial or collector street, the lot shall
provide on-site turnaround facilities so it is not necessary to back any
vehicle onto an arterial or collector street.
R. Adjoining Property.
When a development adjoins land capable of being developed or
subdivided further, suitable provisions shall be made for access from
the adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
S. Pavement.
Street pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Pavement thickness shall be not less than the following:
1. Major arterial and major collector streets; bituminous stabilized
base course, six (6) inches compacted thickness; FABC, two-surface
course, two (2) inches compacted thickness.
2. Minor collector and local streets: bituminous stabilized base
course, five (5) inches compacted thickness; FABC, one surface
course, two (2) inches compacted thickness.
T. Curbs.
The curb return radii for minor streets from collector and arterial
streets shall be thirty-five (35) feet. Curbs shall be constructed of Class
"B" concrete with dimensions of 6" x 8" x 20" and 6" curbface.
§ 192-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-57
1:667
§ 192-57. Topsoil Protection.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved
during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at
least six (6) inches of cover to all unpaved areas of the subdivision and shall
be stabilized by seeding or planting on all slopes up to ten percent (10%) as
shown on the final grading plan. All slopes and minor drainage swales over
ten percent (10%) shall be sodded. All disturbed areas shall be sodded or
stabilized.
§ 192-58. Water Supply Systems.
For residential development these standards are superseded by Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21).
A. Regulations.
All water utility mains, lines, facilities and appurtenances shall be
constructed in accordance with East Brunswick Township Water Utility
Water Distribution System Regulations.
B. Required Connection.
All new construction shall be connected to the municipal water system,
notwithstanding the existence of a well or the opportunity to obtain
water from underground sources.
C. Water Mains.
Water mains shall be installed in accordance with the existing policy of
the East Brunswick Water Utility and shall be adequate to handle all
present and probable future development. Where the dead end of the
main is temporary, a suitable water blowoff valve shall be provided in
lieu of a hydrant. All mains shall be sterilized under the supervision of a
recognized testing laboratory before approval. Water mains and sewer
mains shall be separated a distance of at least ten feet horizontally. The
vertical separation at a crossing of water and sewer line shall be at least
18 inches.
D. Hydrants.
Spacing of hydrants shall be governed by Township Code § 102. There
shall be a hydrant at every dead end of the main or blowoff. Where
hydrants are to be located in a parking lot island the island shall be a
minimum width of nine (9) feet.
E. Service Line.
The subdivider shall provide for the installation of service lines with a
minimum diameter of six inches for domestic service and in all other
cases eight inches in the street right-of-way. Each lot shall be serviced
by a 1" size Type K copper service line from the nearest street main. All
water lines shall be looped wherever practical.
§ 192-57 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 192-58
1:668
Chapter 195
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PORTABLE POOL — Any above-ground-level swimming pool which is not
designed to be permanently fixed in one place but which is intended to be
capable of being removed and stored.
PRIVATE POOL — A pool which is constructed or installed to provide
swimming, bathing or wading facilities for the recreation of the owner or
occupant of a house and his family and guests and which is so located as
to be an accessory use to a residence. This definition includes all buildings,
structures and equipment constructed or used in connection with a private
swimming pool. Swimming pools which are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 197, Swimming Pools, Public, are specifically excluded from this
definition.
WADING POOL — A private pool which is not capable of being used for
swimming. It includes portable pools having a capacity of less than 500
gallons and all pools, portable or otherwise, with a maximum depth of 12
inches or less.
§ 195-2. Applicability.
§ 195-3. Permit required.
No person shall construct, install or maintain a private pool without first
obtaining a permit from the Division of Construction Inspection.
§ 195-4. Application procedure.
A. No permit shall be required to maintain a permanent pool which was in
existence as of July 24, 1962, unless the facilities are expanded or
enlarged, but such pools shall comply with all other provisions of this
chapter.
B. Except where it is specifically provided otherwise, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to wading pools.
A. Applications for permits under this chapter shall be made to the
Division of Construction Inspection and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The street address of the property where the pool is to be
constructed or installed, if other than the address of the applicant.
§ 192-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:669
§ 195-5. Required approval. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-69-D]
The Division of Construction Inspection shall forward one copy of the
application, together with the plans and specifications accompanying it, to
the Chief Construction Official, who shall, within five days, return it with his
findings and recommendations. No permit shall be issued unless the Chief
Construction Official approves the application.
§ 195-6. Approval or disapproval; issuance of permit. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-69-D]
The Division of Construction Inspection shall act on the application within
five days after receiving the findings and recommendations of the Chief
Construction Official. The Division of Construction Inspection may either
approve or disapprove the application as submitted or approve it
conditionally, subject to modifications or changes in the plans and
specifications. If it is approved conditionally, no permit shall be issued until
an amended set of plans and specifications has been filed with the Division
of Construction Inspection, except that, where the modifications or changes
are minor, the Division may issue the permit upon the applicant consenting
in writing to the required modifications or changes.
§ 195-7. Fees.
Fees shall be paid upon the filing of the application. Fees for a permit
required by this chapter shall be as follows:
(3) A set of plans and specifications of the proposed pool which
indicate the type, location and purpose of all structures and
equipment to be used in connection with it, including filtration,
chlorination and testing equipment.
(4) A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the property lines of the lot
upon which the pool is to be constructed or installed, all existing
structures on the lot, the location of the pool and its distance from
the house, the property line and the street abutting the property.
(5) A description of the fence or other enclosure to be constructed
around the proposed pool, including type, height and the number
and location of gates or doors. The information required by this
subsection may be included as part of the plot plan.
(6) A statement as to the method to be used to dispose of wastewater
from the swimming pool.
B. The application and all required plans and specifications shall be in
duplicate.
A. Construction of new permanent swimming pool or the enlargement of
an existing pool: Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for inground pool and Twentyfive
Dollars ($25.00) for above ground pool. [Amended 1-26-81 by
Ord. No. 81-326]
§ 195-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-7
1:670
§ 195-8. Restrictions on the location of pools.
§ 195-9. Construction standards.
§ 195-10. Water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a private pool or its
recirculating and treatment system and a public or private water supply
system which is a source of water used or usable for drinking purposes
unless the connection is designed and installed so as to make impossible the
siphoning or discharge of pool water into the water supply system.
B. Installation of portable swimming pool: two dollars and fifty cents
($2.50).
A. No pool shall be constructed or installed within ten (10) feet of any
property line except as provided in Subsection B.
B. In lots having a width of less than eighty (80) feet upon which an
existing dwelling is located, no pool shall be installed within five (5) feet
of any property line.
C. No pool shall be installed within thirty (30) feet of any street line or
closer to the street than the existing building setback line, whichever is
greater.
D. No private swimming pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot
unless a residence building is also maintained on that lot or on an
adjacent lot.
E. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant or recommend to the
Township Council a variance from the provisions of this section in the
same manner that other variances are granted or recommended. For
that purpose, this section shall be considered to be part of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of East Brunswick.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Zoning.
A. In general. All materials used in the construction of a private pool shall
be of durable construction and water-proof, and the pool itself shall be
designed so as to facilitate its easy emptying, cleaning and disinfecting.
B. Sides and bottom. The sides and bottom of the pool shall be smooth and
free from cracks and open joints. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be
used.
C. Inlets. Inlets shall be located and spaced in a manner that will assure
satisfactory dispersion of incoming water throughout the pool and
facilitate its draining, cleaning and disinfecting.
D. Color. The bottom and sides of the pool shall be either white or a light
color, except that the use of aluminum paint is prohibited.
§ 195-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:671
§ 195-11. Drainage.
§ 195-12. Fences. [Amended 9-30-74 by Ord. No. 74-8-MM]
A. No private pool shall be connected with or otherwise permitted to drain
into the sanitary sewer system.
B. Where it can be done without causing a nuisance or an unhealthy or
unsanitary condition, the drainage from a private pool shall be
dispersed upon the property on which the pool is located or into a sand
filtering pit.
C. Where a pool cannot be drained as provided in Subsection B, it may,
with the approval of the Chief Construction Official, be drained into a
seepage pit or storm sewer, if accessible, or be drained in any other
manner that the Chief Construction Official may specify. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-69-D]
D. In no case shall the drainage from a private pool be permitted to flow
onto any public street without the permission of the Director of
Planning and Engineering, or onto the premises of any abutting
property owner. [Amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
A. All pools shall be surrounded by a fence or wall of substantial
construction not less than four (4) feet in height with no openings larger
than three (3) inches except for gates or doors. The fence or wall shall
be so constructed as to prevent any person from gaining access to the
pool beneath or over it.
B. For the purposes of Subsection A, a dwelling or accessory building may
be used as part of the enclosure.
C. Every fence or wall shall be provided with one (1) or more gates or
doors of the same height as the fence or wall equipped with a selfclosing
or self-latching device capable of keeping them securely closed.
Gates or doors must be locked when the pool is not in use.
D. Wading pools not provided with a fence or wall as required by this
section shall be either emptied or covered with a suitable strong
protective covering fastened securely in place when the pool is not in
use.
E. This section shall not apply to above-ground pools forty-eight (48")
inches or more in height, provided that all steps, ladders or other
means of access to the pool are removed when the pool is not in use, nor
to cases where the entire premises on which the pool is located are
surrounded by a fence which meets the requirements of this section.
[Amended 4-12-82 by Ord. No. 82-448]
§ 195-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-13
1:672
§ 195-13. Lighting.
Lights used to illuminate any private pool shall be located and shaded so as
to reflect the light away from adjoining premises.
§ 195-14. Maintenance. [Added 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-32]
Chapter 197
SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC
§ 197-1. Standard code adopted by reference.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration and operation of
swimming pools, the issuance of permits to locate, construct, alter or
operate a swimming pool and declaring certain swimming pools to be
nuisances is hereby adopted in accordance with the authority granted by
N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed to and made
part of this chapter without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 197-2. Title of code. [Amended 6-23-75 by Ord. No. 75-69-C;
9-11-06 by Ord. No. 06-29]
The code adopted by this chapter is commonly known as the "New Jersey
State Sanitary Code Chapter IX Public Recreational Bathing 2004" and is
sometimes referred to in this chapter as the "Swimming Pool Code."
§ 197-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code have been placed on file in the
office of the Township Clerk and shall remain on file there for use and
examination by the public.
A. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
without stagnant water, and in good repair.
B. During the off-season and when not in use, pools should either be
drained or covered.
C. Every private swimming pool shall at all times comply with the
requirements of the Middlesex County Board of Health. Any nuisance or
hazard to health which may exist or may develop as a consequence of
the condition of the pool shall be abated and removed by the owner
upon receipt of notice from the Health Officer or the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 195-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-4
1:673
§ 197-4. Amendments to standard code. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-69-D; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-87]
The Swimming Pool Code is hereby amended to substitute the words
"Director of Construction Inspection or Chief Construction Official" for the
words "Board of Health" wherever they appear in the code.
§ 197-5. Permit required. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-69-D;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-87]
No person shall locate, construct, alter or operate a swimming pool as
defined in the Swimming Pool Code without obtaining a permit to do so from
the Division of Construction Inspection or Chief Construction Official.
§ 197-6. Fees; terms of permit.
§ 197-7. Revocation of permit. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-69-D; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-87]
Permits may be revoked by the Division of Construction Inspection or Chief
Construction Official for failure to comply with this chapter or with the
Swimming Pool Code.
Chapter 202
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
§ 202-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-12-66 by Ord. No. 66-4-A]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPSITE — Any place where a person is permitted to sleep or dwell in
anything other than a permanent structure.
TRAILER — Any self-propelled or non-self-propelled vehicle or portable
or semiportable structure used or intended for use as a temporary or
permanent dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons, including
A. The fees for permits required by this chapter shall be as follows:
1. Permit to operate a commercial swimming pool as part of a swim
club, hotel, motel, health club, or other commercial facility, or as
part of a homeowners association, condominium association or
townhouse association, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
[Amended 5-22-89 by Ord. No. 89-21; 12-10-18 by Ord. No.
18-34]
B. Permits to operate a swimming pool shall be for a term of one (1) year,
from July 1 to June 30. Permits issued after January 1 of the permit year
may be obtained at half the annual fee. [Amended 4-26-65 by Ord.
No. 65-16]
§ 197-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 202-1
1:674
but not limited to mobile homes, dependent and independent travel trailers,
piggy-back campers, camp cars, mobile home busses and tents.
TRAILER CAMP — Any place where a trailer as hereinafter defined may
be parked, other than an enclosed building, for more than three (3) hours,
including but not limited to mobile home parks and trailer parks.
§ 202-2. License required.
No person shall operate a trailer camp or campsite within the Township of
East Brunswick without having obtained a license and paid the required
license fee.
§ 202-3. Submission of application; information required.
Applications for licenses shall be made to the Township Clerk and shall
contain the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a corporation,
the name and address of the registered agent and the address of the
corporation's principal place of business.
B. A statement as to whether the applicant is the owner of the premises
upon which the proposed trailer court will operate.
C. The total number of trailer stands in the proposed trailer camp.
D. Three (3) copies of a site plan of the proposed trailer camp on a scale no
smaller than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet and clearly showing the
following:
(1) The area, shape and size of the site, all properties within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the site boundaries and all buildings on
those properties.
(2) Topography of the site drawn at a ten-foot contour level.
(3) Any prominent natural features on the site.
(4) The location and size of all easements for gas, water and electric
lines.
(5) The locations of all proposed trailer sites and accessory buildings,
sidewalks, driveways, roads, parking areas, buffer strips and
recreation areas.
(6) The proposed grading and drainage plan for the site.
E. Appropriate information as to the location and type of facilities
provided for water supply, sewage disposal and garbage disposal. If any
laundry or similar facilities are to be provided, information as to their
location and type shall also be included. This information may be
included in the site plan.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-3
1:675
§ 202-4. Restrictions on parking for repair or storage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car for
any period exceeding two (2) hours on any street in the Township of East
Brunswick or on any premises within the limits of the township, except for
the purposes of repair or storage.
§ 202-5. Permit to store, repair or use for temporary housing.
[Amended 7-26-76 by Ord. No. 76-4-F; 3-23-81 by Ord. No. 81-339;
10-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-780; 11-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-114; 12-23-91
by Ord. No. 91-124]
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter or any other section of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick to the contrary, a resident may
repair or store a trailer, motor home, camper or camp car on his or her own
property adjacent to his or her home without first obtaining a permit from
the Township of East Brunswick. Any such trailer, motor home, camper or
camp car undergoing repairs or being stored shall not, during such period
of repair or storage, be used by any persons as a dwelling or sleeping place
unless the owner shall first apply for a permit, without fee, to be issued
by the Township Clerk. Such permits may be issued by the Township Clerk
upon a showing by applicant of any one of the following:
§ 202-6. Fees. [Amended 2-9-65 by Ord. No. 65-4; 12-27-67 by Ord.
No. 67-4-C]
The fee for the license to operate and maintain a trailer camp or camp site
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.) per year, plus two dollars and fifty
F. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant.
A. His or her home has been partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood or
other casualty, in which case the permit shall be valid for a period of
120 days.
B. He or she owns or operates a seasonal recreational property and
requires housing for a caretaker or watchman for security purposes, in
which case the permit shall be valid for a period of 1 year.
C. He or she is constructing or renovating an existing house in a rural
preservation zone on qualified farmland, in which case the permit shall
be valid for a period of 180 days, and shall be eligible for a renewal of
90 days, provided the house is still undergoing construction or
renovation.
Notwithstanding such issuance, the Township Council may revoke such
a permit if it receives sufficient credible information to warrant a
conclusion that the permit was issued based upon a misstatement of
the facts. Any extension of this time period must be approved by the
Township Clerk.
§ 202-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 202-6
1:676
cents ($2.50) per calendar week, or any part thereof, for each trailer parked
at the camp.
§ 202-7. Registry required; regular submission to the Township
Clerk.
Each licensee shall maintain a camp registry and each month submit three
(3) copies of the same so far as it pertains to the previous month, setting
forth the license number of each trailer; serial number, body type and
license number of each automobile; date of arrival, whether still at camp
and, if out, the date of departure; and the age, name and last permanent
address of the owner of each car and trailer and of each occupant thereof.
A copy shall be delivered to the Township Clerk, a copy to the Clerk of the
Municipal Court and a copy to the Tax Collector, together with payment
to the Tax Collector of any and all fees due the township as provided
herein. No license shall be transferable without permission of the Township
Council.
§ 202-8. Density and spacing. [Amended 8-26-68 by Ord. No.
68-4-D]
§ 202-9. Health regulations.
Any water faucet, toilet, garbage receptacle or other equipment required
by the provisions of this chapter in campgrounds or which may hereafter
be required by any rules and regulations of the Board of Health pertaining
to campgrounds shall be in addition to and shall not be construed to mean
water faucets, toilets, garbage receptacles or other equipment now or
hereafter located in or adjacent to the campground and which may already
or hereinafter be required under provisions of other laws or ordinances.
§ 202-10. Required fencing or screening.
Trailer camps shall be enclosed with an approved fence or planted hedge,
five (5) feet in height, with no openings to adjoining property other than the
required entrances and exits to streets or public spaces.
A. No license shall be issued for more than forty (40) trailers in any trailer
camp.
B. Each trailer space shall be clearly marked and shall be adequate for the
type of facility occupying the same. Trailers shall be parked on each
space so that there will be at least fifteen (15) feet side-to-side spacing
between trailers, ten (10) feet end-to-end spacing between trailers and
any adjoining property line, twenty-five (25) feet from the side line of
any public street or highway and fifteen (15) feet from any building or
structure.
C. A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet per trailer space shall be
provided in one (1) or more places for recreation areas, be restricted to
such use and be free of traffic hazards.
§ 202-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-11
1:677
§ 202-11. Travel lanes.
Travel lanes not less than thirty (30) feet in width which provide easy access
to all parking spaces shall be constructed with a hard, dustless road surface
which affords ready means of entrance and exit to the street.
§ 202-12. Construction requirements.
Office buildings, structures housing sanitary equipment, garages and repair
shops shall be constructed to meet all requirements of the Building Code.
Repair shops for motor vehicles shall be located not less than twenty (20)
feet from trailer units or any building.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 202-13. Restrictions on location.
No license to conduct a trailer camp, campsite or sleeping quarters
intended to be provided, as described in the application, shall be issued if
any of the sleeping quarters or any of the outside sanitary conveniences
intended to be provided are within five hundred (500) feet of three (3) or
more dwelling houses occupied for dwelling purposes at the time of the
application in the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 202-14. Permanent foundations prohibited. [Amended 12-12-66
by Ord. No. 66-4-A]
It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee operating a trailer camp to
place, cause or permit any trailer to be placed upon a permanent foundation
or otherwise permanently fixed to the ground, and any such action shall
automatically convert the trailer to a permanent dwelling subject to the
provisions of the Zoning Chapter and all other township ordinances
applicable to permanent structures.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Zoning.
§ 202-15. Use for immoral purposes prohibited.
No person shall permit any licensed premises to be used for immoral
purposes or suffer the violation thereon or therein of any penal law or of any
ordinance of the township.
§ 202-16. Compliance with other standards; inspection.
Each licensed place or premises shall at all times comply with all proper
police, health and fire regulations imposed by the Township Council or
Board of Health. Any business and the place and premises where conducted
shall be subject to examination and inspection by day or night by the
Township Council, or a committee thereof, and by the fire and health
authorities of the township.
§ 202-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 202-17
1:678
§ 202-17. Revocation of license.
In case of failure or refusal to comply with any of the terms or provisions
of this chapter, the Township Council may, on notice and hearing, refuse or
revoke any license applied for or granted hereunder.
Chapter 206
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the township which is not a street or
highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power, other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides and to transport persons or property or to pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor,
buggy and wagon.
§ 206-2. Abandonment prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the township, and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the township for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned.
§ 206-3. Leaving wrecked vehicles on streets prohibited.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on any street or highway within the township.
§ 206-4. Vehicles to be removed from private property.
No person in charge or control of any property within the township, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain
on such property longer than forty-eight (48) hours; and no person shall
leave any such vehicle on any property within the township for a longer
time than forty-eight (48) hours, except that this section shall not apply with
regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a
§ 202-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-4
1:679
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary
to the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the
township.
§ 206-5. Impoundment. [Amended 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-28;
5-10-04 by Ord. No. 04-06]
The Director of Public Safety, or any member of the Division of Police
designated by him, is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any
vehicle, left at any place within the township, which reasonably appears
to be in violation of this chapter or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle
shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
applicable statutes. The Director of Public Safety, or any member of the
Division of Police acting for him, shall notify the registered and legal owner
in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known address
of the owner, of the removal of such vehicle, the reason for the same and
the location of the vehicle. Such vehicle shall be retained and impounded
until the owner or his duly authorized agent shall have paid the cost of such
taking and removal, together with a storage charge of twenty-five dollars
($25) for each and every day such vehicle is retained and impounded.
§ 206-6. Inoperable/unlicensed vehicles parked on private property.
[Added 12-14-98 by Ord. No. 98-32]
Parking of inoperable vehicles and/or vehicles that are not legally licensed
on private property are restricted to a limit of thirty (30) days. This includes
flat tire, missing wheels, left on jacks for long periods during repair of
storage, engine problems that prevent the vehicle from being driven.
Vehicles that are not "street legal", not registered, or without current
license tags shall be considered inoperable.
Chapter 209
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 206-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 206-6
1:680
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 209-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-10-79 by Ord. No. 79-174]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 209-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of East Brunswick are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 209-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 209-4. Violations and Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, or
except as specifically provided in some other section of this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars
($50.) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 209-5. Operation of vehicles restricted in certain areas.
No person shall operate a vehicle at any time upon the grounds of East
Brunswick High School other than on designated paved roadways.
§ 209-5.1. Operation of Vehicles Restricted in Parks. [Added
6-23-80 by Ord. No. 80-264; amended 7-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-266]
No person shall operate a vehicle upon the grounds of any park as identified
herein, other than on designated paved roadways. The parks to which this
section shall apply are:
Bicentennial Park, Community Park, County Lane Park, Pine Ridge Park,
River Bend Park, Sadowski Park, Washington Heights Park and Welsh Park.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-5.1
1:681

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 209-6. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.R.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 209-7. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-8. Parking prohibited during certain periods of the year.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time during the periods indicated upon
any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule II attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-9. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
III of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-10. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule IV of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-11. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule V at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule V of any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-12. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this chapter except
at the angle designated and only within the painted white stall lines.
§ 209-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-13
1:683
§ 209-13. Parking regulations for Township parks. [Added 6-23-80
by Ord. No. 80-264; amended 7-28-80 by Ord. No. 80-266]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon the grounds of any park as
identified herein, unless in areas so designated for parking. All violators will
be towed from areas where parking is not permitted at violators' expense.
The parks to which this section shall apply are:
Bicentennial Park, Community Park, Country Lane Park, Pine Ridge Park,
River Bend Park, Sadowski Park, Washington Heights Park and Welsh Park.
§ 209-14. Parking and traffic on school property. [Amended
12-27-88 by Ord. No. 88-980]
A. Parking prohibited on school property. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time on any streets, roads, driveways or alleys located on public
school property at the schools described in Schedule VII attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
B. All parking areas upon the grounds of East Brunswick High School are
to be regulated by parking permits.
(1) Parking areas will be divided into three (3) categories:
(a) Staff parking.
(b) Student parking.
(c) Visitor parking.
(2) All parking areas so designated will be properly sign-posted so as
to identify the area defined.
(3) All staff members and students shall be required to file with the
principal's office an application which will include the name and
address of the owner and a description of the vehicle. Upon
acceptance, a permit and vehicle decal may be issued by the
principal or his designee.
(4) The vehicle registration decal must be permanently mounted on a
parking hang tag to be attached to the rear view mirror, or such
other method as may be communicated by the Principal's Office of
East Brunswick Public High School to the East Brunswick
Department of Public Safety. The decal on all open two-wheeled
vehicles, including motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters and
mopeds must be located for display at the discretion of the owner.
[Amended 7-27-81 by Ord. No. 81-363; 8-24-87 by Ord. No.
87-864; 9-14-88 by Ord. No. 88-953]
(5) There shall be separate parking areas designated for two-wheeled
vehicles.
§ 209-13 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-14
1:684
(6) All parking regulations will be in effect between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on school days only.
(7) When there are special events at East Brunswick High School of a
temporary nature, temporary permits may be issued by the
principal of the high school, or the Director of Public Safety may
administratively suspend parking regulations for the day or days in
question.
(8) Special permits shall be made available upon application by owners
and operators of utility trucks and vans and by service personnel
who are required to park on the grounds of East Brunswick High
School while conducting business on the premises.
(9) All substitute teachers shall obtain either temporary permits or
staff permits as set forth above.
(10) The Director of Public Safety of the Township of East Brunswick
shall cause to be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Township of
East Brunswick as a public document a copy of the parking plan
showing the areas set forth above.
(11)No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon the grounds of East
Brunswick High School other than at areas so designated for
parking. All violators will be towed from areas where parking is not
permitted at the violators expense.
C. Traffic and Parking on the grounds of East Brunswick High School are
to be regulated by a site plan, a copy of which is on file in the East
Brunswick Department of Public Safety, Traffic Safety Section, and
which is identified by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as
File No. F-1204, approved on October 21, 1982, which site plan is
incorporated by reference in this chapter. [Added 12-27-82 by Ord.
No. 82-483]
(1) Parking Areas.
Vehicles shall be parked within the painted lines shown as areas A
through J on the attached site plan.
(2) Restricted Parking.
The following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards by the Motor Vehicle Commission shown as #8
on the attached site plan. No other persons shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
(3) One Way Streets.
The following described streets and isles are hereby designated as
One Way in the directions indicated as shown on the attached site
plan.
§ 209-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-14
1:685
(4) STOP Intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as
STOP intersections shown as #1 on the attached site plan.
(5) No Right Turn.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations shown as
#2 on the attached site plan.
(6) No Left Turn.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations shown as
#3 on the attached site plan.
(7) Right Turn Only.
All vehicles shall move in the direction shown as #7 on the attached
site plan.
(8) Yield Intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as
Yield Intersections, shown as #9 on the attached site plan.
(9) Non-Through Street.
The roadway on the high school grounds between Cranbury Road
and Summerhill Road is hereby designated as a non-through street.
The site plan is to be amended accordingly. [Added 12-27-88 by
Ord. No. 88-980]
(10) Identification Parking.
Parking spaces for persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification by the East Brunswick High School (students, faculty
and staff) as shown on the attached site plan.
(11) Tow Away.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, fire
hydrants, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in
any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owners or operators expense.
(12) Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the East Brunswick High School
are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act
done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed
prior to the taking effect of this ordinance.
§ 209-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-15
1:686
§ 209-15. Parking in public parking yards and places.
The parking yards and parking places to which this section shall be
applicable are contained in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 209-16. Parking of vehicles on property owned or leased by
Township. [Amended 7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-78]
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time within any of the parking
areas indicated in Schedule IX other than in areas so designated for
parking.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in such a manner as to encroach upon
other parking stalls and/or aisles, or driveways, designated for
vehicular travel. Violators will be towed at the violator's expense with
regard to Schedule IX. [Amended 11-12-79 by Ord. No. 79-192]
C. In accordance with N.J.R.S. 39:4-197(1)h all persons entering the
parking lot adjacent to the Municipal Building, known as Municipal
Parking Lot I, shall enter the same at the most westerly ingress and,
upon exiting same, shall do so at the most easterly egress.
D. In accordance with N.J.R.S. 39:4-197(1)h all persons entering the
parking lot adjacent to the Public Library, known as Municipal Parking
Lot II, shall enter at the most southerly ingress and, upon exiting same,
shall do so at the most northerly egress.
E. In accordance with N.J.R.S. 39:4-197(1)h all persons entering the
parking lot adjacent to the Public Safety Building, known as Municipal
Parking Lot III, shall enter the same at the most easterly ingress and,
upon exiting same, shall do so at the most westerly egress.
F. Traffic Control Devices at the Transportation Center. The Traffic
Control Devices shown on the sketch dated March 30, 1981, annexed
hereto shall be installed and operated on the property owned by the
Township of East Brunswick, bounded by Old Bridge Turnpike, Route
18 and Tices Lane and known as the Transportation and Commerce
Center.
The Traffic Control Devices shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an act concerning motor vehicle and traffic regulations, subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design and
shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of
Transportation. [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-378]
G. No person shall stop or permit a vehicle to stand at any time within any
of the municipal parking areas indicated in Schedule IX, § 209-48, if the
area is posted "No Stopping or Standing." [Added 7-8-91 by Ord. No.
91-78]
§ 209-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:687
§ 209-17. Parking for the handicapped. [Amended 11-24-80 by Ord.
No. 80-307; 1-25-82 by Ord. No. 82-434; 7-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-467;
4-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-505; 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-15; 2-25-91 by
Ord. No. 91-21; 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-27; 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-3;
10-28-03 by Ord. No. 03-34, 2-26-07 by Ord. No. 07-04; 9-27-10 by
Ord. No. 10-22]
A. Designation of parking stalls for handicapped drivers in each of the
parking lots listed below and in successor ownership or occupancy of
the premises is hereby made in accordance with N.J.R.S. 40:11A-1,
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 providing that no person shall park a vehicle in any of
the designated parking stalls in locations referred to herein unless such
person is a physically handicapped individual. Any vehicle parked in a
parking stall reserved for handicapped drivers which does not display
the official state handicapped license plate or special identification
stickers from the Motor Vehicle Commission, shall be presumed to have
been parked in such a stall unlawfully. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No.
10-22]
(1) Commercial Property.
Block Lot Address
29.01 35 6 Alvin Court Office Building
29.01 36 10 Alvin Court Office/Retail
89 4.30 41 Arthur Street Office Building
89.06 4.20 44 Arthur Street Animal Hospital
88.50 1 Auer Court Office Buildings
834 34.03 3 Brick Plant Road Warehouses
319 32 Brier Hill Court Medical/Office Condos
319 36 Brier Hill Court Medical/Office Condos
88.25 17.01 Brunswick Woods Drive Medical/Office Building
88.25 17.02 Brunswick Woods Drive Medical/Office Building
88.25 17.03 Brunswick Woods Drive Medical/Office Building
310 4.01 108 Church Lane Professional Organization
319 10.20 15 Civic Center Drive Civic Center Apartments
58 10.01 0 Claire Road Storage
58 11.03 2 Claire Road Retail/Office Building
833 28 5 Connerty Court Warehouse
833 17 10 Connerty Court Greater Jersey Press
833 10.02 12 Connerty Court Retail/Office Building
833 26 18 Connerty Court Retail Building
319 33.02 4 Cornwall Court Health Club
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:688
Block Lot Address
319 33.01 8 Cornwall Court Wyndmoor Office Park
319 30.01 4 Cornwall Drive Office Building
319 35.01 1 Cornwall Drive Brier Hill Medical/Office
Condos
29.03 1.01 15 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.04 5 19 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.04 7 25 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.04 8.01 27 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.01 32.11 33 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.04 10.03 40 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.04 10.05 40 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
29.01 32.08 45 Cotters Lane Warehouse/Office
322.60 1 0 Cranbury Circle Apartments
96 5.02 332 Cranbury Road Attorney's Office
88.18 1.05 348 Cranbury Road Office Building
88.18 2.13 350 Cranbury Road Office Building
86 40.10 385 Cranbury Road Office Building
86.10 42.03 431 Cranbury Road Pascarella Center
88.36 2.01 454 Cranbury Road Funeral Home
88.31 15.05 457 Cranbury Road Funeral Home
88.31 14.08 465 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
88.31 12.03 469 Cranbury Road Office Building
87 12.15 483 Cranbury Road Office Building
87 12.14 485 Cranbury Road VFW
87 12.01 503 Cranbury Road Office Building
319.22 14.01 535 Cranbury Road Office Building
319.67 1 540 Cranbury Road Waterford Senior
319 12.14 551 Cranbury Road Halls Corner Senior
319 12.08 555 Cranbury Road Bank
319 12.19 557 Cranbury Road Office Building
319 40 561 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
319 38 573 Cranbury Road Office Condos
319 38 575 Cranbury Road Office Condos
319 38 577 Cranbury Road Office Condos
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:689
Block Lot Address
319 16.04 579 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
319 16.05 579 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
319 17.34 585 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
319 17.16 589 Cranbury Road Bank
319 29.04 591 Cranbury Road Bank
319 29.03 593 Cranbury Road Medical Offices
319 17.33 595 Cranbury Road Care One
322.10 21.03 602 Cranbury Road Chelsea Senior
319 17.26 603 Cranbury Road Attorney Office
322.10 21.02 610 Cranbury Road Kindercastle
322.10 19 614 Cranbury Road Post Office
322.10 18.04 620 Cranbury Road Office Building
319 20.02 635 Cranbury Road Kiddie Academy
320 21.06 645 Cranbury Road 4H
321.18 38 678 Cranbury Road Restaurant
314.02 1.05 0 Dunhams Corner Road Baseball Managers
738.01 38.05 123 Dunhams Corner Road Medical Offices
833 24.01 6 Edgeboro Road Medical Offices
834.01 38 7 Edgeboro Road Strip Mall
833 21.03 8 Edgeboro Road Health Club
834 36.02 15 Edgeboro Road Arzee
833 21.02 16 Edgeboro Road Edgeboro Corporate Center
834 35.02 19 Edgeboro Road J.B. Hunt
833 19 28 Edgeboro Road Retail
833 9 34 Edgeboro Road Empty
833 8.01 36 Edgeboro Road Truck Repair
833 6 42 Edgeboro Road Trucking Terminal
833 5 50 Edgeboro Road Trucking Terminal
833 3 61 Edgeboro Road Trucking Terminal
29.03 3 7 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
29.01 26.04 8 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
29.03 2 9 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
29.03 1.02 11 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
29.01 25.03 12 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:690
Block Lot Address
29.01 29 16 Elkins Road Warehouse/Office
323 2.02 777 Helmetta Boulevard Animal Hospital
72 20.01 5 Icker Avenue Office Building
31.01 1 1 Joanna Court Retail
31.01 2.01 3 Joanna Court Warehouse
31.01 6 6 Joanna Court Warehouse
31.01 3.01 7 Joanna Court Warehouse
31.01 12 8 Joanna Court Warehouse
31.01 4.01 9 Joanna Court Warehouse
17 19.02 2 Kennedy Boulevard Office Building
17 18.26 14 Kennedy Boulevard Equipment Sales
17.26 200 35 Kennedy Boulevard Home News
17 187.01 26 Kennedy Boulevard Office Building
17 188 28 Kennedy Boulevard Office Building
17 189.05 34 Kennedy Boulevard Import Company
29.01 43 1 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.01 18.06 15 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.01 18.07 17 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.01 18.08 19 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.05 3.07 20 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.05 3.06 22 Kimberly Road Warehouse
29.01 32.09 25 Kimberly Road Warehouse
322.05 1 3 Lexington Avenue Lexington Downs Mall
322.05 3 5 Lexington Avenue Warehouse
322.06 3.03 11 Lexington Avenue Private School
322.06 5 19 Lexington Avenue Packaging Office
322.80 9 385 Lexington Avenue Gerald Sheet Metal
150 39 49 Main Street Convenience Store
152 2 159 Main Street Restaurant
151 2 177 Main Street Village Depot
147 15 180 Main Street Animal Hospital
17 187.02 33 Mcguire Street Middlesex Gymnastics
58.01 12 44 Milltown Road Office Building
710 8 65 Milltown Road Office Building
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:691
Block Lot Address
709 20 77 Milltown Road Office Building
721 33.03 273 Milltown Road Wawa
641 22.01 274 Milltown Road Service Station
85 30 286 Milltown Road Bank
317.34 22 327 Milltown Road Restaurant
85 3.16 330 Milltown Road Jefferson Building
85 3.17 334 Milltown Road Medical Offices
2.02 3.04 12 Naricon Place Swim Club
242.04 7.04 410 New Brunswick
Avenue
Preschool Avenue
106 16 193 Old Bridge Turnpike Barber Shop
110 5 191 Old Bridge Turnpike Convenience Store
79 13 301 Old Bridge Turnpike Office Building
55.02 20 386 Old Bridge Turnpike Network Services
53 4 421 Old Bridge Turnpike Office Building
50 29.01 455 Old Bridge Turnpike Bank
27 1.34 555 Old Bridge Turnpike Hotel
834.01 1.01 710 Old Bridge Turnpike Bank
176 1.21 0 Old Stage Road Convenience Store
176 1.14 142 Old Stage Road Hair Salon
780.01 1 234 Old Stage Road Convenience Store
309.04 16.12 16 Patrick Street Restaurant
132.01 25 1 Race Track Road Office Building
89 1.03 50 Race Track Road Home Depot/Pathmark
308.21 18.17 192 Riva Avenue Office Building
308.21 18.22 196 Riva Avenue Medical Building
309.04 19.01 505 Riva Avenue Camp
175.04 11 65 Rues Lane Dentist
741 22.02 155 Rues Lane Office/Medical
242.04 7.10 317 Rues Lane Professional Office
88.20 54 324 Rues Lane Strip Mall
6.03 6.19 1 Ruth Street Shoe Store
589 15.01 68 Ryders Lane Restaurant
594 8.02 106 Ryders Lane Gas Station
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:692
Block Lot Address
29.08 14.02 182 Ryders Lane Attorney Office
29.04 1 300 Ryders Lane Retail/Manufacturing
317.13 43.01 421 Ryders Lane Drug Store
721 33.05 426 Ryders Lane Convenience Store
317.13 40.08 429 Ryders Lane Pizza/Cleaners
32 1.24 45 Sixth Street Furniture Store
32 1.13 47 Sixth Street Warehouse
32 6.14 49 Sixth Street Warehouse
175.14 61.02 0 State Route 18 N.J. Bell
6.04 36.04 195 State Route 18 Ramada Inn
17.01 16.01 196 State Route 18 Turnpike Metroplex
6.04 36.03 197 State Route 18 Turnpike Plaza
17.02 1 200 State Route 18 Office Building
17.23 24.02 204 State Route 18 Office Building
6.03 7.01 209 State Route 18 Med Stop
17.23 20.01 210 State Route 18 Strip Mall
17.12 18 214 State Route 18 Office Building
6.02 6.22 219 State Route 18 David's Bridal
6.02 6.20 223 State Route 18 E.B. Prof. Park
17.12 2 228 State Route 18 Attorney's Office
17.12 1.02 232 State Route 18 Dentist
6.01 16.02 233 State Route 18 Loehmans Plaza
6.01 16.03 233 State Route 18 Toys R Us
17.33 5.01 234 State Route 18 Gas Station
833 23.01 244 State Route 18 Hotel 6
26.01 12 253 State Route 18 Strip Mall
26.01 11 257 State Route 18 Office Depot
26.01 3 261 State Route 18 Appliance Store
27 1.33 260 State Route 18 Ethan Allan/Dunkin Donuts
27 1.28 268 State Route 18 Leslie Pools
26 11 275 State Route 18 Strip Mall
26 3.27 277 State Route 18 Cingular
26 3.28 283 State Route 18 Retail
26 3.34 285 State Route 18 Crosspointe Plaza
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:693
Block Lot Address
27 5.09 286 State Route 18 Perkins
26 3.31 287 State Route 18 KFC
26 3.32 289 State Route 18 Vacant
27 5.10 290 State Route 18 Sam's Club/Transportation
Center
26 3.33 291 State Route 18 Colchester Mall
33 1.05 314 State Route 18 Midstate Mall
34 8.01 326 State Route 18 Retail Building
32 2.05 333 State Route 18 Kuhls Mall
32 2.06 335 State Route 18 Restaurant
42 23 336 State Route 18 Village Square Strip Mall
37 1.02 337 State Route 18 Bella La Pizza
32 2.04 339 State Route 18 Retail
32 2.04 341 State Route 18 Loews
44 1 350 State Route 18 D'amico Lincoln
660 5.01 361 State Route 18 McDonalds
32 8.01 363 State Route 18 Chilis
32 11 377 State Route 18 Auto Supply
55.02 10.01 380 State Route 18 Hair Salon
32 15 385 State Route 18 Office Condos
32.01 13.05 389 State Route 18 Bank
32.01 5.03 397 State Route 18 U-Haul
55.01 1.01 400 State Route 18 Auto Dealer
32.01 6.08 405 State Route 18 Village Green Mall
56 3.02 414 State Route 18 Wendy's
32.01 6.23 415 State Route 18 Village Green Mall
56 1.05 418 State Route 18 Jewelry Store
64 1 422 State Route 18 Medical/Office
72 23 434 State Route 18 Eye Glass/Office
70 5.03 435 State Route 18 Pest Control
91.02 4.05 500 State Route 18 Ice Cream
91.02 4.07 510 State Route 18 Retail
713 25.01 513 State Route 18 Empty Retail
91.02 3.11 522 State Route 18 Office
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:694
Block Lot Address
713.03 1 545 State Route 18 6th Avenue
96 1 554 State Route 18 Strip Mall
100 42 555 State Route 18 Blockbuster Strip Mall
103 1 564 State Route 18 Diner
103 15 572 State Route 18 Florist
101.01 1.01 575 State Route 18 Pep Boys Strip Mall
63 2.01 585 State Route 18 Real Estate Office
102 26 591 State Route 18 T-Mobile
89.06 5.10 609 State Route 18 Empty Mall
114 1.02 625 State Route 18 American Harvest
107 59.01 636 State Route 18 Travel Agency
89 4.14 639 State Route 18 Bank
89 4.31 641 State Route 18 Miami Grill
89 4.29 645 State Route 18 K-Mart
117 25 646 State Route 18 Plaza Hill Office Building
89 4.27 647 State Route 18 A&P Strip Mall
89 4.17 651 State Route 18 Furniture Store
116 1.01 652 State Route 18 Lumber Yard
90 2.08 666 State Route 18 Guitar Center
90 2.09 678 State Route 18 Furniture Store
90 2.06 680 State Route 18 Donuts/Ice Cream
89 4.13 683 State Route 18 Baja Fresh
90 2.05 690 State Route 18 Bedding Store
90 2.02 696 State Route 18 Bedding Store
90.02 25.01 722 State Route 18 Strip Mall
131.04 28.01 729 State Route 18 East Coast Fireplace
132.05 21.09 730 State Route 18 McDonalds
132.05 21.07 732 State Route 18 Empty Restaurant
131.04 32.01 737 State Route 18 Dog Grooming
131.04 34.01 741 State Route 18 Medical Building
132.05 16 742 State Route 18 Record/CD Store
131.04 35.01 743 State Route 18 Attorney Office
131 4.01 747 State Route 18 Pool Supplies
132.14 1 750 State Route 18 Red Lobster
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:695
Block Lot Address
132.14 2 752 State Route 18 Denny's
131 20.01 753 State Route 18 Brunswick Square Mall
131 21 753 State Route 18 Brunswick Square Mall
132.14 3 754 State Route 18 Office Building
131 20.02 755 State Route 18 Brunswick Square Mall
132.14 4 756 State Route 18 Bank
132.14 5 758 State Route 18 Office Building
132.14 7 760 State Route 18 Office Building
132.14 8 762 State Route 18 Wow Workout
132.14 9 764 State Route 18 Motel
132.14 10 766 State Route 18 IHOP
132 8.01 780 State Route 18 Gas Station
174 6.14 1018 State Route 18 Burger King
174 6.05 1020 State Route 18 Strip Mall
174.09 4.11 1030 State Route 18 Grease Monkey
175 8.09 1035 State Route 18 Restaurant
175 6.29 1041 State Route 18 Auto Dealer
175 6.28 1069 State Route 18 Restaurant
174.09 5.03 1050 State Route 18 Restaurant
180 1.01 1070 State Route 18 Real Estate Office
132.11 21.01 1088 State Route 18 Paint Store
132.11 26 1090 State Route 18 Auto Repair
132 10.06 1120 State Route 18 Auto Dealer
132 10.03 1126 State Route 18 Restaurant
131 7.01 1177 State Route 18 Strip Mall
100 13 78 Summerhill Road Retail
88 2.21 121 Summerhill Road Professional Office
131 1.08 162 Summerhill Road Strip Mall
131 1.09 172 Summerhill Road Medical Plaza
131 17.01 176 Summerhill Road Medical Building
131 25 190 Summerhill Road Sunrise Senior
131 12.04 204 Summerhill Road Medical Building
88.25 8.12 213 Summerhill Road Bank/Office
741 1.01 281 Summerhill Road Medical/Office
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:696
Block Lot Address
175.20 19.03 286 Summerhill Road Convenience Store
175.20 19.02 288 Summerhill Road Office Building
243 6.03 377 Summerhill Road Insurance Building
76 2.05 1 Third Street Studio
26.03 3.01 85 Tices Lane Royal Garden Apartments
32 1.33 110 Tices Lane Office Buildings
32 1.23 124 Tices Lane Warehouses
29.01 1.13 152 Tices Lane Office/Medical
29.03 5 160 Tices Lane N.J. Truck Assoc.
29.08 15 180 Tices Lane Office Building
6.05 25.01 1200 Tices Lane Office Building
2.02 2.21 0 Tower Center Boulevard Tower 1
2.02 2.22 0 Tower Center Boulevard Hotel
2.02 2.23 0 Tower Center Boulevard Tower 2
2.02 3.03 4 Tower Center Boulevard Motel
55.01 19 0 W Ferris Street Maxsam
55.02 18 0 W Ferris Street Verizon
32 1.29 44 W Ferris Street Retail Building
32 1.30 46 W Ferris Street Children's Place
32 1.25 49 W Ferris Street Equipment Rental
32 1.32 50 W Ferris Street Office Building
45 5 37 W Prospect Street Office Building
45 7 43 W Prospect Street Office Building
45 10 49 W Prospect Street Office Building
40 23 51 W Prospect Street Office Building
40 9.02 67 W Prospect Street Medical Building
(2) Houses of Worship.
Block Lot Address
86 39.07 367 Cranbury Road Trinity Pres. Church
88.43 9 510 Cranbury Road Jehovah's Witness
87.05 15.02 170 Dunhams Corner Road Nativity Evan Lutheran Church
317.26 2.30 195 Dunhams Corner Road Young Israel Of E.B.
315.08 45 303 Dunhams Corner Road Church Of Jesus Christ
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:697
Block Lot Address
315.02 23.01 341 Dunhams Corner Road Anjumin-E-Badri
321.18 39 Fern Road Reform Temple
316.01 6.02 100 Hardenburg Lane Assembly Of God
145 1 21 Kossman Street Old Bridge Baptist Church
699 75.01 155 Milltown Road Our Savior's Lutheran Church
242.03 17 402 New Brunswick
Avenue
United Church Of Christ
138 3 700 Old Bridge Turnpike Nativity Of Our Lord Catholic.
Church
176 1.32 114 Old Stage Road Christ Memorial Lutheran.
Church
307.12 32.12 Riva Avenue Vid Mandir
309.02 46 433 Riva Avenue St. Mary's Coptic Church
594 7.01 110 Ryders Lane Chinese Evgl. Mission Church
317.13 42.07 445 Ryders Lane New Apostolic Church Of N.A.
86.08 70.02 456 Ryders Lane East Brunswick Baptist Church
86.08 56.05 470 Ryders Lane St. Bart's Roman Catholic.
Church
317.27 52.13 511 Ryders Lane East Brunswick Jewish Center
87 3.09 568 Ryders Lane Aldersgate United Methodist.
Church
87 3.15 572 Ryders Lane Calvary Korean Methodist.
Church
29.08 13.13 176 Tices Lane Unitarian Society Of N.B.
(3) Parks.
Block Lot Address
320 27 388 Dunhams Corner Road Crystal Springs
320 4 440 Dunhams Corner Road Heavenly Farms
175.29 11 Gordon Avenue Welsh Park
307.12 3.03 Hardenburg Lane Bicentennial Park (Daisy)
134.01 78 Millman Drive Lenape Park
88.20 49 Ryders Lane Great Oak Park
(4) Municipal Services. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:698
Block Lot Address
319.14 10.04 1 Civic Center Drive Municipal Building
319.14 10.04 1 Civic Center Drive Library
319.04 10.04 1 Civic Center Drive Police
319.04 10.04 1 Civic Center Drive Senior Center
88.18 2.10 346 Cranbury Road Rescue Squad
322.10 19 614 Cranbury Road E.B. Post Office
319.15 2.08 184 Dunhams Corner Road E.B. Independent Fire
314.02 1.03 363 Dunhams Corner Road Brookview Fire Company
320 27 Dunhams Corner Road Parks Headquarters
320 27 Dunhams Corner Road Recreation Department
314.02 1.03 363 Dunhams Corner Road Brookview Fire
322 11.01 Fern Road Old Bridge Volunteer. Fire
Company
29.05 1.01 Harts Lane Public Works
30 1.09 Harts Lane Sewer Utility [Amended
9-27-10 By Ord. No. 10-22]
143 1.04 3 Pine Street Old Bridge Volunteer. Fire
Company
310 25 544 Riva Avenue Brookview Fire Company
27 5.06 290 State Highway 18 E.B. Parking Authority
(5) County/Private Facilities.
Block Lot Address
320 3 717 Cranbury Road Playhouse 22
314.02 2.05 369 Dunhams Corner Road E.B. Baseball Managers
315.01 32 97 Hardenburg Lane Tamarack Golf Course
29.01 33 144 Tices Lane YMCA
(6) Schools.
Block Lot Address
6.01 15.01 Bonner Road Roselle Smith School
86 40.15 369 Cranbury Road Central School
88 19.09 Cranbury Road E.B. High School
242.01 14.05 65 Frost Avenue Frost School
315.16 19.04 9 Hardenburg Lane Warnsdorfer School
86.08 5.27 16 Innes Road Memorial School
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:699
Block Lot Address
175.14 62.02 120 Main Street Bowne School
603 33 Norton Road Churchill School
133.27 10 Old Bridge Turnpike Chittick School
131 1.01 71 Race Track Road Irwin School
132.14 7 760 Route 18 Board Of Ed Offices
131 18.04 112 Rues Lane Middlesex Vo Tech
88.25 8.01 200 Rues Lane Dag Hammarskjold School
586 20 Sullivan Way Lawrence Brook School
(7) Street Location. [Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-22; amended
10-22-18 by Ord. No. 18-25]
Block Lot Address
159 56/55.01 27 Madison Avenue Mckinley Avenue Side
175.16 1 42 Old Stage Road Preston Road Side
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any of the designated parking stalls
unless said person is a physically handicapped driver.
C. All violators will be towed at the violators' expense.
D. The Department of Public Safety shall make available to handicapped
drivers stickers to be applied to their vehicles in order to permit police
personnel to identify such vehicles and in order to assure access to
parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers. Any vehicle parked in a
parking stall reserved for handicapped drivers which does not display
the official state handicapped license plate or special identification
from the Director of Motor Vehicles shall be presumed to have been
parking in such a stall unlawfully. [Amended 9-10-79 by Ord. No.
79-174]
E. All signing and installation shall conform to the specifications as
prescribed by the N.J. Department of Transportation and the National
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Any owner of premises
required to provide parking stalls for handicapped drivers or fire lanes
who shall fail to provide such stalls or fail to maintain such stalls with
adequate signing or striping or fail to provide adequate signing and
striping for fire lanes shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
90 days in jail, or both. [Amended 2-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-21]
F. No operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle in a parking
space on public or private property marked for the physically
handicapped, unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked
therein and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in
that vehicle. In accordance with Chapter 201 of the laws of 1989,
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3) c, any person parking a motor vehicle in a parking
§ 209-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17
1:700
§ 209-17.1. Parking of Trucks and Buses. [Added 3-10-80 by Ord.
No. 80-221; amended 10-13-80 by Ord. No. 80-295; 4-25-94 by Ord.
No. 94-26]
It shall be unlawful to park any truck or bus registered in excess of four tons
on any street, avenue, highway or portion thereof in the Township of East
Brunswick between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day with
the exception of trucks or buses actually being used for emergency service.
Signs shall be erected giving notice of the prohibition set forth herein. The
foregoing is not applicable to privately used campers and motor homes.
§ 209-17.2. Permit Parking. [Added 3-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-498;
amended 11-28-11 by Ord. No 11-21]
space restricted for handicapped drivers, which person shall be without
a special vehicle identification card, shall be liable to a fine of $250
for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in such
form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
[Added 12-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-63; Amended 10-28-03 by Ord.
No. 03-34]
G. No owner or operator of premises having parking stalls reserved for
handicapped drivers and no tenant, contractor or other person may
block access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by
the plowing, piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces. This
prohibition shall be enforceable in the East Brunswick Municipal Court.
[Added 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-27]
A. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the streets or parts of streets
designated in Schedule A, described in Schedule XXIX, which is
attached hereto and made a part of this chapter on a daily basis during
the hours designated in the said schedule unless:
(1) The motor vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a
resident of the street, and
(2) The motor vehicle has displayed on its left rear window in such a
manner as to be closely examined by a police officer a current
residential parking permit, or in the case of East Brunswick Rescue
Squad members in the designated area of the Rescue Squad
Headquarters, a valid East Brunswick Rescue Squad identity plate
displayed on or in the vehicle. Visitors permits shall be hung from
the rear view mirror or placed on the dashboard of the visitors
vehicle. [Amended 6-27-88 by Ord. No. 88-936]
(3) The motor vehicle falls under one of the exceptions to the parking
ban.
B. Exemptions. The following motor vehicles shall be exempt from this
parking ordinance. [Amended 6-27-88 by Ord. No. 88-936]
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17.2
1:701
(1) Visitors. A vehicle displaying a current visitor parking permit may
park provided that the operator of the motor vehicle is a bona fide
guest of a resident within the permit parking area. The visitor's
permit shall be displayed on the rear view mirror or the dashboard
of the vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible by a police
officer enforcing the parking regulations. Vehicle is a bona fide
guest of a resident within the permit parking area. The visitor's
permit shall be displayed on the rear window of the vehicle in such
a manner as to be clearly visible by a police officer enforcing the
parking regulations.
(2) Contractors, Service and Delivery Vehicles. Contractors, service
and delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a
commercial business may park without a permit during the time
they are rendering the service to the residents within the permit
parking area.
(3) Emergency Vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service,
telephone and other public utility motor vehicles may park within
the permit parking area during the time they are rendering
services or repairs within the area.
C. Applications. Applications for the parking permits under this chapter
shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Special Operations
Division of the Department of Public Safety. East Brunswick Rescue
Squad members shall register their vehicles with the Special
Operations Division of the Department of Public Safety.
Permits shall be granted only under the following terms and conditions.
[Amended 6-27-88 by Ord. No. 88-936; 8-14-89 by Ord. No.
89-47; 11-28-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
(1) To persons who are residents on said street or portion thereof upon
which parking is restricted by this ordinance, a permanent permit,
valid for a period of two years, shall be issued for every vehicle
owned or principally operated by such person or persons.
[Amended 11-28-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
(2) Two visitor "hang-tag" permits shall also be issued to each
residential unit on any street or portion thereof upon which parking
is restricted by this ordinance for use only by visitors to that
residential unit. Visitor permits will be valid for a period of two
years. [Amended 11-28-11 by Ord. No. 11-21]
(3) The application shall consist of:
(A) The application will contain a paragraph stating that the
permits will be revoked for misrepresentation, misuse or
abuse.
(B) The application will be signed by the person applying for the
permit.
§ 209-17.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-17.2
1:702
§ 209-17.3. The Township Administration is Authorized to Establish
a Senior Citizen Center Parking Lot. [Added 4-22-91 by Ord. No.
91-44]
§ 209-17.4. Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Added
4-22-91 by Ord. No. 91-44]
Four parking spaces, in addition to those already designated as
handicapped parking spaces, are hereby established in the East Brunswick
Township Senior Citizen Center parking lot. The location of the four
additional spaces shall be as designated by the Township Administration.
All parking restrictions applicable to the existing handicapped parking
spaces will be applicable to the handicapped parking spaces created by this
ordinance.
(C) Date of Issue.
(D) Name of Applicant.
(E) Address of Applicant.
(F) Telephone Number of Applicant.
(G) A valid registration and plate number for each residential
parking permit issued will be necessary. (Visitor permits
excluded)
D. Penalty. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall
upon conviction thereof in the East Brunswick Municipal Court, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $100. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a new violation
occurs or continues. If any provisions of this chapter or the application
of such provisions to any person or circumstances is declared invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or application of this act,
which can be given effect and to this end the provisions of this act are
declared to be severable.
A. Said parking lot shall be that portion of the parking lot adjacent to and
in the area of the Township Senior Citizen Center designated by the
Administration. The Administration shall designate the same by
painting blue stripes on the surface of the pavement and by posting
appropriate signs at or near the approaches to said parking lot.
B. On weekdays, other than public holidays, no person shall park a motor
vehicle in the East Brunswick Township Senior Citizen parking lot
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. unless (i) such person is a
member of the East Brunswick Township Senior Citizen Center, and (ii)
such person displays on the vehicle a decal issued by the Senior Citizen
Center indicating that the person is a member of the Center.
§ 209-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17.4
1:703

ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 209-18. Trucks registered four (4) tons gross weight or over.
[Amended 11-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-709]
Trucks registered four (4) tons gross weight or over are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule X except from the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule X attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-18
1:705

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 209-19. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 209-19.1. Prohibition of entry onto streets. [Added 7-8-91 by Ord.
No. 91-75]
No person shall enter a street at any of the locations described in Schedule
XXXI.
§ 209-19.2. Parking on One-Way Streets. [Added 6-10-92 by Ord.
No. 92-21]
Parking on one-way streets shall be regulated as set forth on Schedule
XXXII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-19.2
1:707

ARTICLE V
Through Streets; Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 209-20. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 209-21. Stop Intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 209-22. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 209-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-22
1:709

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 209-23. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 209-24. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 209-25. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 209-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-25
1:711

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 209-26. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XVIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-27. Turns at intersections.
No person all make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XIX attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 209-28. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule XX whenever
official signs are present prohibiting such turn.
§ 209-28.1. Left turns prohibited. [Added 6-10-92 by Ord. No.
92-21]
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XXX.
§ 209-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-28.1
1:713

ARTICLE VIII
Lane Use
§ 209-29. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XXI attached to and made a part of
this chapter are designated as lane use reservations, and traffic shall move
only as indicated.
§ 209-30. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 209-30, Channelization was repealed 9-10-79 by
Ord. No. 79-174.
§ 209-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-30
1:715

ARTICLE IX
Emergency No Parking
§ 209-31. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
[Amended 11-24-03 by Ord. No. 03-40]
§ 209-32. Posting of signs.
§ 209-33. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 9-4-12 by Ord. No. 12-15]
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle
by towing or other reasonable means. Before regaining possession of the
vehicle, the owner shall pay all costs of the removal, storage, and any other
costs relating to the removal of the vehicle.
§ 209-34. Effectiveness of Article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 209-34.1. Fines and Penalties. [Added 9-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-15]
In addition to any fines or penalties that may be assessed pursuant to this
Code, violators of this article shall also be subject to a fine of $50 and shall
be responsible for all court costs related thereto.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the roadway, no vehicle shall be parked on any street, avenue, highway
or portion thereof in the Township of East Brunswick.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 209-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-34.1
1:717

ARTICLE X
Speed Limits
§ 209-35. Limits established. [Amended 1-11-88 by Ord. No. 87-891]
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof and shopping center parking areas described in Schedule XXIII
attached to and made a part of this chapter is hereby established at the rate
of speed indicated.
§ 209-36. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 209-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-36
1:719

ARTICLE XI
Traffic Control Signals
§ 209-37. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XXIV attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 209-38. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, shall conform to the design
and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 209-38.1. Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System (Red Light
Running Automated Enforcement Program). [Added 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-22]
Subject to the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 the following location shall
utilize a Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System:
Route 18 and Tices Lane
§ 209-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-38.1
1:721

ARTICLE XII
No-Passing Zones
§ 209-39. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are established and maintained along those streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule XXV attached to and made a part of
this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation
in accordance with the sketch dated and numbered as indicated.
§ 209-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-39
1:723

ARTICLE XIII
Schedules
§ 209-40. Schedule I: No Parking. [Amended 10-9-79 by Ord. No.
79-186; 3-24-80 by Ord. No. 80-235; 3-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-28;
4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-38; 6-10-91 by Ord. No. 91-61; 12-23-91 by
Ord. No. 91-122; 6-11-01 by Ord. No. 01-25; 10-11-04 by Ord. No.
04-16; 2-26-07 by Ord. No. 07-03; 6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-17; 8-8-11
by Ord. No. 11-14; 11-23-15 by Ord. No. 15-23]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-7, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Allison Drive Interior
Perimeter of Ushaped
roadway
Entire length [Added 11-12-85 by
Ord. No. 85-711]
Alvin Court Both Entire length [Added 9-12-83 by
Ord. No. 83-529]
Bordentown
Turnpike
Both Entire length
Brick Plant Road Both Entire length [Added 9-12-83 by
Ord. No. 83-529]
Burnet Street Both From Lawrence Brook to
Schoolhouse Lane
Buttonwood Drive Inner
perimeter of
circle
As shown marked on Tax Map
Sheet #39.09 [Added 9-12-83 by
Ord. No. 83-529]
Chestnut Street North From Old Bridge Turnpike to
Kossman Street
Church Lane Both From the North Brunswick-East
Brunswick boundary line to
Dunhams Corner Road.
Cindy Way Both Entire length [Added 7-13-81 by
Ord. No. 81-360]
Civic Center Drive Outer
Perimeter
From Ryders Lane (Rues Lane) to
Ryders Lane [Added 7-27-87 by
Ord. No. 87-855]
Connerty Court Both Entire length [Added 9-12-83 by
Ord. No. 83-529]
Cotters Lane Both From a point 400 feet west from
Elkins Road to a point 750 feet
West of Elkins Road [Added 11/23/
15 Ord. 15-23]
§ 209-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-40
1:725
Name of Street Side Location
Cranbury Road Both From New Jersey State Route No.
18 to Dunhams Corner Road
Davison Avenue North From First Street to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Dunhams Corner
Road
Both Entire Length
Elkins Road Both From Tices Lane to Cotters Lane.
Evergreen
Boulevard
Both From northerly intersection with
Cranbury Road to a point 225 feet
south of Bennett Court
Fountain Street North From New Jersey State Route No.
18 to Joseph Street.
Green Acres Avenue West From the southerly curbline of
Milltown Road to a point 260 feet
south thereof.
Harts Lane Both From Milltown Road to Tices Lane.
Joanna Court Both Entire length [Added 7-13-81 by
Ord. No. 81-360]
Kennedy Boulevard Both Entire length
Lexington Avenue North From a point 1,056 feet east of
Cranbury Road to a point 1,584
feet east of Cranbury Road [Added
6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-17]
Lycoming Lane West From East Brunswick High School
to Coleman Road.
Millman Drive North From River Road to Windsong
Circle West [Added 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-02]
Millman Drive North 25 feet east of Bucknell Drive and
25 feet west of Devon Drive
[Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Millman Drive North 25 feet east of Windsong Circle
East and 25 feet west of Bucknell
Drive [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-02]
Millman Drive North 25 feet east of Windsong Circle
West and 25 feet west of Windsong
Circle East [Added 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-02]
§ 209-40 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-40
1:726
Name of Street Side Location
Millman Drive South From River Road to Pace Street
[Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Millman Drive North 25 feet west to Devon Drive
[Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Millman Drive South 25 feet east of Pace Street and 25
feet east and west of Devon Drive
[Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Milltown Road Both From Old Bridge Turnpike to New
Jersey State Route No. 18
New Brunswick
Avenue
Both From Rues Lane to Langley Road
[Added 6-10-91 by Ord. No.
91-61]
New Brunswick
Avenue
East From Rues Lane to a point 150 feet
north of Bosko Drive [Added
12-23-91 by Ord. No. 91-122]
New Brunswick
Avenue
East 165 feet north from the most
northerly curbline of Old Stage
Road [Added 12-23-91 by Ord.
No. 91-122]
Old Bridge Turnpike Both From New Jersey State Route No.
18 to Main Street, Old Bridge
Parker Street North From the westerly curb line of Old
Bridge Turnpike to a point 240 feet
west therefrom. [Added 7-13-81
by Ord. No. 81-360]
Pine Street South From Old Bridge Turnpike to a
point 180 feet west thereof.
Pine Street Both From Chestnut Street to Terminus.
[Added 6-11-01 by Ord. No.
01-25]
Race Track Road North From New Jersey State Route No.
18 to Elaine Road.
Renee Road Both From Tices Lane north to the end
of Renee Road.
Riva Avenue Both From the Milltown-East Brunswick
boundary line to the East
Brunswick - South Brunswick
boundary line.
§ 209-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-40
1:727
Name of Street Side Location
River Road Both From the South River - East
Brunswick boundary line to
Bordentown Turn pike (Main
Street, Old Bridge).
Rues Lane Both From a point 200 feet east of
Summerhill Road to a point 200
feet west of Summerhill Road.
Rues Lane Both From Cranbury Road to New Jersey
State Route No. 18.
Rutgers Road Westbound From the existing stop sign located
at the intersection of Main Street to
a point 130 feet north to the
intersection of Maple Street
[Added 8/8/11 by Ord. No.
11-14]
Ruth Street South From a point 300 feet west of New
Jersey State Route No. 18 to a point
330 feet east of Taylor Avenue.
Ryders Lane Both From the North Brunswick -East
Brunswick boundary line to
Cranbury Road.
Ryders Lane Both Between Cranbury Road and
Summerhill Road
Editor's Note: This is subject to
a concurring resolution to be
passed by the Middlesex County
Board of Chosen Freeholders.
[Added 12-23-91 by Ord. No.
91-122]
Sullivan Way North From Ryders Lane to Whitehall
Road. [Added 3-11-91 by Ord.
No. 91-28]
Summerhill Road Both From a point 200 feet north of Rues
Lane to a point 200 feet south of
Rues Lane.
Summerhill Road East From Rues Lane to Central Avenue.
Suydam Road Both Entire Length
Taylor Avenue
(Easterly leg)
East From Eggers Street to a point 300
feet south. [Added 2-26-07 by
Ord. No. 07-03]
§ 209-40 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-40
1:728
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street East Between Icker Avenue and Davison
Avenue. [Added 3-24-80 by Ord.
No. 80-235]
Tices Lane Both From Rowan Court to New Jersey
State Route No. 18.
Tices Lane Both Between Rowan Court and Ryders
Lane. [Added 3-24-80 by Ord.
No. 80-235]
Tices Lane Both Between Route 18 and Old Bridge
Turnpike. [Added 3-24-80 by Ord.
No. 80-235]
Westons Mill Road East From the center line of the access
road to New Jersey State Route No.
18 opposite Patton Drive to a point
55 feet south thereof.
Westons Mill Road East From the center of Gage Road to a
point 270 feet north thereof.
Westons Mill Road East From the southerly curbline of
Manor Place to the Southerly
terminus to Westons Mill Road.
Willow Street East From a point 160 feet south of
Cranbury Road to a point 290 feet
south of Cranbury Road.
Wolff Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of
Milltown Road to a point 240 feet
south thereof.
§ 209-41. Schedule II: No Parking During Certain Periods of the
Year.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-8, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof
during the period specified:
Name of
Street Side
Period of
Prohibition Location
Norton Road East May 15 to
September 15 of
each year
From south east corner of
University and Norton
Road to a point 860 feet
north thereof.
Norton Road West May 15 to
September 15 of
each year
From northwest corner of
University Road and
Norton Road to a point
840 feet north thereof.
§ 209-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-42
1:729
§ 209-42. Schedule III: No Parking Certain Hours. [Amended
8-22-83 by Ord. No. 83-526; 8-12-85 by Ord. No. 85-685; 12-8-86 by
Ord. No. 86-803; 8-22-11 by Ord. No. 11-15]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-9, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Aldrich Street North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Between Fetyko Avenue
& Highway 18
Edgeboro Road East 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m.
Entire length
Hardenburg
Lane
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. School Days
Only
Beginning at a point 250
feet north of Dunhams
Corner Road continuing
to a point of 600 feet
north of Dunhams Corner
Road [Added 8-22-11 by
Ord. No. 11-15]
Quincy Road East Saturdays,
Sundays and 3:30
p.m. to 7 a.m.,
Monday through
Friday
Easterly most 200 feet
§ 209-43. Schedule IV: No Stopping or Standing. [Amended 6-27-88
by Ord. No. 88-936; 5-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-56; 12-23-91 by Ord. No.
91-123; 10-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-57; 4-14-97 by Ord. No. 97-10;
2-23-98 by Ord. No. 98-7; 8-8-11 by Ord. No. 11-14; 8-22-11 by Ord.
No. 11-15; 7-23-18 by Ord. No. 18-17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-10, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the time specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 209-42 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-43
1:730
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Arthur Street Both Anytime From New Jersey State
Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Bonner Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Norton Road to a point
200 feet east of Norton
Road. [Amended 8-8-11 by
Ord. No. 11-14]
Deerfield Road West Anytime Between Spencer Court and
378 feet northerly there
from on West side. [Added
8-14-89 by Ord. No.
89-47]
Donna Drive Both 7:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days only
Entire length [Added
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-21]
Edgeboro Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
Entire length [Added
7-22-85 by Ord. No.
85-686]
Ellwood Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.
School Days
Only
Entire Length [Added
7-23-18 by Ord. No.
18-17]
Evergreen
Boulevard East
Both Anytime Between Cranbury Road and
Letts Court [Added 8-14-89
by Ord. No. 89-47]
Fern Road Both Anytime From Dunhams Corner Road
to a point 580 feet southerly
thereof. [Amended 3-24-80
by Ord. No. 80-233]
Flagler Street North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Old Bridge Turnpike to
Pearl Road
Flagler Street South 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m. school
days
Along the southerly curbline
of Flagler Street beginning
from a point 143 feet east of
the Old Bridge Turnpike to a
point 243 feet east of the
Old Bridge Turnpike [Added
10-25-93 by Ord. No.
93-57; amended 9-9-2019
by Ord. No. 19-24]
§ 209-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-43
1:731
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Hardenburg
Lane
Both Any time From Oakmont Avenue to
Riva Avenue
Hardenburg
Lane
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Dunhams Corner Road
to Carlton Court [Amended
8-22-11 by Ord. No.
11-15]
Hardenburg
Lane
West Any time From Dunhams Road to a
point 250 feet north thereof
Helena Street Both 7:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days only
900 feet north from Flagler
Street [Added 8-12-2019
by Ord. No. 19-21]
Highview Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. school
days only
Entire Length [Added
7-23-18 by Ord. No.
18-17]
Hillsdale Road Both Any time From Rues Lane to a point
150 feet south thereof.
[Added 4-14-97 by Ord.
No. 97-10]
Innes Road North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Ryders Lane to Jensen
Street
Lansdowne
Road
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Rues Lane to Snowden
Road [Amended 8-8-11 by
Ord. No. 11-14]
Lois Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. school
days only
From Merrill Avenue to
Channing Road [Added
7-23-18 by Ord. No.
18-17]
McGuire Street Both Anytime From New Jersey State
Route 18 to Kennedy
Boulevard.
Merrill Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. school
days only
900 feet North from
Cranbury Road [Added
7-23-18 by Ord. No.
18-17]
Naricon Place Both Any time From New Jersey State
Route No. 18 East to the end
- New Jersey Turnpike
[Amended 5-28-91 by Ord.
No. 91-56]
§ 209-43 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-43
1:732
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
New Brunswick
Avenue
West Any time 345 feet North from the
most northerly curb line of
Old Stage Road [Added
12-23-91 by Ord. No.
91-123]
Norton Road West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From University Road to a
point 400 feet north thereof
Old Stage Road North Any time From Summerhill Road to a
point 250 feet east thereof.
Old Stage Road North Any time From Summerhill Road to a
point 250 feet west thereof
Old Stage Road North Any time From the easterly curbline of
New Brunswick Avenue to a
point 140 feet east thereof
Old Stage Road North Any time From the westerly curbline
of New Brunswick Avenue to
a point 100 feet west thereof
[Amended 12-23-91 by
Ord. No. 91-123]
Parker Street South Any time From Route 18, east 265 feet
on the south side of Parker
Street [Added 5-23-88 by
Ord. No. 88-930]
Race Track
Road
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. school
days
From Elaine Road to
Summerhill Road
Summerhill
Road
East Any time From Old Stage Road to a
point 250 feet north thereof
Summerhill
Road
West Any time From Old Stage Road to a
point 250 feet north thereof
University Road Both Any time From Tices Lane to
Wellington Road. [Added
3-24-80 by Ord. No.
80-233]
Winton Road West Any time 170 feet North from the
northerly curbline of Ryders
Lane [Added 12-23-91 by
Ord. No. 91-123]
§ 209-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-43
1:733
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Winton Road East Any time 170 feet South from the
most southerly curbline of
Ryders Lane [Added
12-23-91 by Ord. No.
91-123]
§ 209-44. Schedule V: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 2-9-76 by Ord.
No. 75-70-KK; 3-24-80 by Ord. No. 80-228; 7-27-81 by Ord. No.
81-364; 2-22-82 by Ord. No. 82-438; 7-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-468;
7-27-87 by Ord. No. 87-855; 7-9-90 by Ord. No. 90-33; 1-28-91 by
Ord. No. 91-7; 5-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-60; 12-12-94 by Ord. No.
94-51; 5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-12; 2-26-07 by Ord. No. 07-03;
7-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-11; 8-13-18 by Ord. No. 18-17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-11, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets.
Name of Maximum time
Street Side Hours MinutesLocation
Albert Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
Andrew
Place
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
Branco Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-38]
Daniel Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-38]
Hillsdale
Road
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
§ 209-43 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-44
1:734
Name of Maximum time
Street Side Hours MinutesLocation
Hillside Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between South
Woodland and North
Woodland Avenue
Joseph
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
weekends and
holidays
120 From the northerly
curbline of Arthur
Street to a point 300
feet north thereof
[Amended 7-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-11]
Joseph
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Except
weekends and
holidays
120 From the southerly
curbline of Arthur
Street to a point 300
feet south thereof.
[Amended 7-13-15
by Ord. No. 15-11]
Laurel Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
120 Turnpike, entire
length
Lee Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
120 From South Drive to
Myron Place
Manor Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
120 Entire length
Messler
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between Route 18
jughandle and Pine
Ridge Drive
Myron Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
120 Entire length
North
Woodland
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between Route 18 and
Devlin Place
Oxford
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
Patton Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
120 Entire length
§ 209-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-44
1:735
Name of Maximum time
Street Side Hours MinutesLocation
Pine Ridge
Drive
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-38]
Ruth Street North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sunday
120 Between Route 18 and
Taylor Avenue
Ruth Street South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sunday
120 From a point 300 feet
west of Route 18 to a
point 330 feet East of
Taylor Avenue
Serviss
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between Messler
Street and Albert
Street
Sheridan
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length [Added
8-13-18 by Ord. No.
18-19]
Sherman
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
Shetland
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
120 Entire length
South
Woodland
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between Route 18
jughandle and Messler
Street
Taylor
Avenue
(easterly leg)
West 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
holidays
120 From Eggers Street to
a point 300 feet south
[Added 2-26-07 by
Ord. No. 07-03]
Westons Mill
Road
North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 From the westerly
curbline of Burnet
Street to a point 208
feet westerly
therefrom
§ 209-44 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-44
1:736
Name of Maximum time
Street Side Hours MinutesLocation
Westons Mill
Road
South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
120 Between Burnet Street
and Route 18
interchange
Windsor
Drive
Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
120 Entire length
§ 209-45. Schedule VI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-12, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
indicated:
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 209-46. Schedule VII: Parking Prohibited on School Property.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-14A, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any street, road, driveway, or alley located on the
following public school property:
Name Location
Bowne School Bordentown Turnpike (Main Street, Old
Bridge)
Central School Cranbury Road
Chittick School Southeast corner of Old Bridge Turnpike
and Flagler Street
Churchill School Norton Road [Added 11-10-80 by Ord.
No. 80-301]
East Brunswick High School Cranbury Road
Lawrence Brook School Corona Road and Sullivan Way [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Hammarskjold School Cranbury Road
Irwin School Race Track Road
McGinnis School Northwest corner of Dunhams Corner
Road and Hardenburg Lane
Memorial School Innes Road
Smith School Off Bonner Road
Warnsdorfer School Hardenburg Lane
§ 209-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-46
1:737
Name Location
Weber School Northwest corner of Riva Avenue and
Hardenburg Lane
§ 209-47. Schedule VIII: Parking Prohibited in Public Parking Yards
and Places. [Added 5-14-73 by Ord. No. 73-70-U, amended 12-9-74
by Ord. No. 74-70-W; 4-14-75 by Ord. No. 75-70-X]
In accordance with § 209-15, no person shall park a vehicle at any time in
the following locations:
Name Location Limits
Shoppers Mall Route 18 Within 25 feet of sidewalk along east
and west sides of building
Miracle Mall Route 18 Within 40 feet of sidewalk along east
side of building
Daniels Route 18 Within 45 feet of sidewalk along west
and east sides of building and within
12 feet of fence along south side of
building
Delco Plaza (Kleins) Route 18 Within 35 feet of sidewalk along
north, south and east sides of
building
Toys R Us Route 18 Along both sides of access road entire
length east of existing building and
within 25 feet of east side and south
side of building
Brunswick Square
(Bambergers)
Route 18 Within 30 feet of east, west and south
sides of building and within 35 feet of
north side of building
Vornado Inc. (Two
Guys)
Route 18 Within 25 feet of east side of building
and within 20 feet of west side of
building
Village Green
Shopping Center
Route 18 Within 25 feet of sidewalk along north
and east sides of building and within
25 feet of west side of building
Pathmark Route 18 Within 30 feet of sidewalk along east
side of building and within 25 feet of
north and south sides of building
§ 209-46 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-47
1:738
Name Location Limits
The building housing
several stores and
located at the
southeast corner of
the Mid-State Mall,
with the rear portion
facing Old Bridge
Turnpike. and the
front facing west
toward Highway 18.
Highway
18 and Old
Bridge
Turnpike
Within 30 feet of the sidewalk in front
of the building facing west and within
30 feet of the sidewalk along the
northerly side of the building, from
the northeast corner to a point 250
feet east thereof and within 30 feet of
the sidewalk along the southerly
corner to a point 150 feet thereof.
[Added 2-14-84 by Ord. No.
84-558]
Mid State Mall (Adjacent
to Tices
Lane)
Within 30 feet of sidewalk along
south side of building and to within
50 feet of west side of building and
within 45 feet of east side of building.
Mid-State Bowl Route 18 Within 30 feet of south side of
building
Pier 1 Imports Route 18 Within 25 feet of south side of
building
Rues Lane Shopping
Center
Within 25 feet of south side of
building
A & P Shopping
Center
Route 18 Within 36 feet of sidewalk along east
side of building and within 48 feet of
north side of building
Grand Union
Shopping Plaza
Route 18 Within 26 feet of sidewalk along east
side of building and within 35 feet of
north side of building
Windsor Park
Shopping Center
Route 18 Within 20 feet of sidewalk along west
side of building
Route 18 Shopping
Center
Route 18 Within 30 feet of sidewalk along west
and south sides of building and within
58 feet of (Food Fair)
Ramada Inn Route 18 Within 82 feet of the west side of
building and within 32 feet north side
of building to a point 250 feet south
thereof within 20 feet south side of
building from west side of building to
a point 75 feet east thereof; within 20
feet of west side of building from the
office entrance to a point 100 feet
south thereof
St. Bartholomew's
Parish
Ryders
Lane
Adjacent to or within the entrance
drive or the easterly driveway to the
rear of the buildings.
§ 209-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-47
1:739
Name Location Limits
Adjacent to or within the drive to the
north of the buildings adjacent to or
within the exit drive.
Sheraton Motor Inn Route 18 Within 20 feet along the northerly
side of the building
Rustler's Steak House Route 18 Within 15 feet of the easterly side of
the building
§ 209-48. Schedule IX: Municipal Parking Areas. [Amended 3-25-91
by Ord. No. 91-31]
In accordance with § 209-16, the following areas are hereby designated as
property owned or leased by the Township:
Area Location
Municipal Parking Lot I Adjacent to the Municipal Building
Municipal Parking Lot II
Area
Adjacent to the library Location
Municipal Parking Lot III Adjacent to the Public Safety Building
Transportation Center New Jersey State Route No. 18 and Old
Bridge Turnpike
Neilson Parking Plaza Tower Center Boulevard & N.J. State Route
18 [Added 3-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-31]
§ 209-49. Schedule X: Trucks Registered Four (4) Tons Gross
Weight or Over. [Amended 7-23-79 by Ord. No. 79-155; 1-22-90 by
Ord. No. 90-02; 4-11-83 by Ord. No. 83-503; 11-25-85 by Ord. No.
85-709; 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-12; 5-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-55;
11-9-92 by Ord. No. 92-44; 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-15; 12-28-95 by
Ord. No. 95-47; 10-05-09 by Ord. No. 09-22].
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-18, trucks registered four (4)
tons gross weight or over are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials
on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Ainsworth Avenue Entire length [Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No.
83-491]
Aldridge Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
Arthur Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
§ 209-47 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-49
1:740
Name of Street Location
Beekman Corner Road From Church Lane to Ireland Brook
[Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-12]
Buck Road Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Burnham Road Entire length
Cannon Road Entire length
Chestnut Street From Old Bridge Turnpike to River Road
Clearview Road Entire Length [Added 11-9-92 by Ord.
No. 92-44]
Congress Avenue Entire Length [Added 7-22-85 by Ord.
No. 85-684]
Corona Road Entire length
Devlin Place Entire length
Dunhams Corner Road Between Ryders Lane and Church Lane
[Added 1-22-90 by Ord. No. 90-2]
Dutch Road Between Fresh Ponds Road and Dunhams
Corner Road [Added 1-22-90 by Ord. No.
90-2]
Eggers Street Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Emerson Street Entire length. [Added 4-14-93 by Ord.
No. 93-15]
Evergreen Boulevard Entire Length [Added 11-9-92 by Ord.
No. 92-44]
Fern Road Between Cranbury Road and Dunhams
Corner Road [Added 9-28-87 by Ord. No.
87-869; amended by Ord. No. 90-2]
Fetyko Avenue From Prospect Street to Aldridge Street
Flagler Street Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Fresh Ponds Road Between Church Lane and Dutch Road
[Added 4-10-89 by Ord. No. 89-9]
Fresh Ponds Road From Church Lane to Ireland Brook
[Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-12]
Frost Avenue Entire Length [Added 11-9-92 by Ord.
No. 92-44]
Gladstone Drive Entire length [Added 7-27-81 by Ord. No.
81-362]
Grott Lane Entire length
§ 209-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-49
1:741
Name of Street Location
Gunia Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to
New Brunswick - Old Bridge Turnpike
Hardenburg Lane Entire Length. [Amended 5-28-91 by Ord.
No. 91-55]
Henley Drive Entire Length [Added 11-9-92 by Ord.
No. 92-44]
Highland Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
High Point Road Entire length
Hillsdale Road Entire length [Added 10-13-80 by Ord.
No. 80-294]
Hope Street From Route 18 to Summerhill Road [Added
10-5-09 by Ord. No. 09-22]
Icker Avenue From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to
Sixth Street
Jensen Street From Milltown Road to Dunhams Corner
Road
Kendall Road Entire length
Kossman Street Entire length
Madeline Avenue Entire length
Manor Place Entire length
Matawan Road Between County Road 615 and the East
Brunswick/Old Bridge Municipal Boundary
[Added 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-15]
McGuire Street From Kennedy Boulevard to Devlin Place
Meadow Road Entire length
Merrill Avenue From Milltown Road to Dunhams Corner
Road
Merrill Avenue From Milltown Road to Cranbury Road
[Added 10-22-18 by Ord. No. 18-25]
Modzelewski Avenue From Prospect Street to Aldridge Street
North Woodland Avenue Entire length [Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No.
83-491]
Oakmont Avenue From Hardenburg Lane to Riva Avenue
Old Bridge Turnpike From the ramp entrance of North Route 18
to Tices Lane [Added 12-28-95 by Ord.
No. 95-47]
§ 209-49 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-49
1:742
Name of Street Location
Old Stage Road Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Parker Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
Peach Orchard Drive Entire Length [Added 1-22-90 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Preston Road Entire length
Race Track Road Entire length
Redcoat Drive Entire length [Amended 1-22-90 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Riva Avenue Entire length between Milltown border and
South Brunswick border [Added 5-11-87
by Ord. No. 87-840]
Riva Avenue From the Milltown border to the
intersection of Church Lane [Added 5-8-89
by Ord. No. 89-18]
Riva Avenue From Church Lane to Ireland Brook
[Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-12]
River Road Entire length [Added 1-22-90 by Ord. No.
90-4]
Rues Lane Cranbury Road to Canterbury Lane [Added
11-9-92 by Ord. No. 92-44]
Ruth Street Entire length [Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No.
83-491]
Salem Road Entire Length [Added 11-9-92 by Ord.
No. 92-44]
Schoolhouse Lane Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Sullivan Way Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Sunburst Drive Entire length [Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No.
83-491]
Susan Lane From Race Track Road to Lauretta Drive
Taft Place From Old Stage Road to Main Street
University Road Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Village Drive Entire length [Added 7-22-85 by Ord. No.
85-684]
§ 209-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-49
1:743
Name of Street Location
West Amherst Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
Weston's Mill Road Entire length [Added 10-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-28]
Wick Road Entire length [Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No.
79-155]
Wilmot Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old
Bridge Turnpike
Windsor Drive Entire length
Winton Road Ryders Lane to Rues Lane [Added 11-9-92
by Ord. No. 92-44]
Woodland Avenue Entire length
§ 209-50. Schedule XI: One-Way Streets. [Amended 6-10-92 by Ord.
No. 92-21; 8-28-06 by Ord. No. 06-27]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-19, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Central School (parking
lot)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Chittick School
(parking lot) then west
to Old Bridge Turnpike
South from
Flagler Street
Entire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Churchill School (CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Country Lane Park
(roadway in)
West to east Entire length [Added 6-23-80
by Ord. No. 80-264]
East Brunswick High
School perimeter
roadway
East to west
(clockwise)
Entire length
Emerson Street South From Main Street to Matawan
Road
Hammarskjold School
(perimeter road and
parking lot)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Innes Road East From Hilltop Boulevard to
Jensen Street
Irwin School (CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
§ 209-49 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-50
1:744
Name of Street Direction Limits
Kossman Street East Chestnut Street to River Road.
[Amended 6-10-92 by Ord.
No. 92-21]
Lawrence Brook School
(parking lot roadway)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Lycoming Lane
Camelot Drive
South From the high school perimeter
road to
Memorial School
(parking lot)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Merrill Avenue Northerly Northerly curbline of Lois
Avenue to southerly curbline of
Valley View Road. [Added
10-9-79 by Ord. No. 79-185]
Norton Road North Entire length
Rutgers Road South From Main Street to Maple
Street
Smith School (parking
lot roadway)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
Warnsdorfer School
(parking lot)
(CounterclockwisEe)ntire length [Added
11-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-301]
West Prospect Street East From Fetyko Avenue to Old
Bridge Turnpike [Amended
8-28-06 by Ord. No. 06-27]
§ 209-51. Schedule XII: Through Streets. [Amended 4-26-93 by Ord.
No. 93-18; 11-28-94 by Ord. No. 94-49; 10-28-96 by Ord. No. 96-34;
4-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-07]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-20, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
Name of Street Limits
Aldrich Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Arthur Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to
Summerhill Road
Arthur Street From Old Bridge Turnpike to New Jersey State
Route No. 18
§ 209-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-51
1:745
Name of Street Limits
Central Avenue From Summerhill Road to Preston Avenue (Yield
signs shall be installed on Dobson Road, Griffin
Street and Barton Court.)
Church Lane From the East Brunswick - North Brunswick
Township boundary line to Dunhams Corner Road
Corona Road From Sullivan Way to Ryders Lane (Yield signs
shall be installed on Perry Road, Jean Road and
Hamlin Road.)
Cranbury Road From a point 100 feet west of Helmetta Boulevard
- Dunhams Corner Road to a point 50 feet west of
Summerhill Road
Cranbury Road From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Dunhams Corner
Road
From Cranbury Road to Ryders Lane
Dunhams Corner
Road
From Ryders Lane to a point 500 feet south of
Church Lane
Dutch Road From Dunhams Corner Road to Fresh Ponds Road
Eggers Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to University
Road
Farms Road Entire length [Added 8-13-90 by Ord. No.
90-43]
Farms Road Circle Entire length [Added 8-13-90 by Ord. No.
90-43]
Fern Road From Dunhams Corner Road to Cranbury Road
Fern Road Old Stage Road to Cranbury Road [Added
4-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-07]
Fresh Ponds Road Dutch Road to Hardenburg Lane [Added 4-22-02
by Ord. No. 02-07]
Gage Road From Westons Mill Road to Sullivan Way
[Amended 7-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-522;
10-28-96 by Ord. No. 96-34]
Hardenburg Lane
[Added 4-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-07]
Dunhams Corner Road to Oakmont Avenue-
Hardenburg Lane
Harrison Avenue From Main Street (Old Bridge Turnpike) to Old
Stage Road
Harts Lane Between Tices Lane and Milltown Road [Added
11-26-84 by Ord. No. 84-613]
§ 209-51 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-51
1:746
Name of Street Limits
Helmetta Boulevard Cranbury Road to the Helmetta Corporate Line
[Added 4-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-07]
Highland Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Hillsdale Road From Rues Lane to New Jersey State Route No. 18
Jensen Street From Dunhams Corner Road to Milltown Road
Joseph Street From Cranbury Road to Arthur Street
Kingswood Boulevard Dorchester Drive to Cranbury Road [Added
4-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-07]
Lonczak Lane Entire length [Added 8-13-90 by Ord. No.
90-43]
Main Street (Old
Bridge Turnpike)
From the Old Bridge Turnpike to the East
Brunswick Township-Sayreville Borough boundary
line
Main Street (Old
Bridge Turnpike)
From the Spotswood Borough - East Brunswick
Township boundary line to Old Bridge Turnpike
Meadow Road Old Stage Road to Hillsdale Road [Added 4-22-02
by Ord. No. 02-07]
Merrill Avenue From Cranbury Road to Milltown Road
Milltown Road From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Milltown Road From the Milltown Borough - East Brunswick
Township boundary line to New Jersey State Route
No. 18
New Brunswick
Avenue
Old Stage Road to Rues Lane [Added 4-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-07]
Old Bridge Turnpike From Main Street (Old Bridge Turnpike) to the
East Brunswick Township - South River Borough
line
Old Stage Road From Main Street (Old Bridge) to Summerhill
Road. [Added 12-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-423]
Old Stage Road From Summerhill Road to Helmetta Boulevard.
[Added 12-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-423]
Old Stage Road From Main Street (Old Bridge Turnpike) to
Summerhill Road
Old Stage Road From New Brunswick Avenue to Helmetta
Boulevard
Old Stage Road From Summerhill Road to New Brunswick Avenue
§ 209-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-51
1:747
Name of Street Limits
Parker Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Prigmore Street From Cranbury Road to Arthur Street
Prospect Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Race Track Road From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to
Summerhill Road
Race Track Road From Old Bridge Turnpike to New Jersey State
Route No. 18
Riva Avenue From Church Lane to the East Brunswick
Township - Milltown Borough boundary line
River Road From Main Street (Old Bridge Turnpike) to the
East Brunswick Township - South River Borough
boundary line
Rues Lane From Cranbury Road to Summerhill Road
Rues Lane From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Rues Lane From Summerhill Road to New Jersey State Route
No. 18
Rues Lane Cranbury Road to 50 feet east of Canterbury Road
[Added 4-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-07]
Ryders Lane From Milltown Road to Cranbury Road
Ryders Lane From the East Brunswick - North Brunswick
Township boundary line to Milltown Road
South Drive Between Myron Place and North Drive (westerly
intersection) [Added 4-26-93 by Ord. No.
93-18]
Sullivan Way From Gage Road to Ryders Lane
Summerhill Road From a point 100 feet south of Old Stage Road to a
point 100 feet south of Cranbury Road
Sunburst Drive Between Old Bridge Turnpike and River Road
[Added 7-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-761]
Tices Lane From Ryders Lane to New Jersey State Route No.
18
University Road From Eggers Street to Tices Lane
Village Drive Between New Brunswick Avenue and Bromley
Place [Added 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-661]
West Amherst Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
§ 209-51 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-51
1:748
Name of Street Limits
Willow Street From Cranbury Road to Arthur Street
Willow Street Between Cranbury Road and Milltown Road
[Added 11-28-94 by Ord. No. 94-49]
Wilmot Street From New Jersey State Route No. 18 to Old Bridge
Turnpike
§ 209-52. Schedule XIII: Stop Intersections. [Amended 5-24-93 by
Ord. No. 93-28; 11-28-94 by Ord. No. 94-49; 8-28-95 by Ord. No.
95-28; 2-26-96 by Ord. No. 96-3; 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-3; 3-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-16; 11-27-00 by Ord. No. 00-21; 4-22-02 by Ord. No.
02-07; 8-13-12 by Ord. No. 12-10; 4-11-16 by Ord. 16-06; 8-8-16
Ord. 16-12; 6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-07]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-21, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign On At Intersection of
Allwood Road Sullivan Way [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
Arbit Road Sullivan Way [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
Brick Plant Road Edgeboro Road [Added 5-24-93 by Ord. No.
93-28]
Bosko Drive New Brunswick Avenue
Chestnut Street Kossman Street
Connerty Court Edgeboro Road [Added 7-22-85 by Ord. No.
85-683]
Coolidge Avenue McKinley Avenue [Added 11-16-84 by Ord. No.
84-615]
Corona Road Sullivan Way [Added 4-28-86 by Ord. No.
86-75l]
Donna Street Flagler Street [Added 7-27-15 by Ord. No.
15-13]
Edna Street Hilltop Boulevard [Added 11-26-84 by Ord. No.
84-614]
Farms Road Circle,
(east approach)
Farms Road
Fifth Street (both
directions)13
Icker Avenue [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-10]
13.Signage installation will include corresponding painted stop bars.
§ 209-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-52
1:749
Stop Sign On At Intersection of
Fourth Street (both
directions)14
Icker Avenue [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-10]
Fresh Ponds Road Dutch Road
Fresh Ponds Road Hardenburg Lane [Amended 2-25-85 by Ord.
No. 85-642]
Fresh Ponds Road and
Cromelin Court
Cromelin Court [Added 4-22-02 by Ord. No.
02-07]
Fresh Ponds Road and
Kulessa Court
Kulessa Court [Added 4-22-02 by Ord. No.
02-07]
Garfield Avenue McKinley Avenue
Gates Avenue Milton Avenue & Gates Avenue [Added 2-26-96
by Ord. No. 96-3]
Gladstone Drive Churchill Road [Added 4-11-16 by Ord. 16-06]
Glover Road Starkin Road, and Glover Road [Added 3-22-99
by Ord. No. 99-16]
Guernsey Lane Tall Oaks Road
Gulf Road Sullivan Way [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
Hamlin Road Corona Road [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
Hamlin Road Sullivan Way [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
Harrison Avenue McKinley Avenue [Added 8-8-16 by Ord. 16-12]
Herbert Drive Harwin Drive and Herbert Drive [Added 8-28-95
by Ord. No. 95-28]
Helena Street Flagler Street [Added 7-27-15 by Ord. 15-13]
Hilltop Boulevard Farms Road
Icker Avenue Sixth Street
Kennedy Boulevard
(left-turn lane)
McGuire Street
Kennedy Boulevard -
Milton Avenue
Ainsworth Avenue
Lake Avenue Rennee Road [Added 11-26-84 by Ord. No.
84-614]
Landsdowne Road Frost Avenue [Added 8-13-12 by Ord. No.
12-10]
14.Signage installation will include corresponding painted stop bars.
§ 209-52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-52
1:750
Stop Sign On At Intersection of
Langley Road New Brunswick Avenue
Lincoln Avenue McKinley Avenue [Added 8-8-16 by Ord. 16-12]
Litchfield Road Lexington Avenue [Added 6-11-18 by Ord. No.
18-07]
Manor Place Patton Drive
McKinley Avenue Cleveland Avenue
McKinley Avenue Madison Avenue
Miller Avenue Crescent Avenue
Mitchell Avenue Milton Avenue & Mitchell Avenue [Added
2-26-96 by Ord. No. 96-3]
Naricon Place Westons Mill Road
Pearl Road Thomas Road [Added 7-27-15 by Ord. No.
15-13]
Pennsylvania Drive Congress Avenue [Added 5-13-85 by Ord. No.
85-661]
Port Street Helmetta Boulevard
Riva Avenue Church Lane
Roosevelt Avenue McKinley Avenue [Added 8-8-16 by Ord. 16-12]
Ruth Street Taylor Avenue [Added 4-14-86 by Ord. No.
86-743]
Salem Road Canterbury Road [Added 8-13-12 by Ord. No.
12-10]
Salt Meadow Road Allwood Road [Added 11-28-94 by Ord. No.
94-49]
Sixth Street & West
Ferris Street
West Ferris Street [Added 12-8-80 by Ord. No.
80-316]
South Drive Myron Place [Added 11-28-94 by Ord. No.
94-49]
Stage Coach Road Valley Forge Drive [Added 8-13-12 by Ord. No.
12-10]
Surrey Lane Tall Oaks Road
Suydam Road
(Northerly
Intersection)
Kennedy Boulevard [Added 11-28-94 by Ord.
No. 94-49]
Third Street (both
directions)15
Icker Avenue [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-10]
15.Signage installation will include corresponding painted stop bars.
§ 209-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-52
1:751
Stop Sign On At Intersection of
Valley View Road Lois Avenue [Added 11-28-94 by Ord. No.
94-49]
Victory Place Herbert Drive
Village Drive Henley Drive [Added 4-14-86 by Ord. No.
86-743]
Warwick Road Tall Oaks Drive and Warwick Road [Added
11-27-00 by Ord. No. 00-21]
West Ferris Street Sixth Street [Added 9-8-80 by Ord. 80-286]
Whitehall Road Gage Road [Added 7-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-522]
Whitehall Road16 Sullivan Way [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
§ 209-53. Schedule XIV: Yield Intersection. [Amended 4-28-86 by
Ord. No. 86-751; 12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-51]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-22, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign On At Intersection of
Kennedy Boulevard (right-turn lane) McGuire Street
Manor Place Westons Mill Road [Added
12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-51]
Perimeter road approaching East
Brunswick High School driveway
westbound
East Brunswick High School
driveway
Suydam Road (Southerly
Intersection)
Kennedy Boulevard [Added
12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-51]
§ 209-54. Schedule XV: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-23, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 209-55. Schedule XVI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
16.Please note that Whitehall Road does not have a delineated crosswalk; however, approved
and certified signage is necessary.
§ 209-52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-55
1:752
Street Side Location
Burnett Street East Beginning at a point 900 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Schoolhouse
Lane and extending to a point 105 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 209-56. Schedule XVII: Bus Stops. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-199; 6-12-00 by Ord. No. 00-9; 9-10-01 by Ord. No. 01-31]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Main Street eastbound on the northerly side at:
Harrison Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Harrison
Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
Taft Place (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Taft Place and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom.
Main Street westbound on the southerly side at:
Taft Place (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Taft Place and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom.
Harrison Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Harrison Avenue and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
Old Bridge Turnpike southbound on the westerly side at:
Route N.J. 18 and Tices Lane (mid block)
Beginning 250 feet north of northerly curbline of Tices Lane and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
W. Prospect Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of W. Prospect Street and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom.
W. Ferris Street and Wilbur Street (mid block)
Beginning 1700 feet south of the southerly curbline of W. Ferris Street
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
Davison Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Davison Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
Cranbury Road (far side)
§ 209-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-56
1:753
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Cranbury Road and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
Arthur Street (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Arthur Street and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom.
Kendall Road (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Kendall Road and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom.
Rues Lane eastbound on the southerly side at:
New Brunswick Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of New Brunswick Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
Waverly Road West (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Waverly Road West and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
Rues Lane westbound on the northerly side at:
Winton Road and Mercer Road (mid block)
Beginning 400 feet west of the westerly curbline of Winton Road and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
Waverly Road West (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Waverly Road
West and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
New Brunswick Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of New Brunswick Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
Ryders Lane northbound on the easterly side at:
Dunhams Corner Road (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Dunhams Corner Road and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
Innes Road (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Innes Road and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
Ryders Lane southbound on the westerly side at:
Innes Road (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Innes Road
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
Dunhams Corner Road (far side)
§ 209-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-56
1:754
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Dunhams Corner Road and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
Summerhill Road northbound on the easterly side at:
Old Stage Road (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Old Stage Road and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom.
Central Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Central Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
Branton Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Branton Drive and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
Summerhill Road southbound on the easterly side at:
Branton Drive (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Branton Drive
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
Central Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Central
Avenue and extending 140 feet southerly therefrom.
Old Stage Road westbound on the southerly side at:
Summerhill Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Summerhill Road and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
Bosko Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Bosko Drive and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom.
Race Track Road eastbound on the northerly side at:
Windsor Drive (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Windsor Drive and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom.
Race Track Road westbound on the southerly side at:
Rodney Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Rodney Road and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom.
Winton Road northbound on the easterly side at:
Rues Lane (far side)
§ 209-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-56
1:755
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Rues Lane and extending 100 feet
northerly therefrom.
Civic Center Drive northbound on the easterly side at:
Ryders Lane North and Ryders Lane South (mid block)
Beginning 2300 feet south of the southerly curbline of Ryders Lane
North and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
Ryders Lane North and Ryders Lane South (mid block)
Beginning 1300 feet south of the southerly curbline of Ryders Lane
North and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
Ryders Lane North and Ryders Lane South (mid block)
Beginning 2500 feet south of the southerly curbline of Ryders Lane
North and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
New Brunswick Avenue northbound on the easterly side at:
Bosko Drive (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Bosko Drive and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom.
Henley Drive (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Henley Drive
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
New Brunswick Avenue southbound on the westerly side at:
Henley Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Henley Drive and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
Bosko Drive (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Bosko Drive
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 209-57. Schedule XVIII: U-Turn Prohibitions. [Amended 3-10-03
by Ord. No. 03-06]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-26, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Ryders Lane Northbound at Corona Road
Ryders Lane Southbound at Corona Road
Ryders Lane Northbound at Salt Meadow Road
Ryders Lane Southbound at Salt Meadow Road
§ 209-56 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-58
1:756
§ 209-58. Schedule XIX: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-27, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
At
Intersection
of Time Period
Cranbury
Road
West Right Laurie Drive 7 a.m. and 9 a.m.
on school days only
[Added 3-26-90
by Ord. No.
90-10]
§ 209-59. Schedule XX: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
[Amended 1-10-90 by Ord. No. 89-91]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-28, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Location Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal
Cranbury Road and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From east on Cranbury Road to south on
Old Bridge Turnpike
Dunhams Corner Road and
Ryders Lane
From east on Dunhams Corner Road to
south on Ryders Lane
Dunhams Corner Road and
Ryders Lane
From west on Dunhams Corner Road to
north on Ryders Lane
Main Street and Matawan Road From east on Main Street to south on
Matawan Road
Main Street and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From west on Main Street to north on
Old Bridge Turnpike
Matawan Road and Main Street From north on Matawan Road to east on
Main Street
Milltown Road and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From east on Milltown Road to south on
Old Bridge Turnpike
Old Bridge Turnpike and
Cranbury Road
From south on Old Bridge Turnpike to
west Cranbury Road
Old Stage Road and Summerhill
Road
From west on Old Stage Road to north
on Summerhill Road
Rues Lane and Summerhill
Road
Between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
school days [Added 8-11-80 by Ord.
No. 80-276; amended 12-12-83 by
Ord. No. 83-549]
§ 209-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-59
1:757
Location Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal
Ryders Lane and Milltown Road From north on Ryders Lane to east on
Milltown Road
Ryders Lane and Milltown Road From south on Ryders Lane to west on
Milltown Road
Tices Lane and Ryders Lane From west on Tices Lane to north on
Ryders Lane
Tower Center Center Boulevard From South on Tower Center Boulevard
to West on Naricon Place between the
hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 209-60. Schedule XXI: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-29, the lanes indicated shall be
reserved for the actions indicated upon the streets or parts of streets listed
below:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Lane
Reserved
Permitted
Action Location
Kennedy
Boulevard
South Left Left turn only Approach to
McGuire Street
Kennedy
Boulevard
South Right Right turn
only
Approach to
McGuire Street
§ 209-61. Schedule XXII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
[Deleted in its entirety 11-24-03 by Ord. No. 03-40]
§ 209-62. Schedule XXIII: Speed Limits. [Amended 2-11-80 by Ord.
No. 80-217; 4-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-37; 4-27-92 by Ord. No. 92-11;
5-11-92 by Ord. No. 92-12; 11-9-92 by Ord. No. 92-45; 10-25-93 by
Ord. No. 93-55; 10-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-56; 12-12-94 by Ord. No.
94-52; 10-28-96 by Ord. No. 96-35; 9-12-05 by Ord. No. 05-24;
6-2-08 by Ord. No. 08-10; 2-25-13 by Ord. No. 13-04; 2-25-13 by
Ord. No. 13-04; 7-13-15 by Ord. No. 15-12; 4-9-18 by Ord. No. 18-05;
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-35]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 209-35, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 209-59 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-62
1:758
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Arthur Street 25 Both directions between Old Bridge
Turnpike and Route 18 North [Added
7-13-15 Ord. 15-12]
Arthur Street 30 Both directions between Summerhill
Road and Route 18 South [Added
7-13-15 Ord. 15-12]
Roadway in
Bicentennial Park
15 Both directions, entire length. [Added
6-23-80 by Ord. No. 80-264]
15 Roadways between Mall buildings &
parking areas. [Added 1-11-88 by
Ord. No. 87-891]
15 Entrance drives and parking drives.
[Added 1-11-88 by Ord. No.
87-891]
Brunswick
Square
25 All perimeter roadways. [Added
1-11-88 by Ord. No. 87-891]
Church Lane 35 Entire length [Amended 4-9-18 by
Ord. No. 18-05]
Congress 25 Both directions, entire length. [Added
7-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-760]
Cotters Lane 35 Entire length [Added 12-14-81 by
Ord. No. 81-424]
Cranbury-South
River Road
50 From Davidsons Mill Road to Ryders
Lane-Rues Lane
Cranbury-South
River Road
45 From Ryders Lane-Rues Lane to the
northernmost intersection of Dunhams
Corner Road
Cranbury-South
River Road
40 From the northernmost intersection of
Dunhams Corner Road to Route 18
Crescent Avenue 35 Entire length
Dunhams Corner
Road
25 In the McGinnis School zone during
recess or while children are going to
or leaving school during opening or
closing hours
Dunhams Corner
Road
30 From the Irelands Brook Bridge to the
northernmost intersection with
Cranbury Road [Amended 2-25-13
by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 209-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-62
1:759
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Dunhams Corner
Road
50 From the southernmost intersection
with Cranbury Road to the Irelands
Brook Bridge [Amended 2-25-13 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
Dunhams Corner 25 In the Torah Links/Warnsdorfer School
Zone during recess or while children
are going to or leaving school during
open or closing hours [Added
7-13-15 Ord. 15-12]
Dutch Road 35 Entire length
East Brunswick
High School
15 Perimeter roadway on the East
Brunswick High School ground.
[Added 3-24-80 by Ord. 80-232]
East Brunswick
High School
15 Both directions of traffic along the
school connector road at East
Brunswick High School and
Summerhill Road in the Township of
East Brunswick [Added 9-10-84 by
Ord. No. 84-601]
Edgeboro Road 35 Entire length [Added 4-9-84 by Ord.
No. 84-564]
Elkins Road 35 Entire length [Added 12-14-81 by
Ord. No. 81-424]
Evergreen
Boulevard
25 Entire Length [Added 4-8-91 by Ord.
No. 91-37]
Fresh Ponds
Road
35 Entire length [Amended 12-8-80 by
Ord. No. 80-314; 4-9-18 by Ord.
No. 18-05]
Hardenburg Lane 35 Entire length
Hardenburg Lane 25 In the Warnsdorfer Elementary School
zone during recess or while children
are going to or leaving school during
opening or closing hours
Harts Lane 40 Entire length [Added 12-14-81 by
Ord. No. 81-424]
Helmetta
Boulevard
40 Entire length [Added 12-14-81 by
Ord. No. 81-424]
Henley Drive 25 Both directions, entire length. [Added
7-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-760]
§ 209-62 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-62
1:760
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Kennedy
Boulevard
35 Entire length [Added 7-13-87 by
Ord. No. 87-848]
Kimberly Road 35 Entire length [Added 12-14-81 by
Ord. No. 81-424]
Kingswood
Boulevard
25 Between Cranbury Road and 200 feet
east of Dorchester Drive [Added
10-28-96 by Ord. No. 96-35]
Loehmann's
Plaza
15 All roadways and parking drives
[Added 1-11-88 by Ord. No.
87-891]
Main Street 40 Both directions, from the southerly
East Brunswick Township line to Taft
Place [Added 10-25-93 by Ord. No.
93-56]
Main Street 35 From Taft Place to the northerly East
Brunswick Township line, except 25
MPH in the Bowne-Munro School Zone
when the flashing school speed limit
beacons are flashing [Added
10-25-93 by Ord. No. 93 56;
amended 9-12-05 by Ord. No.
05-24]
Merrill Avenue 25 From Milltown Road to Cranbury Road
Mid State Mall 15 All roadways and parking drives
[Added 1-11-88 by Ord. No.
87-891]
New Brunswick
Avenue
40 Zone 1 between Old Stage Road and
1,285 feet north of Langley Road
[Added 10-13-80 by Ord. No.
80-293]
New Brunswick
Avenue
35 Zone 2 between 1,285 feet north of
Langley Road and Rues Lane [Added
10-13-80 by Ord. No. 80-293]
Old Bridge
Turnpike
35 Between Main Street and Lee Street,
both directions [Added 12-30-85 by
Ord. No. 85-723]
Old Stage Road 40 From Helmetta Boulevard to the
center of Summerhill Road
Old Stage Road 35 From the center of Summerhill Road
to Main Street
§ 209-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-62
1:761
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Port Street 40 Entire length [Added 11-12-85 by
Ord. No. 85-708]
Race Track Road 25 In the Irwin Elementary School zone
during recess or while children are
going to or leaving school during
opening or closing hours
Race Track Road 25 Entire length both directions
Riva Avenue 30 Entire length [Amended 4-9-18 by
Ord. No. 18-05]
Route #18 15 All roadways and parking drives
[Added 1-11-88 Shopping Center
by Ord. No. 87-891]
Rues Lane 25 In the Middlesex County Vocational
Technical High School zone, 200 feet
west of Summerhill Road to 200 feet
east of the school's western property
line, during recess or when the
presence of children is clearly visible
from the roadway or while children
are going to or leaving school during
opening and closing hours [Added
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-35]
Rues Lane 30 Both directions from Cranbury Road to
Civic Center Drive, except 25 MPH
when passing through the
Hammarskjold Junior High School
zone during recess when the presence
of children is clearly visible from the
roadway or when children are going to
or leaving school during opening or
closing hours [Added 4-14-86 by
Ord. No. 86-742; amended 5-11-92
by Ord. No. 92-12; 12-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-37]
Rues Lane (Zone
I)
30 Both directions between Old Bridge-
New Brunswick Turnpike and Route
18 [Added 4-14-86 by Ord. No.
86-742; amended 12-12-94 by Ord.
No. 94-52]
§ 209-62 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-62
1:762
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Rues Lane (Zone
II)
45 Both directions between Route 18 and
Summerhill Road [Added 4-14-86 by
Ord. No. 86-742; amended
12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-52]
Ryders Lane 40 Both directions from Cranbury Road to
Milltown Road, except 25 MPH in the
St. Bartholomew's School zone during
recess when the presence of children
is clearly visible from the roadway or
while children are going to or leaving
school during opening or closing
hours, herein designed part of Zone 3
[Added 4-14-86 by Ord. No.
86-742]
Ryders Lane 45 Both directions from Milltown Road to
Raritan River Railroad, herein
designated Zone 4 [Added 4-14-86
by Ord. No. 86-742]
Ryders Lane 40 From Civic Center Drive to
Summerhill Road in both directions
[Added 11-23-87 by Ord. No.
87-876]
Ryders Lane
(Zone III)
40 Between Summerhill Road and
Milltown Road, Except 25 MPH in the
St. Bartholomew's School Zone and
the Solomon Schechter Day School
Zone during recess, when the
presence of children is clearly visible
from the roadway, or while children
are going to or leaving school, during
opening or closing hours. [Added
12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-52;
amended 6-2-08 by Ord. No. 08-10]
Ryders Lane
(Zone IV)
45 Between Milltown Road and Tices
Lane-Washington Avenue [Added
12-12-94 by Ord. No. 94-52]
Ryders Lane
(Zone V)
50 Between Tices Lane-Washington
Avenue and U.S. Route 1 (northbound)
[Added 12-12-94 by Ord. No.
94-52]
§ 209-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-62
1:763
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
School Zones 25 In the East Brunswick High School
and East Brunswick Central Zones, in
40 mph zone, during recess or while
children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing
hours.
Summerhill Road 25 In the Middlesex County Vocational
Technical High School zone, 200 feet
south of Rues Lane to 200 feet North
of school's northern property line,
during recess or when the presence of
children is clearly visible from the
roadway or while children are going to
or leaving school during opening and
closing hours. [Added 12-10-18 by
Ord. No. 18-35]
Summerhill Road 40 Between Old Stage Road and Hope
Road, except 25 MPH in the Irwin
School Zone during recess, when the
presence of children is clearly visible
from the roadway, or while children
are going to or leaving school, during
opening or closing hours. [Added
10-25-93 by Ord. No. 93-55]
Suydam Road 30 Entire length [Added 7-13-87 by
Ord. No. 87-847]
Sunburst Drive 25 Both directions, entire length. [Added
7-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-760]
Tices Lane 40 From Ryders Lane to New Jersey State
Route No. 18
Tices Lane 35 Westbound from Old Bridge Turnpike
to New Jersey State Route No. 18
Tower Center
Boulevard
30 Between the New Brunswick - East
Brunswick Township Naricon Place
Corporate Line and the southernmost
terminus of Naricon Place. [Added
11-9-92 by Ord. No. 92-45]
Village Drive 25 Both directions, entire length. [Added
7-14-86 by Ord. No. 86-760]
Washington
Avenue
30 Entire length [Added 11-12-85 by
Ord. No. 85-708]
§ 209-62 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-63
1:764
§ 209-63. Schedule XXIV: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended
12-10-12 by Ord. No. 12-17; 7-23-18 by Ord. No. 18-16]
Pursuant to § 209-37, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersection
Cranbury Road & Merrill Avenue
Dunhams Corner Road
Evergreen Boulevard
Rues Lane
Henley Drive
Lexington Avenue
Fern Road
Helmetta Boulevard
Dunhams Corner Road & Hardenburg Lane
Fresh Ponds Road & Church Lane (flasher)
Hardenburg Lane (flasher)
Main Street & Old Stage Road
River Road
Bowne Munro School (flasher)
Milltown Road (County
Route 606) &
Harts Lane [Added 7-23-18 by Ord. No.
18-16]
Milltown Road & Merrill Avenue
Harts Lane
New Brunswick Avenue
&
Old Stage Road
Rues Lane
§ 209-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-63
1:765
Intersection
Old Bridge Turnpike & Main Street
Flagler Street (flashing)
Racetrack Road
Cranbury Road
Milltown Road
West Prospect Street
Tices Lane
North End Drive
Edgeboro Road
Riva Avenue & Church Lane
Hardenburg Lane
River Road by Buck Road (flasher)
River Road & Main Street
Rues Lane & New Brunswick Avenue [Added 7-23-18 by
Ord. No. 18-16]
Ryders Lane & Sullivan Way
Stratford Road
Cedar Village Boulevard
Home Depot Parking Lot
Milltown Road
Tices Lane
Peach Orchard Drive
Ryders Lane & Dunhams Corner Road
Civic Center Drive
Cranbury Road
Winton Road
Summerhill Road
§ 209-63 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-63
1:766
Intersection
Summerhill Road & Old Stage Road
Brunswick Square Mall Entrance
Racetrack Road
Arthur Street
Hope Street
Tices Lane & University Avenue
Harts Lane
Renee Road
Tower Center Boulevard
&
Naricon Place
§ 209-64. Schedule XXV: No-Passing Zones. [Amended 3-24-80 by
Ord. No. 80-229; 4-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-243; 8-23-82 by Ord. No.
82-470; 9-12-83 by Ord. No. 83-531; 11-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-712;
12-26-90 by Ord. No. 90-72; 9-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-92; 11-9-92 by
Ord. No. 92-46]
Pursuant to § 209-39, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Burnet Street 8/7/79 NPZ 2598A
Church Lane 11/5/73 NPZ 691
Church Lane 11-6-90 NPZ 3436
Dunhams Corner Road 8/3/76 NPZ 233A
Dutch Road 11/2/73 NPZ 688
Edgeboro Road - Entire length
Eggers Street
Hardenburg Lane 11/8/73 NPZ 673
Hardenburg Lane 12/17/82 NPZ 673B
Helmetta Boulevard 8/11/75 NPZ 1399
Main Street 7/30/79 NPZ 073B
New Brunswick Avenue 6/21/76 NPZ 631A
Old Stage Road 6/14/76 NPZ 746B
Rennee Road - Entire Length [Added 9-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-92]
Rennee Road - From Loehmanns Plaza to Tices Lane - 2,710 feet [Added
11-9-92 by Ord. No. 92-46]
§ 209-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-64
1:767
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Riva Avenue 12/13/73 NPZ 762
Suydam Avenue 7/13/76 NPZ 2324
Tices Lane 2/15/74 NPZ 918
Tices Lane - Between Ryders Lane & Highway 18 [Amended 9-11-91 by
Ord. No. 91-92]
University Road
§ 209-65. Schedule XXVI: Mid-Block Crossings. [Added 3-24-80 by
Ord. No. 80-226; amended 8-14-06 by Ord. No. 06-24; 5-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-08; 8-13-12 by Ord. No. 12-10]
The following mid-block crossings are hereby authorized for pedestrian use
at the locations indicated.
Name of Street Location
Corona Road At 305 feet Southeast of the center line of
Sullivan Way. [Added 5-12-08 by Ord. No.
08-08]
Dunhams Corner Road At 400 feet North of the center of Irelands
Brook [Added 8-14-06 by Ord. No. 06-24]
Dutch Road At 180 feet South of the center line of Putnam
Road.
Flagler Street At 150 feet North of the center line of Helena
Street.
Innes Road At 535 feet North of the center line of Hilltop
Boulevard [Amended 8-13-12 by Ord. No.
12-10]
Kingswood Boulevard 130 feet south of the center line of Dorchester
Drive [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-22]
Norton Road At 800 feet West of the center line of University
Road.
Racetrack Road At 260 feet South of Elaine Road.
Rennee Road At 260 feet East of the center line of Lake
Avenue.
Sullivan Way At 180 feet Northwest of the center line of
Gage Road. [Added 5-12-08 by Ord. No.
08-08]
Winton Road At 570 feet North of the center line of Valiant
Road.
§ 209-64 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-66
1:768
§ 209-66. Schedule XXVII: Channelization of Summerhill Road.
[Added 3-24-80 by Ord. No. 80-231]
The Township of East Brunswick hereby adopts the authorization for the
channelization along Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) from the New
Jersey Department of Transportation issued May 2, 1978 and involving the
following plans:
§ 209-67. Schedule XXVIII: Designated Parking Stalls for
Handicapped Parking. [Added 1-11-82 by Ord. No. 82-434; Amended
7-9-90 by Ord. No. 90-34]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, no person shall park a vehicle in
any of the designated parking stalls shown on sketches on file in the Office
of the Township Clerk, unless such person is a physically handicapped
individual. Any vehicle parked in a parking stall reserved for handicapped
drivers which does not display the official state handicapped license plate,
or special identification stickers from the Motor Vehicle Commission, shall
be presumed to have been parked in such a stall unlawfully.
THIS SECTION WAS DELETED IN ITS ENTIRETY 2-26-07 BY ORD. NO.
07-04.
§ 209-68. Schedule XXIX: Permit Parking. [Added 3-14-83 by Ord.
No. 83-498; amended 6-27-88 by Ord. No. 88-936; 8-14-89 by Ord.
No. 89-47; 9-10-90 by Ord. No. 90-54; 9-24-90 by Ord. No. 90-56;
1-28-91 by Ord. No. 91-2; 5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-12; 2-23-98 by
Ord. No. 98-7; 10-11-04 by Ord. No. 04-16; 6-11-18 by Ord. No.
18-07]
(1) Improvement of Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) located in East
Brunswick striping and sign plan, Station 14+00 to 23+00 - Dated
March 1979.
(2) Improvement of Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) located in East
Brunswick Township striping and sign plan, Station 0+00 to 6+50 -
Dated March 1979.
(3) Improvements of Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) located in
East Brunswick Township striping and sign plan, Cranbury Road
extension - Dated March 1979.
(4) Improvements of Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) located in
East Brunswick Township striping and sign plan, Station 23+00 to
Cranbury Road - Dated March 1979.
(5) Improvement of Summerhill Road (County Road 3-R-12) located in East
Brunswick Township striping and sign plan, Station 6+50 to 14+00 -
Dated March 1979.
(1) The west side of Prigmore Street 258 feet south of the intersection of
Wallace Street.
§ 209-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-68
1:769
(2) The entire length of Academic Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(3) The entire length of Camelot Drive, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(4) The entire length of Colin Street, both sides, between the hours of 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(5) The entire length of Lycoming Lane, on the east side of the road,
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(6) The entire length of Tudor Place, both sides, between the hours of 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(7) The entire length of Coleman Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(8) The entire length of Fairfield Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(9) The entire length of Highview Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(10) The entire length of Ellwood Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(11) The entire length of Laurie Drive, both sides, between the hours of 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(12) The entire length of Quincy Road, both sides, between the hours of 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(13) The entire length of Blair Court, both sides, between the hours of 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(14) The entire length of Channing Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(15) The entire length of Deerfield Road, both sides, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(16) Lois Avenue, both sides, between Merrill Avenue and Valley View Road,
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., School Days.
(17) Merrill Avenue, both sides, between Lois Avenue and Valley View Road.
(18) Parking on the West side of Prigmore Street between Wallace Street
and Fountain Street shall be reserved for members of the East
Brunswick Rescue Squad only.
(19) Richard Road, both sides, entire length, between the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 4:00 P.M., school days.
(20) Prigmore Street, both sides, between Arthur Street and Cranbury Road.
§ 209-68 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-68
1:770
(21) Eggers Street, east, from New Jersey State Route 18 to a point 1,370
feet southwest thereof.
(22) Eggers Street, west, from New Jersey State Route 18 to Sherry Road.
(23) The entire length of Beth Court, both sides.
(24) Overhill Road, both sides, from the easterly curbline of Summerhill
Road to a point 470 feet easterly thereof, between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Sundays and Saturdays.
(25) The entire length of Kendall Road, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(26) The entire length of Rodney Road, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(27) The entire length of Gladstone Drive, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(28) The entire length of James Road, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(29) The entire length of Stuart Drive, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(30) The entire length of Susan Lane, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(31) The entire length of Douglas Road, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(32) The entire length of Lauretta Drive, both sides, Weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
(33) Buck Road between Gladstone Drive and the easternmost intersection
of Pelham Place, both sides, Weekdays between the hours of 6:00 A.M.
and 5:00 P.M.
(34) The entire length of Sherry Road, both sides, weekdays between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. [Added 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
(35) Eggers Street, both sides, from New Jersey State Route 18 to a point
300 feet southwest of Sherry Road North, weekdays between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. [Added 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
(36) The entire length of Donna Drive, both sides, school days, between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-21]
(37) Helena Street, both sides, from Flagler Street to a point 900 feet north,
school days, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. [Added
8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
§ 209-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-68.1
1:771
§ 209-68.1. Schedule XXX: Prohibited Left Turns. [Added 6-10-92 by
Ord. No. 92-21; amended 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-15; 12-20-10 by Ord.
No. 10-30]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-28.1, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Corona Road &
Ryders Lane
Left Westbound on Corona Road to
Southbound on Ryders Lane [Added
7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-15]
Kossman Street and
Old Bridge Turnpike
Left Westbound on Kossman Street to
southbound on Old Bridge Turnpike
Old Bridge Turnpike
& Pettit Avenue
(South River)
Left Southbound on Old Bridge Turnpike
to Eastbound on Pettit Avenue
(South River [Added 6-11-07 by
Ord. No. 07-19]
Salt Meadow Road &
Ryders Lane
Left Westbound on Salt Meadow Road to
Southbound on Ryders Lane [Added
7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-15]
St. Mary's Coptic
Church driveway &
Hardenburg Lane
Left Westbound on Hardenburg Lane
[Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No.
10-30]
Sullivan Way &
Lawrence Brook
School Front
Driveway
Left Westbound on Sullivan to
Southbound into Lawrence Brook
School Front Driveway-School Days
Between 8:30 am and 9:30 am
[Added 11-18-16 by Ord. No.
16-22]
§ 209-68.2. Schedule XXXI: Prohibition of Entry Onto Streets.
[Added 7-8-91 by Ord. No. 91-75]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-19.1, the following streets or
parts of streets are hereby designated as prohibited entry in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Direction Location
Kossman Street Northeast At intersection of Old Bridge
Turnpike
§ 209-68.3. Schedule XXXII: Parking on One-Way Streets. [Added
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-21]
With regard to the following one-way streets indicated on this schedule,
parking is prohibited or permitted as indicated:
§ 209-68.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-68.3
1:772
Street Side Limits
Prohibited or
Permitted
Kossman Street North Chestnut Street to
River Road
Permitted
§ 209-68.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-68.3
1:773

ARTICLE XIV
Policing of Streets Otherwise Deemed Private
[Added 8-26-85 by Ord. No. 85-687; amended 11-23-92 By Ord. No.
92-49]
§ 209-69. Streets Which Are Subject to Municipal Ordinances.
The streets referred to on Schedule A are hereby deemed to be subject to
municipal ordinances including but not limited to enforcement of vehicle
and traffic laws in the Township of East Brunswick.
By the enactment of this ordinance, the Township of East Brunswick
assumes no responsibility for ice and snow removal, leaf removal, garbage
pickup, curbs and sidewalks, repair and maintenance, lighting, repair of
drainage structures or any other activity.
Schedule A
Carriage Square
Whitney Court
Sheffield Court
Ardsley Court
Sudbury Court
Society Hill East I
Morgan Place
Applegate Lane
Palombi Court
McDowell Drive
Society Hill East II
Bromley Place
Bromley Court
Danbury Lane
Danbury Court
Andover Place
Covington Court
Cranbury Circle
Briar Ridge
Briar Ridge Road
Bayberry Court
Redberry Court
Azalea Court
Magnolia Court
§ 209-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-69
1:775
Periwinkle Court
Snowbell Court
Firethorn Court
Winterberry Court
Honeysuckle Court
Hawthorn Court
Buckthorn Road
The Club
Griggs Place
Wycoff Way East
Wycoff Way West
Shields Boulevard
Hatfield Lane
Whitehead Lane
Park Place (off Riva Avenue)
Summerhill Meadows
Baron Lane
Dallenbach Lane
LaRue Lane
Fox Meadow
Williams Court
Rooney Court
Wooten Court
Fox Meadow Court
Manahan Lane
Stults Lane
Magee Court
Lloyd Court
VanLiew Court
Kraemer Court
Crosspointe
Crosspointe Drive
Lear Court
Longfield Court
Blew Court
Meade Court
Cozzens Court
§ 209-69 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-69
1:776
Carhart Court
Ayres Court
Kingswood Station
Commons at Kingswood
§ 209-70. Easements to Enforce Law on Common Open Space.
[Added 11-23-92 by Ord. No. 92-50]
(A) Those lands which are referred to on Schedule A17 annexed hereto
consist of common open space as part of the development referred to
therein.
(B) The Homeowners Association or other owner of such lands referred to
on Schedule A has agreed to convey an easement to the Township of
East Brunswick so that Township employees may enter upon the lands
referred to on Schedule A for the purpose of enforcing the law in the
same manner as the Township of East Brunswick enforces the law for
lands which are open to the general public.
(C) By adoption of this ordinance, the Township hereby agrees to accept
easements for each of the properties set forth on Schedule A whereby
the grantor would convey to the Township of East Brunswick as grantee
the right to enter upon the lands for the purpose of enforcing the law as
set forth above.
17.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 209-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-70
1:777

ARTICLE XV
Control for Movement and the Parking of Traffic on Public and
Private Property
[Added 1-12-98 by Ord. No. 97-38]
§ 209-71. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on All Other Private Property. [Added 1-12-98 by Ord. No. 97-38;
amended 1-12-98 by Ord. No. 97-39; 2-27-06 by Ord. No. 06-07]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.18
18.Editor's Note: Said properties are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 209-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-71
1:779

ARTICLE XVI
Traffic Controls for Streets, Highway Construction and Maintenance
Operations
[Added 3-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-17; amended 9-12-16 by Ord. 16-16]
§ 209-72. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below ground which
requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic;
and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to
the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force performing
these operations.
The Township of East Brunswick in the County of Middlesex, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the US DOT FHA current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D. 2009 Edition, with
Revision Numbers 1 and 2 incorporated, dated May 2012 as amended
and supplemented from time to time, except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 209-73. Road Opening/Right-of-Way Permit.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work under the roadway or within the Right of Way of the roadway
shall obtain the necessary permit from the planning and engineering
department as outlined in Chapter 189 of this code.
§ 209-74. Pre-Construction Meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing
to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Traffic
Commander of the Township of East Brunswick, Department of Public
Safety in order to schedule a pre-construction meeting to submit plans for
safe movement of traffic during such period of construction of work. Any
person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to
the start of such work or whose plans are not approved is in violation of this
section.
§ 209-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-75
1:781
§ 209-75. Hazardous Conditions.
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Traffic Commander of the
Department of Public Safety with at least two (2) emergency contact phone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency
contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not
respond to the call from the Public Safety Department to correct a
hazardous condition, the Township may respond to correct such hazardous
condition. The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Township
shall be charged to the person, contractor, or utility responsible for such
conditions.
§ 209-76. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work
that would delay traffic or cause a safety hazard on any roadway in the
Township before the hour of 9:00 A.M. or after 4:00 P.M. This time limit
may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 A.M. or after 4:00 P.M.
if it is determined by the Township Engineer or his designee or Traffic
Commander of the Department of Public Safety that said activities will not
cause traffic delays or cause a safety or health hazard.
§ 209-77. Road Closing and Detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless a detour
plan is submitted and approved by the Township Engineer or his designee
and the Traffic Commander of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 209-78. Traffic Directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Traffic Commander that same is necessary to
provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 209-79. Stop Work.
The Traffic Commander or his designee shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavation and/or other
related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this section.
§ 209-75 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 209-79
1:782
Chapter 212
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
§ 212-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 212-2. Property regulated.
The property to be regulated by this chapter is as follows:
§ 212-3. Purpose.
The Township Council hereby enacts this chapter because it finds that
operation of such motorized vehicles has been conducted:
§ 212-4. Exceptions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to police
or other emergency vehicles, including but not limited to ambulances,
motorcycles, fire control vehicles and the like, or to motorized lawnmowers,
tractors or farm vehicles or construction equipment.
§ 212-5. Confiscation.
The Division of Police of the Department of Public Safety is hereby
authorized to confiscate and impound any motorized vehicle which is
allegedly operated in violation of the terms of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle,
including motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor
scooters, go-carts, motorized skateboards, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)
and dune buggies or any other vehicle in the class known as
"recreational vehicles" on any property or under any circumstances
described in § 212-2 hereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized vehicle, as described
in Subsection A hereof, to permit any person to operate said vehicles on
any property or under any circumstances described in § 212-2 hereof.
A. All privately owned property and publicly owned property off the
improved right-of-way, except driveways leading to and from the public
right-of-way and residential right-of-way.
A. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet and tranquility of others.
B. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of others or the property of others.
§ 209-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-6
1:783
§ 212-6. Application for permit to operate. [Amended 9-25-78 by
Ord. No. 78-61]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary,
application may be made to the East Brunswick Township Council to obtain
a permit for a time period not exceeding three (3) months for the use of
any vehicle regulated by this chapter on specific property. Notice of the
application shall be served on all residents and owners of property within
two hundred (200) feet of the subject property. The Council may issue a
permit for the property if it finds that the proposed area shall be sufficient
for the intended purpose, that adequate parking is available, that the means
of ingress and egress are adequate to prevent traffic hazard, congestion
or excessive interference with normal traffic movement on adjacent public
streets and thoroughfares and that the property can be so used without
adversely affecting the neighborhood. The permit shall be deemed to have
been automatically renewed for additional periods of three (3) months each
if no written complaint has been filed with the Township Clerk. If a written
complaint has been filed with the Township Clerk, notice of same shall be
served upon the holder of the permit and the permit shall expire at the end
of the three-month period in questions unless a new application is filed and
approved as set forth herein.
§ 212-7. Display of chapter by merchandisers. Added 6-28-76 by
Ord. No. 76-70-NN]
All persons who sell or attempt to sell any vehicle covered by this chapter,
whether by wholesale, retail, mail order catalog or otherwise and whether
new or used, shall be required to post in a prominent place where the sale
occurs a copy of this chapter.
§ 212-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No.
76-70-NN; 2-13-78 by Ord. No. 78-302]
Any person who shall be adjudicated to have violated the terms of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 215
VERMIN
§ 215-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, formerly used,
presently used or to be used for human habitation, use or occupancy, and
includes any accessory buildings and appurtenances belonging thereto or
usually enjoyed therewith.
§ 212-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 215-1
1:784
DIRECTOR — The Director of Health and Welfare of the Township of East
Brunswick or his agents.
ERADICATION — The elimination of rodents, insects and other pests from
any building, lot, premises or commercial vehicle through the use of traps,
poisons, fumigation or any other method of extermination acceptable to the
Director.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents, insects and other pests.
INSECTS AND OTHER PESTS — Include the members of class Insecta
and such members of the phylum Arthropoda as spiders, mites, ticks and
centipedes.
PERSON — Shall be as defined N.J.R.S. 1:1-2.
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot,
premises or commercial vehicle; or any person properly authorized to
exercise powers of or for an owner of property for purposes of its purchase,
sale, use, occupying or maintenance; or any other person who has the use
or custody of the property or any part thereof.
§ 215-2. Presence of vermin prohibited.
The presence of rodents, insects and other pests within the Township
of East Brunswick is hereby prohibited. All buildings, lots, premises or
commercial vehicles shall be kept free from rodents, insects or other pests
and from conditions conducive to rodents, insects or other pest life.
§ 215-3. Premises subject to infestation.
When any building, lot, premises or commercial vehicle is subject to
infestation by rodents, insects and other pests, the person in control shall
apply continuous eradication measures.
§ 215-4. Eradication measures to be taken as directed.
When the Director makes the determination that a building, lot, premises or
commercial vehicle is infested by rodents, insects or other pests, the person
or persons in control shall take such eradication measures as the Director
considers necessary.
§ 215-5. Accumulation of garbage, rubbish and refuse to be
controlled.
The accumulation of rubbish, debris and disused combustible and
noncombustible waste material is prohibited. All garbage shall be handled
as in Chapter 114 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:785
§ 215-6. Harborages to be eliminated.
All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, containers,
machinery, raw material, fabricated goods, junk, food, animal feed and any
other substance which may afford harborage or provide food for rodents,
insects and other pests shall be kept, stored or handled in a manner
acceptable to the Director. Structural harborages which cannot be
eliminated shall be periodically uncovered and inspected.
Chapter 218
WATER
§ 218-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-11-84 by Ord. No. 84-628;
3-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-04; 6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-09]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURDEN RATE — The allocation rate at which indirect costs are applied to
the direct costs of labor by adding to labor payroll taxes and benefits for the
individual. The burden rate is the dollar amount of burden (i.e., overhead)
that is applied to $1 of wages.
CONNECTION FEE — A one-time charge to the customer for each new
requested water service.
CURB STOP — The fitting attached to the end of the supply pipe, used for
turning on and shutting off water at the curb.
CUSTOMER — The party contracting for the water service to a property or
premises as herein classified.
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM (MAIN OR MAINS) — All public pipes, hydrants,
valves, and supply pipes, other than private service pipes, used for
conveying water to or distributing water in the Township.
FIRE SERVICE LINE — Any line which receives water supplied to a fire
hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system, or any combination of the foregoing
located on private property.
MAIN EXTENSION — An extension or addition to the existing water
distribution system piping.
A building under one roof and owned and occupied by one party as one
business or residence.
a.
A combination of buildings, owned by one party, on one common lot
occupied by one business.
b.
A dwelling unit separated by a fire-resistant partition wall and ceiling,
capable of separate ownership with or without zero lot line division.
c.
d. An industrial, commercial or manufacturing establishment.
§ 215-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-1
1:786
METER — A device to measure the quantity of water and/or the rate of flow
delivered to a customer.
METER RATES — Rates or prices to be charged for water, based upon the
quantity consumed as measured by an approved water meter.
OWNER — An applicant or customer holding record title to the property or
premises served.
PREMISES — A building used for either business or residential purposes,
or both, together with the land appurtenant to it and any outbuildings used
exclusively in connection with it, or any part of a building with the land
appurtenant to it when sold as a separate unit.
REMOTE METER — A device connected to the master water meter inside
the building by wire to carry pulse reading in real time to the remote meter
located outside the building permitting a valid reading without the need to
enter the building.
RESALE OF WATER — No resale of water by any person is permitted with
the exception of metered water by a landlord to a tenant at cost.
SERVICE PIPE — A pipe extending from the curb stop into privately owned
property for supplying water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The licensed system operator as covered under
N.J.S.A. 58:11-5.
SUPPLY PIPE — A pipe connected to the main and extending to the curb
stop behind the curbline of the street.
TAP — Is the fitting on the main to which the supply pipe is attached. It is
used to facilitate connecting the service pipe to the main. All Taps shall be
done under normal system operating pressure (Wet).
TAPPING FEE — A one-time charge (parts and personnel) to place the tap
fitting in the line while under pressure.
TOWNSHIP — The Township Water Utility or any of the Township's
authorized agents or employees.
UTILITY — The Water Utility of the Township of East Brunswick.
WATER SERVICE — The act of providing water to a customer.
§ 218-1.1. Water Utility. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
There shall be a Water Utility of the Township of East Brunswick, the head
of which shall be the Director of the Water Utility. The Director shall serve
as head of the Water Utility and shall be responsible for the supervision
of all operations of the Water Utility. The Water Utility shall include such
officers and employees as may be required to fulfill its responsibilities set
forth herein.
§ 218-2. Application for service; inspection; payment of fees.
[Amended 4-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-G]
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-2
1:787
§ 218-3. Water for construction purposes. [Amended 4-25-77 by
Ord. No. 77-90-G]
A. Application required. The owner of any premises desiring to use
Township water or to make a change in any existing water supply shall
make an application, in writing, to the Construction Official of the
Township upon forms provided by the Township. The applicant(s) shall
request the waterline tap to be made by the Water Utility subject to the
provisions of this chapter. All applications shall be accompanied by the
consent of the applicant to be bound by all of the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted by the Township.
1. Prior to the submission of an application for water service, it is the
responsibility of the customer to inspect and examine all pipes and
fixtures on the customer's property to determine whether they are
in good condition. Application for water service shall constitute a
representation by the customer that said inspection has been made
and said appurtenances have been found to be in good condition.
The Utility shall not be liable for any accident, breaks, leakage or
damage arising in any way in connection with the supply of water
or failure to supply same, or the freezing of water pipes or fixtures
of the customer since these are the responsibility of the customer
to protect, nor for any damage to the property which may result
from the usage of water supplied to the premises.
B. Inspection. Upon receipt of an application for service, the Township
may make an inspection of the premises.
C. Payment of fees. No water service shall be made to any premises until
all fees are paid.
D. Connection to municipal water system. All new construction shall be
connected to the municipal water system notwithstanding the existence
of a well or the opportunity to obtain water from underground sources.
[Added 1-29-79 by Ord. No. 78-110]
E. Customers other than residential users making application for water
service, in addition to making written applications for such service,
shall furnish a detailed description of the type and size of buildings, the
nature of the business to be conducted in the structure, the number and
type of fixture to be served. Such applicants shall also furnish the Water
Utility two copies of plans showing:
1. Boundaries of the property.
2. The location within the property of the structures to be served.
3. The location and proposed profile of finished grade of water
service.
A. Application. Where it is desired to use Township water service in
connection with the construction or repair of a building, application
§ 218-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-3
1:788
§ 218-4. Inspection by authorized agents. [Amended 4-25-77 by
Ord. No. 77-90-G]
Authorized agents of the Township, upon the presentation of credentials
provided by the Township, shall have access at any reasonable time to
any premises supplied with Township water for the purpose of making any
desired inspection or to read or repair the meter. Any person who refuses
to admit a duly authorized agent for the purpose of inspection reading or
repairing of the meter, or hinders or interferes with such, shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter and may be subjected to discontinuance of water
service.
§ 218-5. Discontinuance of service. [Amended 4-25-77 by Ord. No.
77-90-G; 3-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-04]
shall be made to the Township Revenue Office by the owner of the
building on forms furnished by the Water Utility. The character of the
work contemplated and the method by which the water is to be used
shall be specified in the application.
B. Fees. No permit for temporary water service during construction or
repair shall be issued unless the fees prescribed in §§ 218-15 through
218-18 are paid in advance.
C. Metering. The Water Utility, at its option, may install a water meter
during the construction or repair of a building upon payment of the fee
prescribed in § 218-18.
A. Request for discontinuance. Where it is desired to discontinue
permanently the use of Township water at any premises, a request, in
writing, to the Water Utility must be made by the owner. Upon receipt of
the request, the water shall be turned off at the curb stop, and
thereafter no charges shall be made for water for the premises in
question. [Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
B. Individuals requesting the razing of a property need to receive written
authorization from the Water Production Superintendent prior to the
discontinuance of service. [Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
C. Temporary discontinuance. In case of the temporary vacancy of any
premises, the water will be turned off at the curb stop upon written
request to the Revenue Office, stating the period of discontinuance, and
will be turned on again at the expiration of that period following the
payment of required charges.
D. Rebates prohibited. Where the premises are left vacant, no rebate will
be allowed for water registered by the meter unless the water is turned
off at the curb stop.
E. Discontinuance by Township. Service may be discontinued by the
township in accordance with the administrative procedure for any of
the following causes:
§ 218-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-5
1:789
§ 218-6. Responsibility of Water Utility.
(1) The use of water for any property or purpose other than that
described in the application.
(2) For waste of water through improper or defective pipes or fixtures.
(3) For failure to protect the water meter and connections from injury
or damage or for failure to properly maintain the service line and
fixtures owned by the person being served.
(4) For tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb stop, seal or other
appliance of the township.
(5) For nonpayment of any charges or fees for water service.
(6) For nonpayment of sewer charges as provided in N.J.S.A.. 40:14A-1
et seq.
(7) For refusing to permit the duly authorized representatives of the
Utility to have access to the property for reasonable inspections.
(8) Making, or refusing to sever any cross connection between a pipe
or fixture carrying water furnished by the Water Utility and a pipe
or fixture carrying water from any other service.
(9) Removal of a remote metering device or cutting of connective wire
is not permitted without a permit issued, without charge and an
escrow deposit of $100 refundable when the remote and
connecting wire has been restored. Removal without approved
application is prohibited and subject to a tampering fine of $200.
A. In general. The Utility shall use diligence and reasonable care to
provide a constant supply of water to consumers, but in the event of
failure to do so owing to accident; the breakage of any service pipe,
service cock or other fixtures; the flushing of waterlines and hydrants;
or the shutting off of the water because of accidents, repairs,
extensions, alterations, discontinuance of service for nonpayment or
any other necessity that may arise; or in the event of failure to notify the
consumers of a failure or accident or the shutting off of the water
supply, the township shall not be liable to any consumer for any damage
which may result or for any damage resulting from the elements or for
any accident, failure or breakage of pipes or any other occurrence
beyond the township's control. [Amended 4-25-77 by Ord. No.
77-90-G]
B. Maintenance of pressure. The Utility shall not be liable for the
maintenance of any minimum pressure in the water system.
C. Physical connection. No water will be furnished to any customer where
any possibility exists of the mingling of the water furnished by the
Water Utility, with water from any other source. Nor will the Water
Utility permit its water system to be connected to any service pipe,
§ 218-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-6
1:790
§ 218-7. Control of system; unauthorized persons disturbing system
prohibited. [Amended 2-8-93 by Ord. No. 93-4; 2-6-17 by Ord. No.
17-07]
§ 218-8. Construction and maintenance specifications. [Amended
2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-3]
tank, vat or other apparatus containing liquids, chemicals or any other
matter which may cause a back-siphonage or back-flow into the Water
Utility supply pipe, and consequently endangering the water system.
D. Specific Control. The Water Utility exercises control over and assumes
responsibility for only that portion of the Utility service facilities
encompassing treatment facilities and water system connected to its
respective customers. With respect to water service facilities, the
aforesaid control and responsibility is inclusive of the water meter. All
other facilities, not mentioned above, are the responsibility of customer,
both in the construction, installation and maintenance of same. The
customer is personally responsible for compliance with all existing
township and water utility regulations, codes and ordinances.
E. The Utility shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any portion
of the service pipe owned by the customer, for damage done by water
escaping therefrom or from lines or fixtures on the customer's property.
The customer shall at all times comply with applicable regulations and
make changes required by reason of changes of grade or relocation of
mains.
A. In general. The water mains, supply pipes, curb stops shall be under the
exclusive control of the Superintendent.
B. Unauthorized persons. No person other than a duly authorized agent of
the Utility shall disturb, tamper with, injure, tap, change, obstruct
access to or interfere with any water main, supply pipe, curb stop or
meter.
C. Penalty. Any person who shall violate § 218-7B of this chapter shall be
subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Section 1-15 of the Code
and be subject to 100% of the cost of the damages caused by their
willful or negligent acts which shall be automatically imposed by the
Water Utility unless the person requests a hearing, in which case a
summons shall be filed and served.
D. Emergency interconnections with adjacent municipalities are permitted
under the exclusive control of the Superintendent of water provided
said interconnections are made at the expense of the adjacent
community in accordance with the AWWA standards and specifications
of the East Brunswick Water Utility and in compliance with the Master
Plan and flow requirements as demonstrated by the dynamic model.
[Added 2-8-93 by Ord. No. 93-4]
§ 218-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:791
A. In general. Service pipes, supply pipes, curb stops, meters, hydrants,
fittings, pipe and all necessary appurtenances used in the construction,
installation and maintenance of the water systems shall be of a material
and manufacturer approved by one or more of the following:
[Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-F; 10-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-88]
American Water Works Association (AWWA)
American Standards Association (ASA)
American Society of Testing Material (ASTM)
American National Standard Institution (ANSI)
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
N.J.A.C. Safe Drinking Water Act 7:10-l Subchapter 11
B. Authorized persons. All decisions on material used in construction,
installation and maintenance of the water system shall be under the
exclusive control of the Superintendent.
C. Inspection of Construction. The Utility shall inspect all construction
being done on the water system, which shall be dedicated to the Water
Utility to determine whether said system facilities are being
constructed in the proper manner. The Utility shall inform the applicant
of any improper construction or any deviation from the approved plans
of the Utility or from its rules, regulations or specifications. The
applicant shall thereafter correct any defects or deficiencies. The Utility
reserves the right to issue a stop-work order to the applicant in the
event of improper construction. The Utility shall be under no obligation
to provide water service to an applicant if the water system is not built
in accordance with the approved construction plans and the Utility
rules, regulation and specifications as covered under this Chapter.
D. Acceptance of completed construction. After construction has been
completed, the applicant shall request in writing that the Utility accept
the water system. The applicant shall at the time of the request, submit
to the Superintendent any and all completed documents which are
necessary to:
a. Dedicate all water facilities including mains, valves, hydrants and
any and all related appurtenances, to the township, which are
located in the public right-of-way or in easemented areas approved
by the Utility;
b. Furnish to the Utility two sets of as-built drawings of the water
system, as constructed in the field, certified by the engineer for the
application. The drawings shall contain footage of pipe, size of pipe,
location of valves, hydrants, pipes and curb stops.
c. Comply with all performance and maintenance bond regulations.
§ 218-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-8
1:792
The Utility shall not accept any water facilities which are not
located in the public right-of-way or in easemented areas approved
by the Utility. In this event, the Utility shall approve final
construction, but shall not accept the facilities and said facilities
shall remain the private property of and shall be maintained by
the applicant. Any additional cost governing these private facilities
shall be covered under &§ 218-15 through 218-18.
E. Maintenance. Supply pipes and mains shall be maintained by the Water
Utility and shall remain the property of the township.
F. Installation. [Amended 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-3]
1. Supply pipes of Type K copper tubing, at least one inch in diameter,
shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the owner by a
licensed plumber and shall be installed in accordance with
drawings and the materials specified on the drawings on file in the
office of the Superintendent and in accordance with applicable
New Jersey statutes.
2. All nonmetallic service pipes shall be installed with a companion
trace wire of #12 TW which shall run the entire length of the
service pipe between the curb stop and the meter connection. The
trace wire shall be securely fastened to the service pipe at regular
intervals not to exceed ten (10) feet using noncorrodible fasteners.
The bared end of the trace wire shall be securely fastened to the
curb stop using a noncorrodible metal clamp. The meter end of the
trace wire shall be securely fastened to the meter yoke using
noncorrodible fasteners leaving a six-inch (minimum) pigtail, but
the wire shall not be connected to the meter or any of its
appurtenances. The trace wire shall be clearly labeled inside the
structure with a tag identifying it as the "WATER SERVICE
TRACER". [Added 2-9-98 by Ord. No. 98-3]
G. Curb boxes shall be installed at grade level and kept uncovered by the
owner and shall not be in the driveway or sidewalk.
H. Criteria for water system construction.
A. An application for conceptual approval of proposed construction of
water facilities shall be submitted to the Water Utility for a review
of the outlined system, route of construction, estimated flow and
usage requirement by the applicant. No application will be
considered unless a professional engineer registered in the state of
New Jersey is in charge of the planning and design of the proposed
water distribution facilities and has affixed his seal and signature to
the plans.
B. Engineer's Report.
§ 218-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:793
A complete engineer's report, setting forth the basis of designs
shall be submitted to the Water Utility by the applicant for each
project. It shall contain the following minimum data:
1. Water Distribution System.
(a) Description of geographic area to be served.
(b) Existing and predicted population of areas to be served.
(c) Terrain data in sufficient detail to establish general
topographic features of area to be served.
(d) Minimum pressure at peak day demand plus fire flow.
(e) Intended use of the proposed realty improvements and the
characteristics of use of the other than residential.
(f) The effect of the proposed water distribution facilities and
existing or proposed water distribution facilities.
(g) The estimated flow.
(h) Description of materials to be used.
(i) A preliminary cost estimate.
(j) Any other factors which would affect design and use of the
water distribution system.
(k) Any other factors which may be required by New Jersey
DEP.
(l) Location of all other proposed utilities.
Materials used in the construction of water mains, supply
and service pipe and appurtenances are indicated in the
specifications of water systems which are on file at the
Water Production Superintendent's office.
C. General Map of the Entire Project.
A general map of the entire project shall be furnished, showing
existing and proposed water mains, valves, hydrants and other
appurtenances.
D. Plans and Specifications.
The submitted plans for the proposed water facilities shall include
a general site plan showing boundaries, contours, proposed and
existing water mains, underground burial of other utilities and shall
include the items referred to in the engineer's report that are
related to the design drawing.
§ 218-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-8
1:794
§ 218-9. Protection of equipment.
§ 218-10. Meters.
(1) Plans shall be uniform size 24" x 36", with a 2" border on top,
bottom and right side and a 2" border on the left side. The last
shall be one for binding. Two (2) sets of plans shall be
submitted for review and the plan shall show the following.
(2) (a) (a) Details. The plans shall show existing and proposed
water and sewer lines, appurtenances, contours and all
existing and proposed streets. The plans shall also show all
other utilities which may conflict with the water system.
All sheets shall be numbered.
(b) Symbols. Proposed water mains and appurtenances shall
be shown by a solid line. All topographical symbols and
connections shall be those used by the United States
Geodetic Survey.
(c) Elevations. All permanent bench marks of the New Jersey
coast and Geodetic Survey shall be shown.
(d) Distances, Size and Material. The distances, diameter and
material of water mains shall appear on the plans.
A. Freezing. Service pipes between the foundation wall and the meter
likely to be exposed to freezing temperatures shall be effectively
protected from freezing by the property owner. In the event that the
Utility shall find it reasonable and necessary to thaw frozen water pipes
leading to or located at residential property only, the Utility shall so
advise the property owner who shall permit entry of Utility personnel
on his property in order to thaw frozen water pipes. The Utility
representative shall require the property owner or any member of the
household over the age of eighteen (18) years to sign a hold harmless
agreement with the Utility releasing the Utility from any claim for
personal injury or property damage arising from the repair or thawing
of water pipes leading to the premises in question. The Utility shall be
paid for all direct and indirect costs involved in responding to a request
by a customer of the water utility to thaw frozen water pipes.
[Amended 9-26-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-J; 1-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-90-K; 11-30-81 by Ord. No. 81-417]
B. Heat. Pipes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent any possible
damage resulting from external heat from boilers, heaters, etc.
C. Meter protection. Service pipes shall be installed in a manner that will
prevent any hot water or other destructive product from returning to
the meter.
A. Meter required. All Utility water used on any premises, except for fire
service lines, must pass through a meter furnished by the Utility.
§ 218-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-10
1:795
B. Duty of consumers. All persons using water supplied by the Utility shall
have the duty of determining that the water is being supplied through a
meter purchased from the Utility, except as provided in Subsection A.
Failure to do so shall not relieve any person from liability for water
supplied, and, in such case, the Utility shall determine the amount of
water used and the rates to be charged.
C. Bypasses of meters prohibited. All unmetered bypasses are outlawed,
and, if a bypass is used, both the owner and the plumber shall be guilty
of a violation of this chapter. The only time a jumper may be used is to
test the lines, and, after the test is finished, the water is to be shut off at
the curb and only turned on by the Utility. After the tap has been
installed, the water shall be shut off at the curb and shall be turned on
only by the Utility after construction water has been paid for in
advance.
D. Meter installations. In all cases where meters are to be installed, the
Utility shall determine the size, proper location and manner in which
the meter shall be installed and protected. All new meters shall be
installed by the township with outside remote reading devices so they
can be read without the meter reader going inside. The owner or agent
shall supply and install a meter yoke and prewiring for a meter remote.
The wire shall start from the meter location to a point outside the
building. The wire for the meter remote shall be located in front of the
building or near the frontage, but not more than ten feet from the front
of the building. The outside wire shall be located not more than five feet
nor less than four feet above grade. The area in front of the meter
remote shall be accessible for reading or maintenance. It will be the
responsibility of the owner or agent to install the wiring according to
specifications as promulgated by the Director of the Meter Division with
the advice of the Construction Official. [Amended 12-13-82 by Ord.
No. 82-477]
E. Meter yokes.
(1) Meter yokes shall be installed in a manner that provides easy
removal, replacement, inspection and reading of the meter.
(2) Meter yokes shall be located as near as possible to the rear or side
entrance of a building not having a basement.
(3) Under no circumstances shall meter yokes be installed in crawl
spaces.
(4) Meter yokes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent
unauthorized removal or tampering with a meter.
(5) Meter yokes shall be placed in a free and clear space at least 2 x 2
feet.
§ 218-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-10
1:796
§ 218-11. Emergency measures.
(6) The decision of the Superintendent in regard to meter yokes shall
be final. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-F; amended
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-88]
F. Care and protection of meters.
(1) The meter shall remain the property of the Utility. The owner shall
be held responsible for the meter, including its care and protection
from damage, freezing, hot water or similar causes. The owner
shall also be responsible for preventing unauthorized persons from
tampering with the meter. In case of damage to the meter or its
stoppage or improper working, the owner shall immediately notify
the Utility, and the Utility shall repair the meter.
(2) Where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter, whether
owned by the Utility or not, become necessary due to any willful or
negligent act by the owner or occupant of any premises, the owner
shall be responsible to the Utility for any expense which it
occasions as a result.
(3) Meters shall be sealed by the Utility, and no person, except an
agent of the Township, shall disconnect, remove, break, injure or in
any way tamper with the seal. A fee of $50 will be imposed for
tampering with the meter seal. [Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
19-35]
G. Testing of meters. The Utility shall test the accuracy and condition of
any meter upon the written request of the owner or occupant of the
premises served by the meter and the payment, in advance, of the fee
prescribed. If the meter is found to register over 2% fast, it shall be
repaired by the Utility or another meter substituted and the test fee
refunded. The Utility may adjust the water bill upon whatever basis
which it deems to be just and reasonable. If the meter is found to
register more than 2% slow, it shall be repaired by the Utility or another
meter substituted, and the Utility may adjust the water bill upon
whatever basis which it deems to be just and reasonable. If the meter is
inoperative and fails to register, the customer will be charged on the
basis of the average daily consumption shown by the meter when
operative. The Utility may make periodic tests of all meters.
A. Declaration of emergency. Whenever the Superintendent of Water
Production, upon independent investigation, certifies that an
emergency exists in the water supply, the Township Council or, if the
emergency will not permit delay, then the Mayor, may proclaim a water
emergency and prescribe regulations to: [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord.
No. 76-90-F; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-88]
(1) Prohibit the use of water for any purpose not necessary to the
health or safety of the public.
§ 218-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:797
§ 218-12. Required measures to prevent waste.
§ 218-13. Hydrants.
(2) Allocate the available water supply.
(3) Reduce consumption of water.
(4) Prevent waste for the period of the emergency.
B. Effect of regulations. The proclamation of an emergency shall be
conclusive as to the fact of the existence of an emergency and shall be
binding upon all persons upon its filing in the office of the Township
Clerk and publication in a newspaper circulating in the Township. Any
regulations included in the proclamation and any regulations
subsequently promulgated shall have the same force as if specifically
set forth in this section. Every owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of
any building or premises served by Township water shall, upon a
promulgation of regulations, become bound by them and shall conform
to them in the use of water and the maintenance of water service
connections and equipment.
A. In general. Every owner of buildings and premises connected with the
municipal water supply shall maintain the water service pipes, fixtures
and connections in good order and repair in order to ensure that there
shall be no waste of water and shall immediately make necessary
repairs to prevent the waste of water.
B. Duties of occupants and tenants. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of
any building or premises connected with the municipal water supply
shall immediately notify the owner or his agent and the municipality of
any defective water service pipes, fixtures and connections causing
waste of water.
C. Duty of owner. Upon receiving notice of any waste of water due to
defective pipes, fixtures or connections, the owner of any premises
served by the municipal water supply shall immediately make all
necessary repairs.
D. Repairs by Utility. Whenever an owner shall fail or refuse to make
repairs to prevent the waste of water after proper notice as defined in
Administrative Procedures Manual, the Township may make the repairs
and charge the cost to the owner in the same manner as other water
charges are made.
E. Between May 1 and September 15, no person shall water a lawn or fill a
swimming pool on an odd date unless he or she resides in a house
having an odd number, and no person shall water a lawn or fill a
swimming pool on an even date unless he or she resides in a house
having an even number. [Added 5-24-82 by Ord. No. 82-462]
A. Unauthorized use of fire hydrants.
§ 218-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-13
1:798
(1) No person, other than a duly authorized agent or employee of the
Township or a member of an authorized fire agency while engaged
in the performance of his duties, shall open or attempt to open any
fire hydrants or valves connected with the water supply system of
the Township without obtaining written permission from the Water
Production Superintendent. [Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
19-35]
(2) No person shall obstruct or prevent free access to, tamper with,
injure or damage a fire hydrant; nor shall any person place any
material, debris, structure or object of any kind within a distance of
10 feet from a hydrant. Any obstruction, when discovered, may be
removed at once by the Utility at the expense of the person
responsible. Removal of the obstruction shall be in addition to any
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this subsection.
B. Duty of property owner. The owner of any property upon which a fire
hydrant is located, including the owner of any property which abuts
upon a portion of a public street on which a fire hydrant is located, shall
have the duty of keeping the hydrant and the area immediately
surrounding it free from snow, brush, weeds, debris or any other thing
which might impede access to the hydrant.
C. Private fire outlets. Where pipes are provided for fire protection on any
premises or where hose connections for fire apparatus are provided on
any pipe, each connection or opening on those pipes, except sprinkler
heads, shall have a standard thread as specified by the Township. No
water shall be taken or used through such pipe openings for any
purpose other than firefighting or for testing fire apparatus after
obtaining a special permit from the Superintendent of Water Production
to make a test. Each test must be conducted under the supervision of
Township personnel. [Amended 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-F;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-88]
D. Permit to open hydrant. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the
Township of East Brunswick that the primary purpose of fire hydrants is
for fire protection. However, the Superintendent of Water Production is
authorized to issue a permit to any person to open a fire hydrant for a
purpose other than fire protection. Permits shall be issued in
accordance with rules and regulations which are established, and
which rules and regulations shall take into consideration the policy
established by this subsection. Each permit shall specify the location of
the hydrant or hydrants to be opened, the date or dates upon which
they may be opened, the length of time they may remain opened, and
the purpose for which such openings may be made. [Amended
6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-F; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-88;
12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
E. Return of hydrant meter. Failure to return a hydrant meter within the
time frame of the permit shall result in a $100 fine being levied plus loss
of deposit.
§ 218-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-14
1:799
§ 218-14. Sprinkler systems. [Amended 6-28-99 by Ord. No. 99-30]
§ 218-15. Water meter fees. [Amended 3-28-66 by Ord. No. 66-40-A;
10-26-70 by Ord. No. 70-90-A; 12-10-73 by Ord. No. 73-90-D;
5-10-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-E; 5-23-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-H; 6-12-78
by Ord. No. 78-34; 9-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-396; 2-14-83 by Ord. No.
83-495; 12-29-89 by Ord. No. 89-88; 12-23-91 by Ord. No. 91-120;
12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-55; 9-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-37; 12-19-05 by
Ord. No. 05-39; 12-17-07 by Ord. No. 07-27; 3-22-10 by Ord. No.
10-06; 5-22-17 by Ord. No. 17-23; 6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-09;
12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
A. Application. Application for a connection to the potable water supply
system for the purpose of installing a sprinkler system shall be made to
the license operator of the Water Utility as governed under state
statute. The installation shall be performed in accordance with
regulations and standards as set by the N.J.A.C. 7:10 National Standard
Plumbing Code and the N.J. Uniform Construction Code, latest edition,
and the East Brunswick Water Utility and other applicable codes of the
Township of East Brunswick and subject to the charges as specified in
§§ 218-15 through 218-19.
B. Protection from Fire Sprinkler System.
1. The potable water supply system which shall supply water to any
fire protection system, including, but not limited to, standpipe and
automatic sprinkler systems, shall be protected from backpressure
and backsiphonage by one of the following devices:
x Reduced-pressure backflow preventer
x Reduced-pressure detector assembly
2. Whenever a backflow device is installed in the potable water supply
to a fire protection system, the hydraulic design of the system shall
account for the pressure drop through the backflow device. If such
devices are retrofitted for an existing fire protection system, the
hydraulics of the sprinkler system design shall be checked to verify
that there will be sufficient water pressure available for
satisfactory operation of the fire sprinklers.
C. Protection from lawn and irrigation system. When the potable water
supply system will be utilized for a lawn or irrigation system, the water
supply system shall be protected from backflow by a reduced-pressure
backflow preventer.
A. The water meter fixed fee shall be based on the water meter size as
outlined below. These rates apply to all properties, including single and
multiple dwellings and commercial and industrial properties. Rates
may be billed monthly but at a minimum quarterly.
§ 218-14 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-15
1:800
§ 218-16. Water consumption rates. [Amended 1-24-77 by Ord. No.
77-1-VV; 4-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-G; 9-12-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-I;
4-10-78 by Ord. No. 78-6; 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-55; 9-13-99 by
Ord. No. 99-37; 12-19-05 by Ord. No. 05-39; 12-17-07 by Ord. No.
07-27; 3-22-10 by Ord. No. 10-06; 5-22-17 by Ord. No. 17-23;
6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-09; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
§ 218-17. Fire service charges. [Amended 10-26-70 by Ord. No.
70-90-A; 5-8-72 by Ord. No. 72-90-B; 4-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-90-G;
12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-55; 9-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-37; 12-19-05 by
Ord. No. 05-39; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
Meter Fee Per Quarter
Meter
Size
(inches) Year 2020 Year 2021
Year
2022 Year 2023 Year 2024
5/8, 3/4,
and 1
$36 $37 $38 $40 $41
1 1/2 $72 $74 $76 $80 $82
2 $115.20 $118.40 $121.60 $128 $131
3 $230.40 $236.80 $243.20 $256 $262.40
4 $360 $370 $380 $400 $410
6 $720 $740 $760 $800 $820
8 $1,152 $1,184 $1,216 $1,280 $1,312
A. The rates for all water supplied by the Township to any premises are
hereby fixed in accordance with the following rate per 1,000 gallons of
consumption. Rates are billed quarterly but may be billed monthly,
based upon the total water consumption as recorded through each
meter account.
Consumption Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022 Year 2023 Year 2024
$5.20 $5.36 $5.51 $5.67 $5.83
B. In the event that there is a stopped meter or the Utility is unable to get
a reading, the customer shall receive an estimated bill.
A. The water sprinkler riser fixed fee shall be based on the water sprinkler
riser meter size as outlined below. These rates apply to all properties,
including single and multiple dwellings and commercial and industrial
properties. Rates may be billed monthly but at a minimum quarterly.
§ 218-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-17
1:801
§ 218-18. Miscellaneous charges and permit fees. [Amended
10-9-67 by Ord. No. 67-90; 6-28-76 by Ord. No. 76-90-F; 4-25-77 by
Ord. No. 77-90-G; 1-24-77 by Ord. No. 77-1-VV; 8-21-78 by Ord. No.
78-44; 8-21-78 by Ord. No. 78-48; 10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-88;
9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-402; 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-55; 6-9-97 by
Ord. No. 97-18; 12-19-05 by Ord. No. 05-39; 6-11-18 by Ord. No.
18-09; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
Meter Sprinkler Meter Fee Per Quarter
Size
(inches) Year 2020 Year 2021
Year
2022 Year 2023 Year 2024
3 $16 $17 $21 $22 $22
4 $80 $85 $105 $110 $110
6 $180 $191.25 $236.25 $247.50 $247.50
8 $240 $255 $315 $330 $330
10 $320 $340 $420 $440 $440
12 $450 $478.13 $590.63 $618.75 $618.75
B. For the purpose of determining pipe size, measurement shall be made
where the private line connects to the Utility system.
C. A minimum charge of $100 will be charged every four months for each
fire hydrant installed on private property as outlined below.
Fire Hydrant Fee Per Quarter
Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022 Year 2023 Year 2024
$100 $100 $100 $100 $100
A. Tapping service charge. Copies of fee schedules are to be annually filed
in the offices of the Township Clerk and Collector of Revenue, certified
by the Director of Finance each year. The schedule shall be for fees
associated with providing water service and shall include the cost of
issuing a permit making the tap to the water main.
(1) The applicant shall furnish and install all curb stops, valves and
supply pipes from the main to the curb box, including the
connection to the corporation or tapping valve, all of which shall be
in accordance with Utility specifications on file in the
Superintendent's office.
(2) All excavation and trench work must be done by the owner. Permits
for road openings, where applicable, must be made to the Township
before the issuance of a permit. The cost of same is not included in
the water tap permit.
(3) Additions to the foregoing charges shall be made, where
applicable, as follows:
§ 218-17 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-18
1:802
(a) On state highways, there shall be an added charge for any fees
that may be charged by the New Jersey State Highway
Department. The customer will be responsible for paying the
fees or charges, and the cost thereof shall be in addition to the
water service charges listed above.
(b) On county roads, there shall be an added charge for inspection
and repair of pavement as determined by the Middlesex
County Highway Department. Permits shall be secured directly
from the county.
B. Water meter installation fee. The following fees shall be charged for
approved meters to be furnished and be installed by the Water Utility:
(1) Installed meters shall be in accordance with bids adopted by
resolution of the governing body plus one hour's burden labor at
current rate.
(2) A charge for installation of meters greater than 5/8 inch shall be
computed on the basis of the cost of the meter, plus a 20%
surcharge.
(3) Meters two inches and larger shall be purchased from the Utility
based on the current bid price and installed at the expense of the
owner by a private plumber.
(4) All meters two inches and larger must be equipped with a strainer.
C. Permit for water service during construction.
(1) The fee for a permit for temporary water service during
construction shall be $40 per dwelling unit plus a deposit equal to
inventory cost for a hydrant meter and wrench to be placed on the
hydrant when water is to be obtained during construction.
(2) For commercial buildings, the construction fee shall be equal to
inventory cost for a hydrant meter and wrench to be used when
water is to be obtained during construction.
(3) All water used for construction purposes shall be metered through
a meter supplied by the Water Production Superintendent.
D. Meter tests. The fee for the test of the accuracy or condition of any
water meter made at the request of the owner shall be charged
according to the cost to the Utility.
E. Turn-ons. A fee of $25 shall be charged for turning on the water at the
curb stop during normal hours, or actual cost during nonwork hours.
F. Emergency request for service shall be billed at actual cost of same
service.
G. Hydrant use permits. Charges for fire hydrant use permits shall be
calculated on the basis of rates on file. There shall be a minimum
§ 218-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-18
1:803
§ 218-19. Connection Fee. [Added 2-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-493;
amended 7-25-83 by Ord. No. 83-520; 2-15-84 by Ord. No. 84-551;
8-11-86 by Ord. No. 86-766; 9-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-776; 1-27-87 by
Ord. No. 87-820; 7-27-87 by Ord. No. 87-854; 10-25-89 by Ord. No.
89-77; 9-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-98; 12-28-92 by Ord. No. 92-55]
charge of $100 for 20,000 gallons. The Township may, at its option,
furnish and install a meter on loan in lieu of an estimated charge and in
such case shall receive a deposit equal to the cost of such meter.
A. All new customers shall pay a one-time water service connection fee for
each new unit requesting service in an amount established by the Chief
Finance Officer and certified to the Township Clerk after the auditors
for the Township of East Brunswick have followed the appropriate
formula and certified the amount of the connection fee for each
calendar year. The connection fee to be charged for each new unit will
be that fee in effect at the time the service is requested. In the event
there is a change in the use of the structure which includes either a
change in the intensity of use or a change in the size of the facility
which results in the increases in the nature or extent of the service
provided by the Water Utility, the Utility shall increase an additional
connection fee to correspond with the increased intensity.
Annually, the Chief Finance Officer is to certify to the Municipal Clerk
and Collector of Revenue the connection and tapping fees which will
apply for the forthcoming year. Said fees shall take effect 30 days after
the Chief Finance Officer's certification to the Township Council and
filing with the Municipal Clerk.
B. In order to encourage property owners to tie into the municipal water
system and to discontinue the use of pumping water from wells, which
pumpage may adversely affect the aquifer, a person converting from
well water to the Township water system may pay the connection fee
referred in § 218-19A in equal payments over a twelve-month period
with interest computed at the same rate as charged for payment for
improvements under assessment ordinances.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any property owner who has
experienced groundwater pollution or contamination, as verified by the
Health Department of the Township of East Brunswick, may convert
from well water to the Township water system and may pay the
connection fee in equal payments over a five-year period, without
interest.
C. Owners of land or developers who are not converting from existing
wells to the Township water system are not entitled to pay the
connection fee over a twelve-month period as set forth in § 218-19B but
must pay the connection fee at the time application for connection is
made.
§ 218-18 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-19.1
1:804
§ 218-19.1. Waiver of Fees. [Added 9-26-83 by Ord. No. 83-535]
If the Township Council obtains clear and convincing evidence that a
resident's well has become contaminated or polluted through no fault of the
resident, the Township Council may adopt a resolution waiving any or all
of the tapping and connection fees provided for in this chapter. In adopting
such a resolution, the Township Council may provide that the resident be
permitted to defer payment of any or all of the tapping and connection fees
until such time as the subject property is sold, in which event the amount
of such fees which is not paid shall become a lien on the subject property
in favor of the Township, and the amount of the lien, with interest, shall be
satisfied at the time that the property is sold.
§ 218-20. Payment of charges; charges not paid become a lien.
[Amended 10-9-79 by Ord. No. 79-184; 6-22-92 by Ord. No. 92-25]
A. Payment of charges. Charges for water consumed in any quarterly
period or fraction of a quarter shall be due and payable within 20 days
from the date of the billing. In the event that charges are not paid when
due, a late fee shall be added to the amount of the bill. The amount of
the late fee shall be computed at the same rate as the rate of interest
upon delinquent taxes. [Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-35]
(1) The quantity recorded by the inside meter shall be conclusive on
both the customer and utility, except when the meter has been
found to be inaccurate. In such cases, the quantity may be
determined as provided under § 218-10G and 218-20A2 and 3.
(2) Any customer that disputes a bill rendered by the Utility for water
shall bring the disputed bill to the attention of the Revenue Office
of the Utility within 15 days of the issuance of the bill. Said dispute
shall be presented to the office of the Revenue Official in writing,
stating the exact portion of the bill that is in dispute and the
reasons why the bill is in dispute.
(3) Upon receipt of a disputed bill claim by a customer, the Collector of
Revenue shall present a temporary estimated bill to the customer
which shall be computed on the basis of the average usage during
the preceding twelve-month period or the usage during the same
period of time in the preceding year, whichever, in the estimation of
the Collector of Revenue, presents a more-accurate estimate. The
customer shall pay the amount of the temporary estimated bill
within the same time limits for payment of the original bill.
(4) The Collector of Revenue shall investigate the bill dispute
presented by the customer and shall receive whatever supporting
evidence the customer may wish to present and shall determine
whether the disputed bill is valid or is invalid in whole or in part. In
the event that the Collector of Revenue determines that any or all
of the disputed bill is due, and that amount exceeds the amount
paid by the customer under the temporary estimated bill, the
§ 218-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-20
1:805
§ 218-21. Tank Maintenance and Protection. [Added 7-13-15 by Ord.
No. 15-10]
Chapter 219
difference shall be paid by the customer within 14 days after
notification, in writing, by the Collector of Revenue. After said
fourteen-day period, the bill shall be classified as delinquent and
shall be processed as covered under § 218-20A and B of this
chapter.
(5) No abatement on meter bills will be made for leaks, or for water
wasted by damaged or defective fixtures.
B. Lien for unpaid water charges. In accordance with the laws of the State
of New Jersey, all charges for water and all other municipal charges
provided in this chapter, including penalties, shall be a lien upon the
property on account of which the charge is incurred until paid.
C. Penalty for bad checks. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:62-77, a penalty will be
imposed upon water customers attempting to pay water bills with
checks which are returned due to insufficient funds, which penalty shall
be in the amount of $20 for each such check.
A. "Asset management" is based upon GASB (Government Accounting
Standards Board) Accounting Statement #34 or future amendment
which deals with fixed assets. The East Brunswick Water Utility and
private-sector companies use accrual accounting which measures the
current liability but also long-term asset liabilities. Examples of such
are capital assets, infrastructure and general obligation debt. The
concept of utilizing GASB #34 for Asset Management is to have our
tanks in such condition there is zero depreciation. Zero depreciation
means the tanks and ground reservoir are in like-new condition at all
times. To accomplish this requires a sound program and consistent
funding to protect these valuable assets.
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:26-23, known as the "New Jersey
Water Supply Public Private Contracting Act," the Township is
permitted to sign a long-term contract with a qualified company
based upon compliance with the statuary provisions.
(2) The management of the maintenance contract will be under the
responsibilities of the Director of Water Utility in accordance with
the standard operating procedures.
(3) The New Jersey Water Supply Public Private Contracting Act
permits contracts to be signed for a period of 50 years, which shall
be controlled by the Township Council and the passage of
appropriate resolutions upon proper compliance with the Public
Private Contracting Act.
§ 218-20 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 218-21
1:806
SEWER UTILITY
GENERALLY
Purpose: The sewer utility will operate the sanitary sewer system previously
operated by the East Brunswick Sewerage Authority. The sewer utility has
not been given explicit authority to do certain things authorized by N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1; that reserve power shall remain with the Township Council.
Operation of System: The system of sanitary sewers, trunk or intercepting
sewers, sanitary sewer works, sanitary sewer outlets, sanitary disposal
works, pumping stations and all improvements purchased by the Township
from the municipal utilities authority, together with similar facilities and
improvements constructed and owned by the Township or which may be
constructed by the township or accepted by the Township, shall be
operated, maintained, managed and controlled by the Township as a
publicly owned or operated utility or enterprise for the Township within the
meaning and for the purposes of the Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et
seq., the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq., and all other provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq. and other applicable laws.
§ 219-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in these Rates, Rules and Regulations shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — Party contracting for the sewer service to a property or
premises as here in classified.
AUTHORIZED — Legal with written approval from the Director of the East
Brunswick Township Water and Sewer Utility.[Added 11-9-15 Ord. 15-28]
AUTHORIZED GROUNDWATER — Ground water being pumped via a legal
connection as approved by the Director of the East Brunswick Township
Water and Sewer Utility.[Added 11-09-15 Ord. 15-28]
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other wastewater
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or the place of disposal
CUSTOMER — Part receiving the sewer service for a property or premises
as here in classified.
DOMESTIC CONSUMER UNIT — A dwelling or structure normally occupied
by a single family.
§ 218-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-1
1:807
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The normal waterborne fluid wastes from
residences, commercial establishments, institutions and industrial
establishments, limited to the waste from kitchens, bathrooms, water
closets, lavatories and laundries.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
EXCESS LOADING — Instances where biochemical oxygen demand and
suspended solid sample results indicate that strengths exceed those of
a domestically equivalent waste of greater than 225 mg/l, and if such
wastes have been introduced into the Utility sanitary sewer system.[Added
6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-08]
FIXTURE UNIT — Each plumbing unit including but not limited to sink,
toilet, urinal, fountain, tub or shower.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. The wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pre-treated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
FLOOR DRAIN — Any fixture, pipe or other drainage device located inside
of a structure, which may be interconnected to the sanitary sewer system.
FLOW EQUALIZATION — The reduction in peak rates of flow, through the
use of storage facilities or equalization tanks.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
HOUSE CONNECTION — That portion of the public sewer which extends
from the main in the street or easement to the property line. (Also called
service lateral.)
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes or sewage.
MAY — Is permissive (see SHALL).
NORMAL SEWAGE — Shall have the same definition as the terms "normal
sewage" or a domestic sewage adopted by the Middlesex County Utilities
Authority, with particular reference to the limits defined for suspended
solids and biochemical oxygen demand.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in waste water prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the system. The reduction or alteration may
§ 219-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-1
1:808
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means except by dilution. Appropriate pretreatment technology
includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for
protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or
otherwise be incompatible with the system or treatment processes.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface water that are
not admitted intentionally.
SERVICE UNIT — A unit of charge established by the Utility, which is
approximately equivalent to the average discharge from a single family
detached home in the Township of East Brunswick; the unit is not precise,
but is based upon approximations of quantity and variability of discharge
for various classes of system users.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater".
SEWER — A pipe of conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER SYSTEM — The plants, structure and other real and personal
property acquired, constructed or operated or to be acquired, constructed
or operated by a sewer utility for the purpose of the sewer utility, including
sewers, conduits, pipe lines, mains, pumping and ventilating stations,
sewage treatment or disposal systems, plants and works, connections, and
outfalls, compensating reservoirs, and other plants, structures, boats,
conveyances, and other real and personal property, and rights therein,
and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for the collection,
treatment, purification or disposal in a sanitary manner of any sewage,
liquid or solid wastes, night soil or industrial wastes.
SHALL — Is mandatory (see MAY).
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period
of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during normal
operation and may adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — A drain or sewer
for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water
from any source.
§ 219-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-1
1:809
SUPERINTENDENT — The licensed system operator as covered under
N.J.S.A. 58:11-66 and N.J.A.C. 7:10A, Licensing of systems operator.
SUSPENDED SOLID — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", of the
American Public Health Association, Washington, D.C., and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
SWIMMING POOLS — A private, institutional or public swimming pool
uses for recreational purposes, including the restroom, cabanas, backwash
or filtering facilities, or any appurtenance used in connection with the
swimming pools which may have a sanitary waste discharge.
UNAUTHORIZED — Illegal without approval from the Director of the East
Brunswick Township Water § Sewer Utility.[Added 11-9-15 Ord. 15-28]
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect for the receiving water, or water that would not
cause violation of receiving water quality standards.
UTILITY — The East Brunswick Sewer Utility.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES or SEWERAGE FACILITIES — The structures,
equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat
domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant".
§ 219-1.1. Sewer Utility. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord. No. 10-32]
There shall be a Sewer Utility of the Township of East Brunswick, the head
of which shall be the Director of the Sewer Utility. The Director shall serve
as head of the Sewer Utility and shall be responsible for the supervision
of all operations of the Sewer Utility. The Sewer Utility shall include such
officers and employees as may be required to fulfill its responsibilities set
forth herein.
§ 219-1.2. Responsibility of Sewer Utility. [Added 12-20-10 by Ord.
No. 10-32]
A. The Sewer Utility shall use diligence and reasonable care to provide
constant and consistent sewerage services to consumers. The Sewer
Utility shall maintain, operate, repair and construct the plants,
§ 219-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-1.2
1:810
§ 219-2. Penalties.
structures and other real and personal property required for the
purpose of the Sewer Utility including the Sewer System as defined in
this Chapter.
B. In the event of its failure to provide constant and consistent sewerage
services due to accident or failure or breakage of lines, pipes,
structures, or part or all of the Sewer System or natural events and the
elements ("Uncontrollable Events"), neither the Sewer Utility nor the
Township shall be liable to any consumer for any damage that may
result or that results from such Uncontrollable Events, or from any
other occurrence beyond the Sewer Utility's or the Township's control.
C. The Sewer Utility and the Township shall in no event be responsible for
maintaining any portion of House Connections for damages incurred as
a result of the breakage, rupture, leakage or other failure of such House
Connections.
A. Penalties. For any violation of the Rules and Regulations of the East
Brunswick Sewer Utility the Utility may impose any or all of the
following penalties:
(1) Discontinuance of all or part of service at the property where the
violation occurs.
(2) Discontinuance of water service to the property.
(3) A monetary penalty of up to maximum by law for each violation. In
the case of continuing violation, each day of violation shall be
deemed to be a separate violation. Where there is evidence of a
violation of Section 3.4 of these rules and regulations, there shall
be a presumption that the violation was observed or measured and
the Utility shall have the discretion to charge a full or part quarter
assessment.
(4) Assessment of the actual costs to the East Brunswick Sewer Utility
to correct the violation, including reimbursement for any penalties
which may have been imposed upon the East Brunswick Sewer
Utility by any regulatory agency.
(5) The penalties for grease and oil shall be up to the following:
(a) 101 - 200 mg/L = $100 per day
(b) 201 - 300 mg/L = $200 per day
(c) 301 - 400 mg/L = $300 per day
(d) 401 - 500 mg/L = $400 per day
(e) 501 mg/L and over = $500 per day
§ 219-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-2
1:811
§ 219-3. Domestic Service.
In the case of continuing violation, each day of violation shall
be deemed to be a separate violation. The penalties shall be
prepared by the Collector of Revenue and may be modified
based on level of flow, concentration level, remedial action and
improved test results. The penalties may be appealed to the
Chief Finance Officer.
None of the above shall be deemed to prevent the imposition
of such criminal and civil penalties as may be imposed by the
Municipal Court of the Township of East Brunswick under the
applicable ordinances of the Township of East Brunswick.
A. New domestic customer services. Under no circumstances shall any
new fixture be installed in a building or dwelling at an elevation lower
than the front curb elevation or the street centerline elevation,
whichever is higher, unless special precautions are incorporated into
the new fixture installation to prevent surcharging of the new fixture
installation from the sanitary sewer main because of high flow or
blockage. Owners of existing houses or dwellings or buildings where
fixtures or drains or outlets are lower than the elevation abovespecified,
should install and maintain a check valve system, or other
protective device. Also, a check valve or other protective device shall be
installed in any structure where the lowest fixture is below the rim of
the next upstream manhole. Selection and installation must be
approved by Superintendent of sewer and plumbing sub-code official.
The installation and maintenance of protective systems is the
responsibility of each property owner and the Utility cannot be held
responsible for any damage as a result of system malfunctioning,
blockages or surcharges in the public sewer system.
Regulations or requirements specified herein shall also pertain to
commercial or industrial properties, where applicable.
Any and all construction work requiring supervision by EBSU personnel
must be performed in conformance with applicable OSHA, PEOSHA,
Confined Space Entry Regulations, and all other applicable Federal,
State and EBSU regulations concerning job and employee safety. Utility
personnel will not participate at any job site where the above noted
regulations are not adhered to.
B. Garbage disposal units and sump pumps. Garbage disposal units may
be installed only upon proper notification to the Sewer Utility.
Unauthorized sump pumps for removal of storm water runoff or
basement leakage are not permitted to discharge into a sanitary sewer.
Unauthorized discharge from existing sump pumps must be removed
from the sanitary sewer system within 60 days after notification by the
Utility. [Amended 11-9-15 Ord. 15-28]
§ 219-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-3
1:812
§ 219-4. Industrial or Commercial Service.
Garbage disposal units and authorized sump pumps will be billed at
an annual rate in addition to the normal sewer charge. Charge for the
disposal unit or pump will continue until the customer has notified
the Utility of its removal and a house verification by the Utility has
been made. Routine house inspections may be made by the Utility to
determine the existence of garbage disposal units or sump pumps and
the customer will be billed retroactively, a maximum of two years or
for the period of use, for the additional service provided. Only properly
shredded garbage (see definitions) and authorized groundwater shall
be discharged. Sump pumps must not be connected to a public sewer,
and the charge for such use is not intended as a sanction but only to
recover the costs incurred. [Amended 11-09-15 Ord. 15-28]
Groundwater sump pumps will be permitted to be connected to and
discharge ground water into the sanitary sewer only in cases of
extreme hardship as determined and authorized by the Director of
the Water and Sewer Utility after a review of necessity has been
performed. In addition to the yearly sewer rate a twenty-five dollar
($25.00) quarterly fee for this connection and discharge will be
charged to the account for the duration of the groundwater sump
pump connection to compensate for the added demand on the
Township's infrastructure. This fee will adjust as the regular yearly
sewer rate adjusts. An inspection of disconnect is required before the
fee will be removed from the account, the normal yearly rate will still
apply. [Added 11-09-15 Ord. 15-28]
C. Landlord-tenant responsibility. All charges are a lien against the
property and therefore the responsibility of the property owner.
A. Industrial or Commercial Service. Industrial and commercial
establishments making application for initial sanitary sewer service, or
making additions or changes to existing sanitary sewer service, in
addition to making written application for such service, shall furnish a
detailed description of the type and size of buildings, and nature of the
business to be conducted in each structure, the number and type of
fixtures to be served, the type, volume and chemical characteristics of
the waste to be discharged, and such other information as may be
required. Such applicants shall also furnish the Utility two (2) copies of
24" x 36" or 36" x 42" plans showing at a scale no less than 1" = 100',
the following:
(1) The boundaries of the property.
(2) The location within the property of the structures to be served.
(3) The location and profile (with respect to finished grade) of the
services.
§ 219-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:813
(4) Details of the proposed connections to the sewerage system, and
arrangement and details of meter and sampler installation should
they be required.
(5) Location of sampling manhole, either within or immediately outside
of property right-of-way. Exact location shall be determined by
Superintendent of sewer.
B. Agreement required. The Utility will accept industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewage system, upon execution of a formal, written
agreement, and under and subject to the provisions appearing in said
agreement, and the rules stated hereinafter. The agreement will set out
in detail the characteristics of the wastes, the flow conditions which
shall govern, the conditions and costs with respect to the physical
connection or connections, and the annual service charges. The form of
Agreement is as contained herein is on file with the Tax Collector. It will
be the policy of the Utility to consider each application on its merits,
and to establish specific conditions applicable to the particular
situation, for each agreement.
Any and all construction work requiring supervision by EBSU personnel
must be performed in conformance with applicable OSHA, PEOSHA,
Confined Space Entry Regulation, and all other applicable Federal
State and EBSU regulations concerning job and employee safety. Utility
personnel will not participate at any job site where the above noted
regulations are not adhered to.
C. Industrial or commercial sewer connection Applications and Fees. For a
connection involving the acceptance of industrial wastes, the applicant
shall submit complete data along with a completed Application for
Industrial Sewer Connection and Agreement for Industrial Wastes form
which can be requested from the Collector.
For a connection from a commercial property where the wastes are of
a domestic quality, the applicant shall submit complete data along with
a completed Application for Individual Commercial Sewer Service form
which can be requested from the Collector.
Applicant shall deposit with the Utility a filing fee, review fees, and
inspection fees, as described in the Rates section of these regulations.
D. Prohibited wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge,
deposit, cause or allow to be discharged or deposited any pollutant or
wastewater, which will interfere with the operation and/or performance
of the POTW. A user shall not, under any circumstances, contribute to
the Utilities waste stream anything which in any way contributes to a
violation of any of the parameters in the Utility's NJPDES Permit or
contains any of the following substances:
Wastes containing the following substances or possessing the
characteristics listed below, will not be accepted.
§ 219-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-4
1:814
(1) Any vapors, steam, or smoke.
(2) Any fluids with temperature in excess of 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
(3) Any fluid wastes which contain in excess of 100 mg/L of fat, oil or
grease, either vegetable or mineral.
(4) Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the wastewater treatment plant or operation of
the wastewater treatment plant.
At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in
the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
be more than ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL)
of the meter.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, zylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides, and sulfides and any other substances in which
the Utility, State, and/or EPA have determined to present a fire
hazard or hazard to the system.
Any volatile, explosive, or flammable substances such as benzene,
gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil or similar substances.
(5) Any solids or viscous matter which may cause interference with the
flow of wastes, such as ashes, grease, garbage with particles
greater than one half inch in diameter, cinders, concrete, stone or
stone dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair or similar substances.
Equipment or trucks carrying such materials shall not be washed
and have the wash water discharged into the system. Equipment or
trucks carrying such materials shall not be washed and have the
wash water be discharged into the system.
(6) Any fluid wastes having a pH value less than 6.0 or in excess of 9.0
or possessing other properties capable of causing damage or
hazard to sewers, structures, treatment process, equipment or
operating personnel.
(7) Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient
concentration to injure or interfere with the sewage treatment
process, to cause a hazard or injury to animals or persons, or to
create an unacceptable condition or toxic effect in receiving
streams, or exceed the limitations of the Utility's NJDPES Permit. A
toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act.
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:815
(8) Improperly shredded garbage.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, which is capable of
causing a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewer for maintenance or repair.
(10) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions. Highly colored wastes.
(11) Any wastewater containing radioactive substances or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Utility in compliance with State and/or Federal regulations.
(12) Septage, or septic wastes.
(13) Any wastes containing components which exceed limits set forth by
the county, state or federal regulatory agencies, or by the
Middlesex County Utilities Authority.
(14) Regulated medical waste.
E. Grease, oil and sand separators. When, in the reasonable opinion of the
Superintendent of sewer, grease, oil and sand interceptors or oil
reclaimers are required, they shall be provided and maintained at the
expense of the owner, in continuously efficient operating condition.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperatures. They shall be watertight, substantially constructed and
equipped with readily removable access covers. Where deemed
necessary, cold water sprays shall be installed. The design and
pertinent data shall be submitted to the Utility for review and approval
by the Superintendent of sewer prior to construction or installation.
Separators must be installed entirely on the property of the owner. An
approved grease separator must be used on the outlet sewer of every
restaurant, and must be of sufficient capacity so that the requirements
of § 219-4 D(3) herein shall not be exceed at any time.
The owner must submit proof to the Utility of periodic cleaning.
Separators must be cleaned at least every three months, unless
evidence is provided that this frequency may be expanded or reduced.
Separators are subject to inspection by the Utility to insure
maintenance. Inspections will be made during reasonable hours.
F. Pretreatment. The Superintendent reserves the right to require
pretreatment and/or flow equalization where the chemical or flow
characteristics of the proposed waste, in the opinion of the Director,
Engineer, Superintendent, State or Federal agencies, or the Middlesex
County Utilities Authority, make such pretreatment or flow equalization
desirable or mandatory. Some of the characteristics which may indicate
pretreatment are listed below:
§ 219-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-4
1:816
(1) 5 day B.O.D. in excess of 300 mg/L.
(2) Suspended solids in excess of 350 mg/L.
(3) Any fluid wastes which contain in excess of 100 mg/L of fat, oil or
grease, either vegetable or mineral.
(4) Average daily flow in excess of 17% of rated capacity of the
collection line or pumping station.
(5) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug"
as defined herein.
(6) Presence of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride, chromium, copper,
cyanide, fluoride, iron, lead, magnesium, manganese, nickel,
nitrate, selenium, sulfate, zinc or pH values outside the acceptable
limits as described in § 219-4(D). The following criteria shall apply:
(a) The substances listed below shall not exceed the following
specified limits:
Limit, mg/L
Arsenic 0.10
Barium 2.00
Cadmium 0.02
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.10
Copper 0.20
Cyanide 1.00
Lead 0.10
Mercury 0.01
Selenium 0.02
Zinc 0.60
(b) Persistent pesticides - not to exceed one one-hundredth of the
TL50 value at 96 hours as determined by appropriate bioassay.
(Persistent Pesticides are defined as natural and synthetic
materials having a half- life of greater than 96 hours, which
are used to control unwanted or noxious animals or plants.
They include fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, fumigants
and rodenticides.)
(7) Dissolved solids in excess of 1500 mg/L.
(8) Ammonia (NH3) in excess of 40 mg/L.
(9) Phenol in excess of 1 mg/L.
(10) Chlorine demand in excess of 15 mg/L.
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:817
(11) Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide or any halogen gas
in excess of 10 mg/L.
In such instances where it is agreed that the industrial waste will
be received following pretreatment, drawings and specifications
shall be submitted for approval of the Superintendent of sewer
showing all pertinent details of the type of flow meter, wastewater
sampler and housing to be used, to meter and sample the flow of
industrial wastes, and also details of the control manhole to be
constructed on the industrial waste connection. The manhole shall
be provided with adequate access manhole covers of approved
type, through which access shall be possible by Utility personnel at
all times. Drawings, specifications, reports, etc. shall be submitted
in quadruplicate and shall be prepared and sealed by a Professional
Engineer, registered in the State of New Jersey. An approved
shutoff valve may be required on the discharge sewer immediately
upstream of the sampling manhole.
Where pretreatment and/or flow equalization facilities are required
they shall be provided and continuously maintained in an effective
operating condition at all times, at the expense of the industry.
Each industry connected to the Utility sewer system shall be
responsible for maintaining a quality of effluent from their
premises, which conforms to the provisions established in their
agreement with the Utility. Sampling and analysis shall be done
so as to conform with accepted practice, and in accordance with
the current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, Washington, D.C.
The owner or operator of all retail food establishments, catering
establishments, commercial food preparation facilities, meat
processing facilities, and such other uses which may be designated
by the Superintendent which may result in the accumulation of
oils, fats, cellulose, starch, proteins or grease in the sanitary sewer
system of the East Brunswick Sewer Utility, shall add into each
sanitary sewer line serving such use a continuous application of
a bacteriological culture and/or similar additive to control and
treat such discharges, which culture formulation and application
schedule shall be approved by the Superintendent. All appropriate
records concerning the operation of such a program shall be made
available to the Utility on a monthly basis. Other remedies shall
also be considered if the above program is not successful.
The cost of preparing and submitting this data for consideration
by the Utility shall be borne by the industry. Likewise, the cost of
sampling and analysis to determine compliance with the terms of
the agreement shall be borne by the industry, although conducted
by the Utility or its duly authorized representative.
§ 219-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-4
1:818
G. Control manhole. Commercial or industrial customers permitted to
connect to Utility sewers, even though not initially being required to
provide pre-treatment, may be required to provide a control manhole
and/or meter and sampler as described in § 219-4(F) and (I), whether
upon initial connection or change in use.
H. Penalty of discontinuance. In the event that any person or business fails
to conform to these regulation, or fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of their agreement with the Utility, which failure causes
damage of any sort to the Utility or Utility's employees, the Utility shall
determine the extent of the damage and bill the industry accordingly. If
such bill is not paid within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of
the bill, legal action may be instituted to enforce collection, and the
Utility may resort to termination of the connection after giving twentyfour
(24) hours' notice.
The Utility reserves the right to cancel the agreement, upon one year's
written notice, in the event of repeated failure to comply with the terms
of the agreement, or the Rates, Rules and Regulations of the Utility. In
the event of imminent hazard to the system or personnel, or violations
of the Clean Water Enforcement Act (Chapter 28, P.L. 1990) the Utility
reserves the right to terminate service immediately, and to substantiate
the action within five (5) days thereafter.
I. Industrial waste flow meter and sampler. The person or business shall
furnish, install and maintain a flow meter of the totalizer-indicatorrecorder
type, if required, to measure the discharge of industrial
wastes, and a wastewater sampler to periodically take and preserve a
portion of the wastewater stream, as described in § 219-4(F). The flow
meter and wastewater sampler must be approved by the Utility, but the
cost of said equipment and installation is to be borne by the industry. All
costs of furnishing, installing and maintaining the industrial waste flow
and sampling equipment will be borne by the industry and the
equipment shall be readily accessible to Utility personnel.
J. Industrial sewer rates. Service charges for industrial wastes shall be as
shown in the section on rates.
K. Surcharge for high-strength wastewaters. High-strength wastewaters,
including pretreated wastewaters, will be subject to rate surcharges.
(See section on Rates) Surcharges shall be based on results of Utility
surcharge sampling program.
A monthly sample shall be taken and the strengths therein averaged for
the entire quarter in which the sample was taken.
A single sample per month shall be averaged and the strengths therein
charged for the entire month in which the sample was taken.
L. Industrial service revisions. The industrial wastewater parameters and
the criteria for industrial waste limits are subject to future revision or
modification as may be required by the New Jersey Department of
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:819
Environmental Protection, U.S.E.P.A., the Middlesex County Utilities
Authority, and/or the East Brunswick Superintendent.
M. Air conditioning units. Air conditioning units will not be permitted to
discharge clean water into a sanitary sewer. Recirculation devices shall
be used, or excess water shall be discharged to a separate point of
disposal. Similarly, there shall be no discharge to a sanitary sewer from
other sources of clean water, as determined by the Utility, such as
condensate pumps, cooling towers, etc.
N. Grease traps. Grease traps will be required on all food service
establishment discharges, or on discharges from any facility which is
expected to release quantities of grease and oil in excess of that of
domestic waste. The type and manufacture of grease traps must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation. The sizing of
grease traps will be based upon the following criteria. Each applicant
for a new grease or oil producing installation, and each existing user of
the Utility system when requested, shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Description of establishment, including number of employees,
number of patrons, number of seats, frequency of seating, and type
of grease producing facilities.
(2) A listing of fixtures, including their function, volume, and
description, including dishwashers or other grease producing
units.
(3) A listing of the drain outline sizes or trap sizes of each fixture.
(4) Total annual water use and daily minimum and maximum use.
The sizing of grease traps will be established by the
Superintendent, based upon Standard PDI-G101, as published by
the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. The following adjustments
may also be considered by the Utility:
(1) Flow rate shall be based upon fixture drainage in a one minute
period.
(2) Additional allowance shall be made for dishwashers, or other
grease discharging equipment.
(3) A safety factor shall be built into all grease trap sizing to allow
for inadequate cleaning and maintenance. Safety factors shall
be viewed on a case by case basis.
Grease traps shall be installed on the exterior of any food service
establishment, in order for adequate cleaning and maintenance
techniques to be utilized. The Utility may waive this requirement
in the event of unusual hardship or other technical difficulty. The
decision on the location of the grease trap on the interior or
exterior of the building shall be solely that of the Utility.
§ 219-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-4
1:820
§ 219-5. Sewer Main Extensions.
Specifications for grease traps are as follows: Grease trap
chambers shall be constructed of non-corrosive materials, such
as fiberglass. The chambers, if installed on the exterior of the
building, shall be capable of sustaining 10 ton truck H2O loading,
and shall have baffles and fittings made of non-corrosive materials.
Access shall be available through 24" manhole frames and covers
located at each end of the chamber. Units shall be equal to the
product of Tyler pipe (Tyler, Texas), Town and Country (as
distributed by Trap Zap of South Norwalk, Connecticut), or Zurn
Industries (Erie, Pennsylvania) green Turtle.
Installation of grease traps shall meet the recommendations of the
Plumbing and Drainage Institute, including locations, flow control
and venting. Grease Trap installation will also require a plumbing
permit and compliance with Township plumbing code regulations.
Sampling manholes for food service establishments shall be
installed downstream of the grease trap, but upstream of any
interconnection of bathroom sanitary service line and shall be
inspected by the Superintendent.
To obtain optimum operating efficiency of a grease interceptor, a
regular schedule of maintenance must be adhered to. All grease
interceptors must be cleaned regularly. The frequency of grease
removal is dependent upon the capacity of the interceptor and the
quantity of grease in the waste water. Grease removal intervals
may vary from once a week to once in several weeks. When the
grease removal interval has been determined for a specific
installation, regular cleaning at that interval is necessary to
maintain the rated efficiency of the interceptor. After this
accumulated grease and waste material has been removed, the
interceptor should be thoroughly checked to make sure that the
inlet, outlet and air relief ports are clear of obstructions.
A. General provisions. Persons proposing subdivisions or developments
requiring a main extension for sewer service shall prepare applications
described in this section with the necessary supporting documents. The
policy of the Utility is to permit extensions only when paid for and
installed by the applicant. No facilities for collection, treatment or
disposal of sewage within the "district" of the Utility (which
corresponds with the boundaries of the Township) shall be constructed
unless the Utility shall give its consent and the Superintendent shall
approve Contract plans and specifications therefor.
It is the policy of the Utility to charge connection fees for connection
to its sewer system following the rates set forth in the Utility's Rate
Schedule. The connection fee is charged per Service Unit.
Connection fees shall be payable prior to submission of Application
unless specific arrangements are agreed upon. If payment is not
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:821
received within this period, the project may not proceed and the
connection fee shall be at the prevailing rate at the time of receipt
of the check. The applicant shall also be subject to any change in
regulations. If the project is to be constructed in sections the
connection fees may be paid for each section prior to application for
acceptance of each section, at the prevailing connection fee at the time
of each section's acceptance.
Unless otherwise approved, where locations do not front the sanitary
sewer, residential subdivisions containing three or more building sites
or lots or any residential structure to be used by three or more families,
regardless of volume of flow, and all nonresidential developments such
as schools, commercial buildings, industrial buildings and other
structures will be required to install a sanitary sewer system to be
connected with the nearest existing sanitary sewer in the Township.
Exceptions may be made only where:
(1) Developments lie within the Septic System Management Area
formed by the Township (where special requirements are imposed),
or,
(2) The applicant will not create an environmental hazard.
(3) The applicant obtains a certification from the Superintendent that
mandatory connection is not required under existing municipal law.
For residential subdivisions not fronting on a sanitary sewer and
containing two or less building sites or lots, or if the lands are
deemed by the Utility to be too remote from any existing facilities,
consideration will be given to an individual sewage system with a
dry sanitary sewer system or approved alternative for future use in
lieu of connection to existing facilities.
Any main extension and related facilities (other than industrial
septic systems) installed under the provisions of this section, or
easement required for the purpose, shall be transferred to the
Utility as hereinafter described.
During construction but before final acceptance, the Utility shall
have the right to use any completed portion of the system without
waiving its right to further inspection or testing or to order
correction of any defects provided the Utility does not
unreasonably delay inspection, testing and acceptance of that
portion of the system.
Use of the sanitary sewer system for the discharge of sump pumps,
or drainage from cellar drains, leaders, downspouts, drainage tile,
cooling system drains and other similar discharges shall not be
permitted.
Unpolluted industrial cooling waters and unpolluted drainage shall
be discharged into a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-5
1:822
Easements will be required for sewers not located within an
existing public right-of-way. The width of such easements will be
determined by the Superintendent, depending on the size and
depth of sewer to be located in the easement.
Easements must be extended to the nearest adjacent property if
future service will be required.
Easement documents must be in a form acceptable to the Township
Attorney, and must incorporate the following language:
No fill, material, machinery, appliances, or similar objects may be
placed on the said premises which will impose an additional loading
in excess of 100 lbs. per square inch (100 lbs/sq. inch) without
the prior written approval of the Utility. Provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit the ability of
grantors to use the land over the easement for the storage of
vehicles.
No trees may be planted on the easement within ten feet on either
side of the location of the sewer line. Said trees shall not grow more
than ten feet tall. Other types of shrubbery may be planted within
the easement area, however, the same five foot distance from either
side of the location of the pipe must be adhered to. No fences
may be placed on or around the easement that preclude Utility
access. No utilities may be placed across the easement without
Superintendent approval; such approval will not be unreasonably
withheld provided there is no hazard or exceptional impeding of
access to Utility facilities. The Superintendent must be given
adequate notice of any surface construction on or over the
easement area.
B. Applications — general. A sequence of applications for sewer
extensions are required for the Utility's determination of needs,
availability of service, effect of proposed extension, and inspection of
installed extension. Application forms are available from the Utility. No
application will be considered unless a Professional Engineer
registered in the State of New Jersey is in charge of the planning and
design of the proposed sewerage facilities and has affixed his seal and
signature to the submissions. Each application shall be submitted in
duplicate with the designated fees to the Utility not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which action on the
application is desired.
Applications shall be signed by the property owner. If the property
owner is a partnership, applications shall be signed by a general
partner, or in the case of a corporation, by an officer of the corporation.
Signature of agent, attorney or engineer is not acceptable.
Each application must be accompanied by those fees, deposits and
guarantees described herein, or in the section on Fees and Charges.
All fees accompanying applications shall be cash, certified check or
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:823
acceptable other draft at the option of the Utility. (For standard
applications, see § 219-11(A))
The review and inspection fees shall be placed in an escrow fund,
with interest as required by law, from which expenses will be paid by
voucher. If so required by the Utility, additional deposits shall be made
by the Applicant to meet expenses; surplus funds shall be returned to
the Applicant after payment of all fees and after final acceptance of the
facility by the Utility. The Applicant will be required to pay all costs
incurred by the Utility on his project.
Where deposits or guarantees are based on estimated construction
costs, a submission shall be made by the Applicant's engineer and
verified by the Superintendent. The approved construction cost shall
be based on the estimated period of construction and shall include all
on-site and off-site work; and for bonding purposes a 20% contingency
allowance will be added.
Inspection work by the Township, its employees, engineer or agents
is intended only to review compliance of the work with the approved
design documents. These inspections or lack thereof are not intended
to review safety precautions, adherence to State or Federal regulations,
or hazards to the public, contractor employees, or third parties. Each
applicant assumes full responsibility for damages or injuries caused on
its work sites, and agrees to indemnify and provide separate defense
for the Township and representatives against all actions or claims.
Where off-site facilities are involved, the following policies shall prevail:
(1) The Applicant is considered responsible for providing off-site
facilities to provide capacity for his development.
(2) The design of off-site facilities is to be undertaken by the Applicant,
and shall be subject to design standards established by the Utility
and subject to review of the Engineer and approval of the
Superintendent. The off-site design is based upon the total
community needs, rather than capacity for the development alone.
The design parameters shall be provided to the Applicant by the
Utility.
(3) Where the Utility requires additional capacity for areas outside of
the development, it will assume any increment of cost for service to
such areas.
(4) Off-site facilities shall be installed by the Applicant, and shall be
subject to design standards established by the Utility and subject to
review of the Engineer and approval of the Superintendent. The
Applicant's share of the costs must be available to finance the
initial construction (i.e. the Utility should not be required to finance
the Applicant's share) unless specific alternate arrangements are
approved by the Utility.
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-5
1:824
(5) The Utility's share of off-site facilities may be credited against
connection fees. If the Utility's share exceeds the total of all
connection fees, a lump sum payment may be made toward the
cost.
(6) All approved and accepted on-site and off-site facilities installed by
the Applicant shall be transferred to the Utility, where they lie in
public rights of way or easements. Said transfer of facilities must
take place prior to the release of performance guarantees.
C. Application for conceptual review -two or more residential units. An
application describing the proposed residential, commercial, or
industrial development, or other project, shall be submitted to the
Superintendent with supporting data to determine the economic and
technical feasibility of extending sewer service. This application shall
be submitted concurrent with filing of conceptual sub-division or site
plan application with the East Brunswick Planning Board or Zoning
Board. The Superintendent may defer or waive certain parts of this
supporting data at its discretion where the cost of data preparation is
excessive for the development or project planning and approvals.
Approval of this application shall extend for a period not to exceed one
year from date of approval.
In addition to the application, the Applicant shall furnish two (2) copies
of a general location plan (min. scale 1" = 100') showing streams,
streets, lots, blocks and tax map numbers, copy of application
submitted to the Planning Board, location of any existing water
distribution and/or sanitary systems in the area, proposed system
outline and route of construction, and estimated quality and volume of
flow. Elevations shall be based on the Township datum (NAVD 88).
The Superintendent shall analyze the submitted application and
supporting data and report to the Applicant the Utility's
recommendations and/or findings. These findings may be furnished to
the Township Planning or Zoning Board as support material.
If the Superintendent determines that portions of the existing
downstream system do not have sufficient capacity to accept flow from
the proposed development, then the Utility may require payment for,
or the construction of, supplementary off-site facilities to accommodate
the additional flow. Costs shall include all engineering and overhead
costs.
D. Application for review of pumping station facilities. This application
shall be submitted following preliminary approval of the East
Brunswick Planning Board, copy of which shall accompany this
application.
An application and supporting data specifying the engineering details
of the proposed project will be analyzed for compliance with Utility
engineering standards including provision for orderly growth.
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:825
The approval of all applications must be submitted within twelve (12)
months after conceptual review approval or re-application for
conceptual approval will be required. The applicant shall specify
whether phased construction is intended.
This application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the
Engineer's Report, construction cost estimate, two (2) sets of drawings
(min. scale 1" = 50'), specifications, manufacturers' data, and other
material needed to permit a detailed engineering review. The
Engineer's Report shall clearly define the design criteria used in
connection with population, flow, layout, pumping station design,
equipment selection, etc. All drawings submitted shall be the latest
drawings approved by the Township and shall be kept current. Final
drawings filed by the applicant shall include notations as to transfer of
easements and sewerage facilities.
The application and supporting data will be reviewed by the
Superintendent to determine compliance with the Utility's Rules and
Regulations, applicable statutes and projected growth patterns.
Approval of this application, with conditions set by the Utility shall be
a mutual agreement between the applicant and the Utility regarding
the terms and conditions for providing sewer service, including the
construction or financing of off-site facilities considered necessary by
the Utility.
The Applicant shall pay all permit and application fees to the Utility, as
well as applicable fees to Middlesex County Utilities Authority and New
Jersey D.E.P. Permits to construct sewers and/or other structures within
flood plains, wetlands and the right-of-way limits of State, County,
Municipal roads and all railroads, and all other permits must be
secured by and paid for by the Applicant.
The Applicant must inform and secure any necessary clearance and/or
approval from any public utility involved. Proof of such notice and/or
approvals shall be filed with the Utility.
E. Application for authorization to construct. This application shall be
submitted following preliminary approval of the East Brunswick
Planning Board, copy of which shall accompany this application.
An application and supporting data specifying the engineering details
of the proposed project will be analyzed for compliance with Utility
engineering standards including provisions for orderly growth.
All applications must be submitted within twelve (12) months after
conceptual review approval or re-application for conceptual approval
will required. The applicant shall specify whether phased construction
is intended.
This application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the
Engineer's Report, construction cost estimate, two (2) sets of drawings
(min. scale 1" = 50'), specifications, manufacturers' data, and other
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-5
1:826
material needed to permit a detailed engineering review. The
Engineer's Report shall clearly define the design criteria used in
connection with population, flow, layout, sewer and pumping station
design, equipment selection, etc. All drawings submitted shall be the
latest drawings approved by the Township and shall be kept current.
Final drawings filed by the applicant shall include notations as to
transfer of easements and sewerage facilities. The drawings shall
include finished flow grades which are necessary to insure that no new
fixture is installed below the street elevation without the check valve or
other suitable device being installed by the developer.
The application and supporting data will be reviewed by the
Superintendent to determine compliance with the Utility's Rules and
Regulations, applicable statutes, and projected growth patterns.
Approval of this application, with conditions set by the Utility, shall be
a mutual agreement between the applicant and the Utility regarding
the terms and conditions for providing sewer service, including the
construction or financing of off-site facilities considered necessary by
the Utility.
The Applicant shall pay all permit and application fees to the Utility, as
well as applicable fees to Middlesex County Utilities Authority and New
Jersey D.E.P. Permits to construct sewers and/or other structures within
flood plains, wetlands and the right-of-way limits of State, County,
Municipal roads and all railroads, and all other permits must be
secured by and paid for by the Applicant. In addition, the Applicant
shall prepare all applications and submit all data required by the
current Rules and Regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the Middlesex County Utilities Authority,
including:
(1) N.J. DEP Form CP-#1, with engineer's signature and seal where
designated, 2 copies.
(2) N.J. DEP Form WQM-006, Engineer's Report, signed and sealed, 5
copies.
(3) East Brunswick Township Resolution approving the project, 2
copies.
(4) Receipts of notifications to proper agencies, 2 copies.
(5) U.S.G.S. Quad Map, 3 copies.
(6) Final Plans and Profiles, signed and sealed, 6 copies.
(7) Checks for proper applicable fees payable to Middlesex County
Utilities Authority, and to Treasurer, State of New Jersey.
The Applicant must inform and secure any necessary clearance and/or
approval from any public utility involved. Proof of such notice and/or
approvals shall be filed with the Utility.
Before construction may commence, the Applicant must also furnish the
following:
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:827
(1) State D.E.P. approval to construct.
(2) Performance guarantees, as hereinafter specified.
(3) Insurance certificates, with coverage as hereinafter specified.
(4) Schedule of construction.
(5) Payment for off-site facilities.
Approval of construction by the Utility will be void and invalid after
one (1) year unless substantial construction has commenced on the
approved facilities. Where construction has commenced within the one
(1) year period, approval will be automatically renewed for a successive
one (1) year period, after which a request must be filed for an extension
of time. Should a project not commence substantial construction within
the one (1) year period, the application as indicated shall become void
and invalid and will require a renewal application to EBSU.
A renewal application fee shall be charged. Should the application
be resubmitted in its previous form, without need for change, the
application may then be renewed by the Utility without system
condition, or in the EBSU Rules and Regulations, an entirely new
review, with the appropriate fees, may be required. It shall not be
necessary for EBSU to notify an applicant that his time period has
expired, that will be the responsibility of the applicant. Application shall
be required upon the expiration of any of the above noted time periods.
Capacity in the system will not be reserved unless, a) the Utility
approval is still valid, and b) all connection fees are paid.
F. Application for performance guarantee reduction/release. Upon
satisfactory completion of construction, inspection, and testing, the
applicant shall request that the Superintendent approve the installed
system (or part thereof).
Ownership, maintenance and operation of the system shall be the
responsibility of the Utility only after specific written final acceptance
by the Superintendent of all or part of the system. Until this written
final acceptance is issued by the Utility, the ownership, maintenance
and operation shall remain the responsibility of the Applicant. However,
operation of the system may not commence until a permit for operation
is issued by the Utility and notification has been sent to the State
Department of Environmental Protection. The applicant will be subject
to all and any payments of any fines, levies and/or assessments prior
to the final acceptance of the ownership of the system by the
Superintendent.
The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) Two (2) copies of as-built plans (as described hereinafter), one of
which must be reproducible prepared and certified by the
applicant's engineer and approved by the Superintendent.
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-5
1:828
(2) All necessary documents, legal descriptions and plans approved by
the Utility that will permit the dedication of all necessary facilities,
property and easements that are an inherent and necessary part of
the completed project.
(3) Proof of payment of all fees and charges required by the Rules and
Regulations up to and including this application.
(4) Operating Permit for that portion of sewerage facilities covered by
this application.
(5) Releases from all parties having jurisdiction over any part of the
project.
(6) Certified copy of Final Map as recorded with the County Clerk.
(7) A written release from any legitimate complainant on record with
the Utility (or a suitable Township Inspector's report on the
complaint).
(8) A signed voucher for release of cash bond.
Upon recommendation of the Superintendent, a partial reduction
in the performance guarantee may be approved by the Utility. Such
reduction will apply only to the Bond or Letter of Credit; no portion
of the cash bond will be returned until full and final Performance
Bond Release has been approved.
A Maintenance Bond shall be posted upon approval of Performance
Bond Release.
G. Performance guarantee and insurance. A performance guarantee
satisfactory in form to the Utility, in the amount of least 120% of the
total approved construction cost of that portion of the project covered
by the application, shall be furnished with the application to construct
(Form C). The guarantee shall contain an "evergreen" clause, and shall
remain in full force and effect for the duration of construction and until
release is approved by the Utility. The guarantee shall assure the Utility
of complete acceptable construction, and shall further guarantee that
said construction will be in accordance with the Rates, Rules, and
Regulations of the Utility, the plans and specifications and Engineer's
Report and cost estimate approved by the Superintendent. The
approved guarantee shall be in the form of a 90% performance
guarantee by approved surety and 10% cash or certified check. The
amount of the required performance guarantee may be increased for
due cause by the Utility, including periods of construction extending
more than one (1) year. In the event of default or non-performance by a
developer, as determined solely by the Utility, part or all of the
performance guarantee may be applied by the Utility to completion of
the work. NO WORK MAY BEGIN ON AN APPROVED PROJECT UNTIL
A PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE HAS BEEN SUBMITTED AND
ACCEPTED BY THE UTILITY.
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:829
H. Construction procedures. No construction may start without
"authorization to construct" from the Superintendent, a "permit to
construct" from the State Department of Environmental Protection, and
a minimum one (1) weeks' notice to the Utility of intention to start work.
During construction, the Utility intends to have personnel present on
the site to observe the installation of sewerage facilities. The purpose
of such observations will be only to achieve an acceptable installation
and will not incur any responsibility for safety practices on the site, or
liability for injury or damage caused by the contractor's operations. The
cost of such observation shall be borne by the applicant.
Work will be rejected for the following reasons:
(1) It is performed or backfilled without observation by Utility
personnel or representative,
(2) It is performed after the Utility's authorized agent disapproves the
materials or the method of installation, or
(3) It fails to pass the testing requirements stipulated elsewhere in
these regulation.
Work will be approved only after final observations, testing,
corrective work, approval of restoration by the Township and
property owners, and written certification by the Superintendent.
The Superintendent reserve the right to stop work on the project, if
materials, workmanship, or operations are not in conformance with
specifications or Utility regulations. Failure to stop work may result
in the following:
(a) Rejection of all work.
(b) Notification to surety that performance guarantees are being
violated.
(c) Notification to Township that issuance of building permits and
certificates of occupancy should be terminated.
(d) Police action if work is being performed in public rights-of-way
or in a manner detrimental to the public welfare.
The contractor, builder, and all subcontractors must abide by
the requirements of the State Construction Safety Code, and
the OSHA regulations. Neither the Utility nor its engineer or
agents are responsible for adherence to such regulations, or
for other safety precautions related to the project.
If there is any portion of the project left in a hazardous
condition, or if reasonable orders issued by the Utility or its
engineer are not followed, the Utility reserves the right to use
the cash portion of the performance guarantees to rectify the
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-5
1:830
condition. Five (5) days written notice of such intention will be
issued by the Superintendent to the Applicant and his surety,
unless hazards to the public require more urgent action. If the
cash funds are inadequate, additional funds must be posted, or
the Utility may demand action by surety.
I. Maintenance bond. Prior to final release of the performance guarantee
the Applicant shall submit a maintenance bond from acceptable surety,
in form approved by the Superintendent. The bond shall be in the
amount of 15% of the original approved construction cost estimate, and
shall extend for two (2) years from the date of the resolution releasing
the performance guarantee, and until an acceptable final inspection. No
partial maintenance bonds will be accepted.
J. As-Built Plans (Land Use § 132-54). Prior to bond release for all
residential and all other sewer improvements, "as-built" drawings shall
be submitted to the Utility. As-built plans shall be submitted on plastic
film as well as a CAD generated data file (compatible with the most
current version of AutoCAD) with a scale of greater than 1" = 50". All
submittals must be referenced to the N.J. State Plane coordinate system
of 1983 and the NAVD of 1988. As built plans shall include the
following:
Drawing Size: Approx. 24" x 36"
Name of development and lot and block number in title box, and "As-
Built" clearly labeled.
Horizontal Scale: 1" = 30', 40' or 50'
Date of as-built survey and name of surveyor
North arrow
Profiles
Distances
NAO 83
All other utilities shown on plan or encountered
Invert and rim elevations
Slopes
Locations of house connections or laterals
horizontal location, distance from downstream manhole
horizontal location of plugged and relative to 2 permanent structures
Notations as to the finished elevations of any structure wherein fixtures
lie below curb grade, and as to the facilities (e.g. check valves) used on
the connection
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:831
§ 219-6. Connections and Service Lines.
Location of pipe in easements (easements labeled)
Location of manholes in easements (tie to existing structures)
Pipe materials
main line sewer (class of pipe)
laterals — size and material
Certifications
drawings signed and sealed by developer's engineer (P.E. or L.S.)
Transfer of Ownership of Easements and Sewerage Facilities, using
wording:
"Sanitary sewer easements shown on this drawing and all sanitary
sewerage facilities installed as shown herein are hereby dedicated to
the East Brunswick Sewer Utility, upon acceptance."
Drawing Materials - mylar or linen reproducibles (one set) and blue-line
prints (two sets) upon final acceptance.
A. Individual connections and service lines. Following are the types of
individual connections anticipated into the Utility's system:
(1) Resumption of service through an existing building sewer and
house connection (including change of ownership or type of
service).
(2) Installation of a new building sewer from a structure to an existing
house connection on the Utility's system.
(3) A new building sewer and a new house connection tapping into the
Utility's system.
B. Permits and applications. All individual connections to the Utility's
system, whether using existing or new facilities, must apply for a permit
for connection of the sanitary sewer into the existing EBSU system.
For all commercial or industrial connections to the Utility's system,
whether using existing or new facilities, an application must be
submitted titled "Application for Individual Commercial Sewer
Service", together with detailed plumbing plans and supporting data
as may be required. In addition, the Utility may require submission
of "Application for Industrial Sewer Connection and Agreement for
Industrial Wastes".
Applications must be signed by the property owner and the customer
requesting service, with both parties accepting financial and legal
responsibility for the connection and its use. The accepted application
§ 219-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-6
1:832
will constitute a contract between the Utility and the Applicant,
obligating the Applicant to pay the Utility's established rates, and to
comply with the Utility's rules and regulations.
All applications must receive the approval of the Superintendent before
the installation is started. All installations must be inspected and
receive the approval of the Superintendent before service is furnished.
An "Application for Change of Use in Existing Sewerage Facilities"
must be made upon any change in service from that described in the
original application or upon any change in ownership of a commercial
or industrial property. The new customer shall be responsible for
making application for approval by the Superintendent, before sewage
service is received or continued. There will be no charge for filing
applications for change in type of service, unless special review or
analysis is required.
Applications for new construction shall be accompanied by two sets
of plans prepared by a registered plumber or approved contractor,
showing the proposed line from the structure to the Utility main or
the location of the existing line to be used. Plans must include all
elevations.
The applicant must obtain and file permits for openings in State, County
or Township roads as required. The applicant must pay all fees, provide
bonds or deposits, insurance, and meet all traffic and safety
requirements.
No applications for service will be accepted by the Utility until the
applicant has paid, or made satisfactory arrangements to pay, all
arrears and charges at the subject premises, or due by the applicant at
any premises now or heretofore occupied by them.
Application for new service connections will be accepted subject to
there being existing mains in streets or right-of-way abutting the
premises to be served, and subject to there being sufficient capacity
available.
When a property owner has made application for a new service, or
has applied for the reinstatement of an existing service, it shall be
presumed that the piping and fixtures on the applicant's premises are
in good condition. The Utility will not be liable, in any event, for any
accident, breaks, or leakage arising in any way in connection with the
pipes or fixtures of the customer, nor for any damage to the property
which may result from the usage thereof.
Building Sewers are under the jurisdiction of the East Brunswick Sewer
Utility and the East Brunswick Plumbing Inspector. Approval of the
Plumbing Inspector or a Certificate of Occupancy will be required
before the Utility will accept discharge of sewage into its mains.
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:833
An Application for Disconnection of Sewerage Facilities" must be filed
prior to disconnection.
C. Utility responsibility. New connections to existing sewer mains will be
at the expense of the Applicant - (see definition), including tapping (if
approved by the Utility), fittings, pipe, labor and related materials.
Such new connections and laterals will become the property of the
Utility to the property line or easement line. The Utility will maintain
such new connection and new laterals from the sewer main to the
property right-of-way (depending on the location of the sewer main)
after installation, and after inspection and approval by the
Superintendent together with the Township Plumbing Inspector. Utility
maintenance will be for failure of material only. If stoppage is due to
material originating from the premises served, the owner will be billed
for the repair.
D. Size and kind of house connection or building sewer. The
Superintendent reserves the right to determine the size and kind of
service lateral from the main to the property right-of-way or easement
line, from the property line to the structure to be served, or from the
main in the right-of-way to the structure to be served. The materials,
location and installation procedures shall conform to the latest
"Specifications for Sewer Construction" on file at the Township office,
or to the requirements of the Engineer. A vented inspection and
maintenance riser is required behind the curb or at an approved
location on each house connection, as per standard Utility details.
That portion of the building sewer, service lateral and sewer clean-out
installed and maintained by the owner shall be installed in accordance
with the applicable Plumbing Code and the Utility specifications, and
shall be inspected and approved by the Township Plumbing Inspector
and Superintendent prior to backfilling the trench. Any construction
not approved shall be immediately removed and reconstructed in an
approved manner.
E. Building sewer location. No building sewer shall be laid within five (5)
feet of any gas pipe, water service or any other facility of any public
utility company, nor within five (5) feet of any open excavation, vault or
meter pit; nor shall the location be under any sidewalk or driveway
unless approved. All building sewers shall be installed within the limits
of the customer's property and a minimum of three (3) feet from any
property line(s) or building walls. Landscaping shall be located so as to
minimize root intrusion into the building sewer, and in no event shall
trees be placed within five (5) feet of any building sewer.
F. Elevation of sanitary fixtures. Under no circumstances shall any new
sanitary fixtures be installed in a building at an elevation lower than the
front curb elevation or street centerline elevation (whichever is higher)
unless special precautions are incorporated into the new fixture
installation to prevent surcharging of the new fixture from the sanitary
sewer main because of high flows or a blockage. In any event the Utility
§ 219-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-6
1:834
will not be responsible for any backups or surcharges into fixtures or
structures.
Prior to installation of any fixture which may be lower than the
elevation heretofore specified, the owner shall obtain the approval of
the Township Plumbing Inspector and the Superintendent on the type
of precautions that will be taken to eliminate the potential flooding of
premises with sewage. In the event a fixture is found to be installed
at any point lower than heretofore specified, the Utility may revoke
the sewer connection permit or discontinue service until the fixture is
removed or positive control measures are instituted to eliminate any
potential surcharging of the building with sewerage.
Special protective devices, such as check valves, shall also be
incorporated in building sewers, where the lowest fixture is below the
rim of the next upstream manhole.
G. Maintenance by customer. All house connections, building sewers,
sewer clean-outs and fixtures furnished by the customer or the Utility
shall be maintained by the customer in good order, and all piping and
connections furnished and owned by the Utility and on the property of
the customer shall be protected properly and cared for by the customer.
All leaks in the building sewer or other pipe or fixture in or upon the
premises served must be repaired immediately by the owner or
occupant of the premises. The customer shall be responsible for
notifying the Utility of the party engaged by said customer to do any
maintenance work on the customer's building sewer, prior to work
being commenced, and said party shall not backfill any trench until the
work has been inspected and approved by the Superintendent. Any
work not acceptable shall be immediately removed and replaced by
work which is acceptable.
The Utility shall in no way be responsible for maintaining any portion
of the building sewer owned by the customer, or for damage done by
sewage escaping therefrom; or for lines or fixtures on the customer's
property; and the customer shall at all times comply with the applicable
municipal regulations with respect thereto, and make changes therein,
required by reason of changes of grade, relocation of mains or
otherwise. The owner shall be responsible for all stoppages within the
house connection and the building sewer from the building to the main,
if caused by discharge from the buildings on the site.
H. Prohibited connections. Under no circumstances may any of the
following be connected to the sanitary sewers, either directly or
indirectly:
(1) Foundation underdrains, or sump pumps.
(2) Area drain or yard drain.
(3) Rain conductor or down spout.
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:835
(4) Grease pit.
(5) Air conditioning equipment, except condensate which will be
permitted under conditions approved by the Utility.
(6) Storm water inlets or catch basins.
(7) Drains from pieces of equipment or manufacturing process, except
when specifically authorized under the provisions of these Rules
and Regulations.
I. Special connections. Building sewers and house connections to public
buildings, churches, apartment houses, commercial establishments,
and industrial establishments, shall be installed to conform to detailed
plans and specifications approved by the Superintendent.
J. Property served by single building sewer. A building sewer from the
curb, easement line or right-of-way line to a property, shall not serve
more than one building unless otherwise approved. Upon proper
application of the owner, a property may be served by two or more
building sewers, each of which, for billing purposes, may be considered
as being one customer account.
K. Single building sewer with two or more customers. Where two or more
customers are now served through a single building sewer, any
violation of the rules of the Utility, with respect to either or any of said
customers, shall be deemed a violation as to all, and unless said
violation is corrected after reasonable notice, the Utility may take such
action as may be taken for a single customer. However, such action will
not be taken until a customer who has not violated the Utility's rules has
been given a reasonable opportunity to connect his pipe to a separately
controlled building sewer.
L. Policy on blockage and repairs. Following is the policy of the Utility with
regard to procedures for repairs of building sewers and house
connections to the Utility's system:
(1) In the event of a stoppage or failure in a building sewer or house
connection, the property owner shall be responsible for
endeavoring to correct the situation and for obtaining a
measurement to the point of stoppage or failure.
(2) If the problem is found to exist between the property line or
easement line and the house or building, then the property owner
shall be responsible for proceeding with all necessary corrective
work.
(3) If the problem is found to exist between the property line or
easement line and the main sewer, then the Utility shall be
responsible for proceeding with all necessary corrective work.
(4) If the work is performed by the Utility and it is found that the
problem has been caused by faulty use of the sewer by the property
§ 219-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-6
1:836
owner, such as discharge of bulky materials, discharge of acids,
etc., then all costs must be borne by the property owner, including
the costs of labor of any Utility personnel and costs of equipment
and materials provided by the Utility, and shall be paid promptly by
the property owner to the Utility. If not paid promptly, the amount
of said costs shall be added on to the next sewer bill submitted to
the property owner.
(5) Under no circumstances shall the Utility be responsible for damage
to furnishings or house or building interiors unless negligence on
the part of the Utility is demonstrated.
M. Policy on missing or damaged curb clean-out caps. When an Utility
inspection indicates that a sewer cap or clean-out is missing or
damaged, the customer will be notified that the facility must be
repaired or cover replaced, within 72 hours (3 days). After that time
period, the Utility will replace or repair the clean-out or cap and the
customer will be charged for parts and service.
N. Unauthorized connection. No person(s) shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer,
service lateral or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Utility.
O. Floor drains. The connection of floor drains to the sewer system may be
permitted by the Utility, on a case by case basis, subject to but not
limited to the following criteria:
(1) No interconnection of storm water drains with the sanitary sewer
system will be permitted.
(2) Assurances must be provided by all current and future owners of
the property, that discharges into the floor drains will never include
waste oil, gasoline, coolant, anti-freeze, brake and transmission
fluids, paint, volatile or explosive liquids. Also, no discharge of any
item prohibited by USEPA, NJDEP, MCUA or EBSU regulations
shall be permitted. The property owner shall be responsible to
determine restricted items. Such assurances may include deed
restrictions, affidavits, annual permits, or other forms of assurance
determined by the Utility.
(3) Any floor drain located below street level will be required to have a
check valve installed prior to connection to the sewer system. The
property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
check valve.
(4) The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
floor drains.
(5) Notices are to be prominently posted and maintained, by the owner,
instructing the building occupants as to the restrictions on floor
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:837
drain use. Such notices must be maintained and replaced or
updated when necessary.
(6) A grease, oil, and sand separator will be required on the outlet pipe
from the floor drains as required in § 219-4(E) of these regulations,
unless waived by the Utility. The above noted devices will be
located outside of any structure or building and subject to
inspection by the Utility. An approved clean-out must be installed
between the above described devices and the property line, prior to
connection to the sewer system.
(7) Additional pre-treatment units, controls, access manholes and
special facilities may be required for specific installations.
(8) The Utility will conduct monthly tests of flow, utilizing a NJDEP
approved laboratory. All costs will be borne by the property owner,
including surcharge billing.
(9) The Utility reserves the right to order or disconnect floor drains
from the sewer system for repeated violations of these rules and
regulations.
(10) Any floor drains in existence prior to the adoption of this regulation
shall be required to conform to the terms of this section.
P. Swimming pool connections. The connection of swimming pools to the
sewer system may be permitted by the Utility on a case by case basis
after application, inspection and approval by the Superintendent. Such
approval will be conditioned upon the following matters:
(1) The only acceptable discharge will be from the pool contents, from
treatment system backwash, and from restrooms. No discharge of
other wastes will be permitted, particularly from but not limited to
cleaning fluids, acid wash solutions, filter sand, leaves, twigs or
other materials which would otherwise not be acceptable into the
sanitary sewer system of the Utility.
(2) In order to limit the rate of discharge, the maximum pipe size for
connection to the Utility system will be two-inch (2") diameter cast
iron or polyvinyl chloride pipe for gravity systems. The maximum
size for pumping systems will be one-inch (1") diameter cast iron or
polyvinyl chloride pipe or an equivalent orifice. Exceptions may be
made to this requirement on a case by case basis only in the event
of a problem with pipe slope, or if the discharge is into a Utility
sewer twelve-inches (12") in diameter or greater.
(3) Connection to the Utility system must be preceded by an
acceptable screening device.
(4) The discharge pipe line must include a double check valve, to
insure against backup from the Utility system into the pool.
§ 219-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-6
1:838
§ 219-7. Tampering With System.
§ 219-8. Inspection and Testing of Installed Facility.
(5) Each application must be accompanied by a sketch showing the
exact location of the desired connection, and the pipe line, valves,
appurtenances, and pool structure. Any change from the plan must
be noted on the as-built sketch.
(6) Connection to the Utility sewer must conform to standard Utility
details, including a curb riser, approved saddle, and a proper
lateral connection. Pavement, curb, and sidewalk restoration, if
any, must meet Township requirements.
(7) Notice must be given to the Utility upon each instance in which a
portion or all of the pool water is to be discharged into the Utility
system.
(8) The Superintendent reserves the right to order the disconnection
of pool drains from the sewer system for repeated violations of
these Rules and Regulations.
(9) The Utility will require proper insurance and indemnification
before work is undertaken in the public right-of-way.
A. Tampering with system. No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the East
Brunswick Sewer Utility wastewater facilities. No person shall enter
upon any property of the East Brunswick Sewer Utility without the
express permission of the Utility.
Any such person(s) shall be responsible to pay 100% for all damages
caused by his (their) malicious, willful or negligent acts, and shall also
be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Section 1-15 of the
Code.
A. Inspection of sewage system during construction. All construction of
sewage systems shall be under the jurisdiction of the Utility, either
directly or through inspectors under the supervision of the Township
Engineer.
(1) The Superintendent and the Applicant's Engineer shall enforce
compliance with the approved plans and specifications.
(2) The Superintendent shall have the authority to have the work
discontinued in the event of noncompliance.
(3) The Applicant shall furnish the name of the occupant, the street
address, and lot and block number to the Utility at least two (2)
weeks prior to a request for the certificate of occupancy from the
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-8
1:839
Construction Code Official to assure that the lateral inspection has
been accomplished, and all fees have been paid.
(4) No sewer connections shall be made to the appropriate street main
whether tested or not unless under the supervision and inspection
of the representative for the Superintendent.
A temporary, leak proof bulkhead type plug shall be installed in
the upstream (inlet) side of the manhole furthest downstream in
any sewer main or branch under construction and shall remain
intact and unloosened until permission is received from the
Superintendent to remove same. This permission will not be
granted until each section of the sewer has been cleaned and
flushed in a manner acceptable to the Utility.
B. Testing of completed system. All sewer mains shall be subjected to
either an infiltration or exfiltration test, or under special circumstances
to a low pressure air test. Exfiltration tests shall be conducted in lieu of
infiltration tests when the pipe has been laid above the groundwater
level. Infiltration tests shall be used only when the groundwater level is
above the crown of the sewer and completely surrounds the pipe during
the period of testing. The tests shall be performed between two
manholes or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent for the Utility
and shall include all related sewerage including house connections.
The contractor shall furnish all labor, materials, and equipment
necessary for the testing.
Exfiltration tests shall be under at least a four (4) foot head or a
pressure corresponding to a head equal to the depth of the lower
manhole of the section under the test.
Allowable infiltration of exfiltration shall not exceed a rate of 100
gallons per mile, per inch of diameter of sewer, per 24 hours.
In order to ensure that there shall be no gushing or spurting streams
entering the sewer, the contractor shall be held responsible for water
tightness of the line, shall satisfactorily repair all joints and other
parts not sufficiently water tight and then shall make additional tests
of the infiltration or exfiltration until the test results conform to the
requirements given herein and until all visible leaks are eliminated.
Detailed criteria for testing, and special requirements will be in the
Utility's approval.
Sewer Pipe Cleaning - After testing and before final acceptance of the
work, the Contractor shall clean the entire sewer system, unless such
procedures are specifically waived by the Superintendent. The cleaning
method employed shall utilize Jet-Vac Sewer Cleaner or approved
equal, and all material collected at the downstream end of the system
shall be removed by vacuuming, and shall not pass downstream.
§ 219-8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-8
1:840
§ 219-9. Billings, Payments, Delinquencies, Etc.
Upon completion and visual acceptance, all lines are to be internally
examined using a television camera, to check for improper joints, offgrade
pipe, and damaged pipe. The inspection is to be witnessed on a
monitor screen by Utility personnel, and video tape is to furnished, as
approved.
A. Rendering of bills for sewer service. All such items are covered by the
Revenue Office in the Finance Department. Bills are mailed at various
times depending on type of user. Sewer service charges for each new
unit will be initiated upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
Estimated bills will be issued in the event that a meter reading is
not available for a meter read customer. The estimated bill shall be
prepared utilizing the last meter reading indicating usage for that
particular time frame.
B. Delinquent and disputed accounts. Any bill unpaid thirty (30) days after
the due date shall be classified as delinquent and shall be charged at
the maximum statutory interest rate per month. Any bill unpaid fortyfive
(45) days after presentation shall be subject to discontinuance of
service after not less than ten (10) days written notice.
If service is discontinued for non-payment of the account, it will not be
restored until the turn on fee (payable in cash or certified check) plus
all unpaid charges are paid or satisfactory arrangements have been
made for payment.
If the check used for payment is returned by the bank for any reason, a
processing fee will be charged against the account.
Any unpaid balance of service charges and interest thereon shall be a
lien against the property and action shall be initiated pursuant to the
procedure specified under N.J.S.A. 40:14A, N.J.S.A. 26A-12 and N.J.S.A.
54:5-1 et seq.
Notice of delinquent charges shall be processed by the Tax Collector of
East Brunswick.
C. Discontinuance of service. Service may, at the sole discretion of the
Utility, be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) Misrepresentation in application.
(2) Willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures, or otherwise.
(3) Use of sewer for any other property or purpose than that described
in the application.
§ 219-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-9
1:841
(4) Tampering with any service pipe, or any other appliance of the
Utility.
(5) Nonpayment of any charge accruing under the application.
(6) Refusal of reasonable access to the property for purposes of
inspecting, reading, repairing, or removing meters and/or
plumbing.
(7) Making, or refusing to sever any cross connection between a pipe
or fixture furnished by the Utility and a pipe or fixture from any
other source.
(8) Nonpayment of bills within time prescribed.
(9) Violation of any rules of the Utility.
D. Renewal of service. Service will be renewed when the conditions under
which such service was disconnected are corrected and upon payment
of all accrued charges provided in the schedule of rates or rules of the
Utility.
E. Deposits. Deposits may be required from new customers without a
record of prior use, or from any customer who becomes habitually
delinquent. The amount of the deposit shall be equal to the average or
estimated bill.
Any customer having paid a deposit shall pay bills for sewer service as
rendered, in accordance with the Rates, Rules and Regulations of the
Utility. The deposit shall not be considered as payment on account of a
bill during the time the customer is receiving service.
Deposits shall be returned to the depositor when he shall have paid
undisputed bills for service for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months.
No interest will be paid on deposits.
F. Continuing obligation to pay service charge. Upon the connection to a
sewer for an improved and usable property, the obligation to pay the
minimal annual service charge continues despite the failure to occupy
the property or to use the sewer facilities, so long as the building or
structure on the property is still available for use and the sewer
facilities remain available.
Without written notice, it shall be assumed that connections are or
may be active, thereby requiring sewer service. Charges will therefore
continue until written notice of discontinuance.
G. Form of payment. Form of payment may be by check or U.S. currency.
The Utility reserves the right to refuse payment rendered in significant
amounts of coin. For any property on tax title lien, or any account where
§ 219-9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-9
1:842
§ 219-10. Responsibility for Service.
§ 219-11. Fees and Charges. [Amended 6-11-18 by Ord. No. 18-08]
a check was returned by the bank, payment must be in certified check,
money order, or U.S. currency.
H. Disconnection of sewerage facilities. In the event that a sewer lateral
service will be permanently discontinued, the Utility shall be notified in
writing that the service billing will be terminated. The property owner
must file a letter for disconnection of sewerage facilities, and the sewer
lateral shall be permanently sealed water tight by the property owner in
a manner subject to the approval of the Inspector, with all costs of
review and field observation being borne by the property owner.
A. Reasonable access. The properly identified authorized agents of the
Utility shall have the right of access to the premises served, at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of reading meters, collecting
samples, examining fixtures and pipes, observing the manner of use,
and for any other purpose which is proper and necessary in the conduct
of the Utility's business.
B. No oral agreements. No agent or employee of the Utility has
authorization to orally bind it by any promise, agreement, or
representation not provided for in these Rates, Rules and Regulations.
C. Damage and repairs. Whenever any person(s), firm(s), partnership(s),
corporation(s), or any combination thereof causes or has caused any
damage to the sewer system or facilities of the Utility, the party or
parties causing such damage shall immediately notify the Utility of such
damage. The Utility shall have the right to repair such damage or have
such damage repaired, and shall have the further right to recover the
full cost and expense of such repairs, including but not limited to the
standard charges for work performed by Utility employees, for
materials, supplies and equipment used for such repairs, from the party
or parties causing such damage.
D. Mandatory sewer connection. The owner of any house, building or
structure located on a street along the line of any sewer which is now in
operation or is constructed in the future in the Township of East
Brunswick shall connect the drainage of all sources of sewage in the
house, building or structure to the sewer. Any owner of a building or
structure who fails to connect to a sewer system after written
notification by the Utility of the availability of service, shall be subject
to the penalties and remedies of the East Brunswick Township
Ordinance.
A. Fees and deposit to accompany application and permits. For standard
applications, see table below for fees. Minimum deposits may be
increased if the Utility review exceed these minimum requirements.
§ 219-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:843
Application
Filing
Fee
Deposit for
Review
Deposit for
Inspection
Conceptual
Review of
Sewerage
Facilities
$100 $50 per connection
unit, Min. deposit is
$1,000
None
Renewal
Authorization
$50 $50 per connection
unit, Min. deposit is
$1,000***
None
Pumping
Station Review
$100 $2,500 per pump,
station, minimum
deposit
None
Construction
Authorization
$200 $1.50 per ft. of
sewer plus $500 per
pumping station.
Min. deposit is
$1,000***
10% of approved
construction cost
Min. deposit $1,000
Renewal
Authorization
$50 $1.00 per ft. of
sewer plus $500 per
pumping station
Min. Deposit
$1,000***
10% of approved
construction cost
Min. deposit $1,000
Performance
Bond
Reduction/
Release
$100 $0.50 per ft. of
sewer plus $500 per
pumping station
Min. deposit
$1,000, plus
pumping station
deposit if applicable
(re-application
deposit as required)
5% of approved
construction cost
Min. deposit $1,000
(Re-application
deposit as required)
Special Review None Minimum Deposit -
$500
Minimum for
connection of
Residential
Sanitary Sewer
$25* None Actual Cost**
Minimum for
connection of
Commercial
Sanitary Sewer
$50* Actual Cost** Actual Cost**
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:844
Application
Filing
Fee
Deposit for
Review
Deposit for
Inspection
Industrial
Sewer
Connection
Application and
Industrial
Waste
Discharge
Agreement
(Fees additional
to Forms A
through D)
$50 Actual Cost**
Min. deposit $4500
Actual Cost**
Change of Use None None (unless
special review or
analysis required)
Actual Cost**
Disconnection
of Sewerage
Facilities
None None Actual Cost**
Initial Floor
Drain
Application
$25* Actual Cost**
Min. $100 deposit
for floor drain
review, plus any
special costs of
review because of
unusual wastes,
industrial processes
or special
circumstances
Actual Cost**
Annual
Renewal/Floor
Drain Permit
$25 Actual Cost**
Swimming Pool
Drainage
Application
$25 Actual Cost**
Minimum deposit
$100
Actual Cost
Swimming Pool
Drainage
Permit
10,000 -
20,000/gal
$25*
Over 20,000/
gal
$100*
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:845
Application
Filing
Fee
Deposit for
Review
Deposit for
Inspection
Annual
Renewal/
Swimming Pool
Draining
Permit:
10,000 -
20,000/gal
$25
Over 20,000/
gal
$100
NOTES:
* (not including connection fees)
** (Actual Cost of EBSU - Time, Equipment and Materials overhead
roll up taxes, if applicable)
*** May be adjusted if re-application is unchanged from initial
application
B. Sewer services charges.
All owners of property connected to the sewer system of the East
Brunswick Sewer Utility shall pay to the Utility a base sewer service
charge in accordance with the following schedule:
The sewer service charge shall be at the annual rate of $320.00 for each
Service Unit.
The classification of establishments connected to the sewer system and
the Service Units chargeable to each such establishment shall be as
follows:
(1) Residential Establishments:
(a) Each single family residence - One service unit.
(b) House trailer shall be one service unit.
(c) Each apartment in a multi-family dwelling, apartment house,
commercial or other building, shall be one service unit.
(2) For all other buildings or establishments, including commercial
establishments, industrial establishments (with only domestic
sewage), schools and public buildings, the charge shall be the
greater of:
(a) 0.1 service units per 10,000 gallons of sewage flow or part
thereof; or
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:846
(b) The number of service units as specified for the particular
classification in § 219-11(K) hereof, multiplied by the annual
rate set forth herein.
The volume of sewage flow on which the determination of the
unit charges applicable under (a) above are based shall, except
as otherwise provided for herein, be assumed to be the same
as the quarterly volume of water use as determined by the
East Brunswick Water Utility. Volume of water use does not
apply and shall have no impact on rates charges by service unit
classification under (b).
(3) Water used but not discharged into sanitary sewers by Commercial
and Industrial Establishments.
Whenever any commercial or industrial establishment uses water
in such manner that water used is not discharged into the sanitary
sewer system of the East Brunswick Sewer Utility, the quantity
of water so used and not discharged into the sanitary sewerage
system shall be excluded in determining the sewer charges for said
premises; providing, however, that the quantity of water so used
and not discharged into the sewerage system is measured by a
device or meter approved by the Superintendent and installed by
the owner of the premises without cost to the Utility. In lieu of
the installation of a device or meter for measuring the quantity of
water not discharged into the Utility's sanitary sewerage system,
the owner of the premises may install, at his own cost and expense,
a device or meter for measuring the quantity of sewage discharged
into the Utility's sanitary sewer system.
When, in the opinion of the Superintendent, it is not practical to
install a measuring device to continuously determine the quantity
of water discharged into or not discharged into the sanitary
sewerage system, the Utility shall determine, in such manner or by
such method as it may prescribe, the quantity of water discharged
into the sanitary sewerage system, either as a percentage of the
total volume of metered water use or otherwise. Any dispute as to
the estimated amount shall be determined by the Utility and its
decision shall be final. If the owner of the property is not willing
to accept the determination of the Utility he may be required, for
the purpose of determining future sewer rental charge, to install an
approved measuring device as described in the paragraph above.
(4) Sewer Charges to Commercial or Industrial Establishment without
separate water meters
Whenever two or more establishments are served by a single water
meter the Utility may estimate the amount of water delivered to
each establishment and may apply full or minimum charges to each
establishment as enumerated above.
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:847
If the owner of the property does not agree to the Utility's
determination of the sewer charge as set forth above, they shall,
at their sole cost and expense, install separate meters for each
building or establishment on the premises.
(5) Floor Drain Charges.
(a) Floor Drains - 0.30 service units per 1,000 sq. ft. (or part) of
building are tributary to floor drains.
(b) Vehicle Bays - Additional 0.33 service units per bay where
occasional car washing may be expected.
Additional 0.66 service units per bay where occasional truck
washing (exterior or interior) may be expected.
(6) Swimming Pool Drains.
(a) For swimming pool sizes as follows:
[1] 10,000 - 20,000 gallons, additional .20 service units
[2] 20,000 - 40,000 gallons, additional .80 service units
[3] Over 40,000 gallons, additional .20 service units per
10,000 gallons or part thereof
C. Connection charges.
A connection charge or charges shall be imposed for each direct or
indirect connection to the East Brunswick Sewer System. The charges
shall be as per this Rate Schedule for each Service Unit as defined in
§ 219-11(L) under Initial Connection Charge, except where otherwise
noted.
Initial charges for the right to connect directly or indirectly to the
Utility's sewer system shall include a connection fee per unit, as unit is
herein defined under "Initial connection Charge", as well as additions
to fees and charges for inspections of the work to be accomplished
by applicants in keeping with the Utility's Rules and Regulations as
the same are promulgated, amended, modified and supplemented from
time to time. Such Connection Fees, which are and constitute a onetime
initial charge for the right to connect to the Utility's sewer system,
are an integral part of the Utility's Rate Schedule and are a distinct and
separate charge from all other rates and sewer charges and payment of
one shall not constitute payment of the other.
Connection Charge - The connection charge shall be a fee charged
to any customer of the East Brunswick Sewer Utility at the time of
connection of the facility or facilities of said customer either directly or
indirectly to any portion of the East Brunswick Sewer Utility system,
or at the time when sewer service becomes available, calculated on the
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:848
basis of capital costs expended by the Utility to the date of calculation
together with accrued interest thereon.
The connection charge shall be updated from time to time by the
East Brunswick Sewer Utility to reflect additional capital costs and
additional interest accrued on the East Brunswick Sewer Utility sewer
system.
The current connection charge is $2,395.00 per Service Unit.
Upon an addition, alteration or change in use of any building already
connected to the Utility system, an additional connection fee may be
charged based upon the sewer connection designations.
D. Waste surcharges.
Where biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solid sample results
indicate that strengths exceed those of a domestically equivalent waste
of greater than 225 mg/l, and if such wastes have been introduced
into the Utility sanitary sewer system, excess loading charges will be
imposed as follows:
Waste volumes shall be based on a metered flow, corroborated (when
requested) by water meter records. Charges for volume shall be as
shown in the rate schedule.
The customer shall pay all excess loading charges from the Utility
within 20 days of receipt of such billing. The failure to pay such excess
loading charges within the twenty-day period will result in an automatic
cancellation of the customer's participation in the average excess
loading program.
Waste strength shall not exceed the limits listed in the section entitled
Industrial or Commercial Service without pre-treatment.
(1) Excess loading charges for suspended solids, biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), chlorine demand, and other materials shall be
based on actual charges to the Utility by the MCUA. Quarterly
samples shall be taken for suspended solids and BOD to establish
the concentrations in determining the annual excess loading rate.
The annual excess loading rate will be calculated by averaging the
total suspended solids and BOD results for the prior year
proportionately against the tolerance parameter of 400 mg/l. This
annual loading rate shall be set prior to the billing year and be
recalculated the following year. The excess loading rate shall be
multiplied by the metered water flow per 1,000 gallons of usage to
establish the excess loading charge.
(2) Customers may request, at their expense, an additional sample for
anomalous results. The customer shall not determine the date of
the additional test. The results of the additional sample shall be
integrated into the calculation of the excess loading rate and not
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:849
replace the anomalous sample. The requested additional sample
charge shall be added to the customer's sewer bill at the cost to the
Township to perform the sample.
(3) Establishments that have no sample history shall be assessed at a
domestically equivalent waste assumed sample result of 225 mg/l
until a loading rate can be reasonably calculated.
(4) Quarterly samples shall be taken to determine the discharge
concentration for grease, oil, fats, either vegetable or mineral.
Results in excess of the allowable limit of 100 mg/l shall be charged
a flat charge for the quarter of $250.00.
The Collector of Revenue shall have the discretion to make any
modifications necessary to insure that the intent of the excess
loading charges as approved by the EBSU is adhered to.
E. Payments of connection fee. For single family home, existing prior to
the installation of collection lines by the Utility, and applying and
connecting within thirty (30) days after notification of availability of
services by the Utility, payment must be:
(1) In lump sum, or
(2) In three (3) equal installments over a three year period,
commencing at time of availability of service, prior to connection.
(Balance to be paid in full upon change in ownership)
Single family home built after collection lines were installed,
payment must be:
In lump sum prior to connection or occupancy.
Property owners who fail to make application and connection
within the required time limits, and do not have written
certification from the Township of East Brunswick indicating valid
reasons for not connecting:
Payments due in full on date service becomes available. Service is
considered available upon notification by the Utility, which is not
necessarily the time of connection.
For developments comprising two (2) or more homes,
payment must be made:
Prior to submission of Application for Acceptance; or
Phased in accordance with construction phases if so approved by
the Utility.
Where multi-family or non-residential structures exist prior
to the installation of the collection system, payment must be
made:
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:850
In full within thirty (30) days after the notification that service is
available.
Prior to the connection if the connection is made within the thirty
(30) day limit.
When multi-family or non-residential structures are built
after the collection system is available for service, payment
must be made:
At the time of the application, which must be prior to the
connection and occupancy.
A change in use shall require the submission of Change of Use
form, and may require the payment of an additional connection
fee, if the connection fee for the resulting use is higher than the
connection fee for the prior use at the time of change in use. The
amount of the connection fee will be the connection fee for the
resulting use, less the connection fee paid for the prior use of the
property.
F. Liens; rights and remedies; enforcement. In the event that an initial
service charge or connection fee or annual service charge with regard
to any parcel of real property owned by any person, corporation, or
other entity other than the State or any agency or subdivision thereof
shall not be paid as and when due as herein above stated, the unpaid
balance thereof and all interest accruing thereon, shall be a lien on
such parcel, and all such liens shall become enforceable with and as any
other municipal lien on real property in the municipality in addition to
the other remedies of civil suit or foreclosure or any other remedies
which may be available and provided by and under the Laws and
Statutes of the State of New Jersey is such case made and provided.
In the event that an initial service charge or connection fee or any
service charge of the Utility with regard to any parcel of real property
shall not be paid as and when due, the Utility may enter upon such
parcel and cause the connections thereof to be cut and shut off until
such service charge and any subsequent service charge with regard
to such parcel and all interest accrued thereon, together with a reconnection
fee shall be fully paid to the Utility, and/or may avail itself
of any and all other remedies which may be available and provided by
and under the Laws and Statutes of the State of New Jersey in such
case made and provided. The reconnection fee shall be in the amount of
all labor, materials and administrative costs incurred by the Utility. The
minimum re-connection fee shall be $100.00. (See § 219-11(J))
All rights and remedies provided in this rate schedule and in any
amendments or modifications hereof and supplements hereto for the
collection and enforcement of rates and service charges, initial service
charges, connection fees or tapping fees, rents, and rates, and all
other fees and charges shall be cumulative and concurrent with and
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:851
in addition to those provided and authorized in and by the Laws and
Statutes of the State of New Jersey in each such case made and
provided.
G. Floor drain fees.19 The Utility may permit floor drains; however, an
annual permit will be required. A supplementary charge over and above
the annual sewer service charge as per § 219-11B(5) will be assessed.
This extra charge will be billed with the sewer service charge either
annual or quarterly.
If roof leaders or storm drain connections are found to exist, the illicit
connections must be removed immediately. On such finding, charges
will be assessed retroactively at the rate of 0.22 units per 1,000 square
feet of tributary roof area or impervious area, retroactive for the period
of use.
The Utility will charge $100 for inspection of the floor drains if
requested by the property owner.
The property owner will be responsible for all costs of annual permits,
quarterly testing and inspections.
The property owner will also be responsible for any costs developed
from test results showing violation of § 219-4D, E and F. The property
owner will also be responsible for any surcharge costs as per
§ 219-11D.
H. Swimming pool drain fees. The Utility may permit commercial
swimming pool drains; however, an annual permit will be required. A
supplementary charge over and above the annual sewer service charge,
as per § 219-11B(6) will be assessed. This extra charge will be billed
with the sewer service charge either annually or quarterly.
I. Miscellaneous charges.
Check processing fee. If a check used as payment is returned by the
bank for any reason, a charge of $20 will be charged against the
account.
Turn-on fee. If service is discontinued for any reason, the resumption
of service will require prepayment of a fee of $100, together with the
actual cost of Utility services rendered.
Copy fees. Fees shall be charged for copies of public documents as
permitted by law.
Sump pumps. As stipulated elsewhere, the discharge from sump pumps
may not be connected to the Utility sewer system. If found connected,
the property owner will be charged on the basis of continuous
19.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Garbage disposal fees, was repealed 12-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-34, which ordinance also provided for the renumbering of the remainder of
this section.
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:852
discharge at 10% of the rated pump capacity (1 unit equals 100,000
gallons per year). Charges will also be levied retroactively for the
period of use, to a maximum of two years. The property owner must
remove any connected sump pump within 60 days after notice from the
Utility.
J. Other rates and deposits for escrow. When any application shall be
made to the East Brunswick Sewer Utility other than those applications
specifically provided for herein, there shall be deposited with the East
Brunswick Sewer Utility an escrow fund which shall be utilized for
purposes of paying for public hearings, stenographic expense, legal
expense, engineering expense and such other expenses as may be
experienced by the East Brunswick Sewer Utility in hearing of the
application or applications.
In such case, the East Brunswick Sewer Utility shall estimate the costs
of such proceedings and shall advise the applicant in written form,
and the applicant shall, prior to any such hearings and proceedings,
deposit with the East Brunswick Sewer Utility the estimated sum of
such escrow.
Upon conclusion of all proceedings, any unused escrow shall be
promptly returned by the East Brunswick Sewer Utility to the applicant.
At the conclusion of the proceedings and such other times as it may
be necessary, the East Brunswick Sewer Utility will account to the
applicant for all monies expended and shall advise in written form
any surplus or deficit in the same. In the event of any deficit, the
applicant shall, promptly and prior to any further proceedings taking
place, deposit such additional escrow as may be required by the Utility.
K. Minimum annual charges and initial connection charges.
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
A. Single-Family Home 1.00 1.00
B. Multi-Unit Housing (Note 1)
(including apartments, hotels
and motels, townhouses, trailer
stalls, dormitories,
condominiums, etc.)
(1) For each apartment in a
multifamily dwelling
1.00 1.00
(2) For each house trailer 1.00 1.00
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:853
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
(3) For each separate hotel/
motel type room, with
individual sanitary facilities
0.25 .030
(4) For each separate hotel/
motel room without
sanitary facilities (or if
jointly used)
0.20 0.25
(5) For each unit in a limited
income senior citizen
housing Development
containing not more than
one bedroom receiving
financial assistance through
N.J.H.F.A.
0.80 0.25
C. Schools (Note 2)
(1) For each 70 persons of
student and staff
population, without
showers, Cafeteria, or
water using laboratories
1.00 1.20
(2) Additional for showers, per
70 population
0.05 0.12
(3) Additional for cafeteria, per
70 population
0.05 0.12
(4) Additional for laboratories,
per 70 population
0.05 0.12
D. Doctors - For each physician or
principal health care person
2.10 3.20
E. Dentists - for each practicing
dentist, hygienist, orthodontist,
or similar practitioner
2.30 2.90
F. Commercial Establishments
(Note 11) (including stores,
offices, shopping centers, but
not including fountains,
restaurants, etc.)
(1) For up to 4 persons
employed full time
1.00 1.20
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:854
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
(2) For each additional person
employed
0.05 0.12
(3) Additional for each
restroom fixture
0.25 0.35
G. Public Buildings (including
municipal buildings, post
offices, fire houses, libraries,
etc.)
(1) For up to 4 persons
employed on premises
1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional person
employed
0.05 0.12
(3) Additional for each public
restroom fixture
0.10 0.25
H. Religious Institutions (Note 2)
(1) For congregations up to
400 seats
1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional 100
seats, or part
0.10 0.25
I. Restaurants, Diners,
Luncheonettes, Fountains (Note
3)
(1) For up to 50 seats capacity,
and 5 day, 8 hour daily
period
1.25 3.00
(2) For each additional 10 seats
or part available on 8 hour
basis
0.25 0.60
(3) Take out restaurants,
without seats
1.00 1.20
J. Taverns, Bars (Note 4)
(1) For up to 25 counter or
seating capacity and 5 day,
8 hour daily period
1.00 2.40
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:855
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
(2) For each additional 10
customer space or part, per
8 hour period
0.50 1.20
K. Services Stations, Garages
(1) W/O car wash or repair
facilities
1.00 1.20
(2) Additional for each garage
bay
0.05 0.12
(3) Additional for each car
wash bay, no recycling
1.50 4.50
(4) Additional for each car
wash bay, with recycling
0.75 1.50
L. Banquet or Catering Facilities
(Note 5)
(1) For room with up to 150
seat capacity
1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional 50 seat
capacity or part
0.15 0.30
(3) For separate part time bar 0.50 1.20
M. Laundromat or Laundry (Note
11)
(1) For each washing machine 0.75 2.25
(2) For each 4 employees, or
part
1.00 1.20
(3) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
N. Nursing Homes, Hospitals
(1) For each 10 beds, or part 3.50 8.40
(2) For each 4 staff personnel
or part
1.00 1.20
(3) For each additional staff
member
0.05 0.12
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:856
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
O. Recreation Centers, Tennis or
Swim Clubs, etc. (based on 12
months use, outdoor facilities
will be pro-rated for 3 months
use)
(1) For up to 4 employees 1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
(3) For each 100 transients
daily, with restrooms
0.50 1.20
(4) For each 100 transients
daily with restrooms and
showers
1.00 2.40
P. Funeral Homes
(1) For up to 4 employees 1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
Q. Theaters, Drive-Ins, and
Auditoriums (Note 6)
(1) For the first 200 seats, or
car stalls or part
1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional 100
seats or car stalls
0.25 0.60
R. Industrial Establishments (Note
7)
(1) For up to 4 employees 1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
(3) For each 100,000 gallons of
domestically equivalent
process waste
Note 8 Note 9
(4) Additional for each
restroom fixture
0.25 0.35
S. Veterinary Hospital, Dog Kennel
(1) For up to 4 employees 1.00 1.20
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:857
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
(2) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
(3) For each operating or exam
room
0.25 0.60
(4) For each 10 kennels 0.50 1.20
T. Automated Car Wash (Note 10)
(1) For each car wash bay, w/o
recycling
Note 8 Note 9
(2) For each car wash bay, with
recycling
Note 8 Note 9
U. Beauty Parlors, Barber Shops
(1) For up to 4 employees 1.00 1.20
(2) For each additional
employee
0.05 0.12
(3) For each customer service
stations (chair)
0.05 0.10
V. Floor Drains, All Uses
(1) Additional per 1,000 square
feet or part of tributary
area
0.30 0.30
(2) Additional for floor drains
per bay where occasional
car washing may be
expected
0.33 0.33
(3) Additional for floor drains
per pay where occasional
truck washing may be
expected
0.66 0.66
W. Swimming Pool Drains
(1) For swimming pool sizes
10,000 gallons to 20,000
gallons
0.20 0.20
(2) For swimming pool sizes
20,000 gallons to 40,000
gallons
0.80 0.80
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-11
1:858
Minimum
Service Units
for Annual
Charge
Purposes
Minimum
Service Units
for Initial
Connection
Charge
Purposes
(3) For swimming pool sizes in
excess of 40,000 gallons,
per 10,000/gallons or part
thereof
0.20 0.20
NOTES REGARDING MINIMUM ANNUAL CHARGES AND
INITIAL CONNECTION CHARGE SCHEDULE
Note 1 Charge is per unit, whether occupied or not.
Note 2 Part time schools to be considered based on days of occupancy
(assuming 5 days as full time occupancy).
Note 3 Charge is for either separate establishments or for an auxiliary
establishment (e.g., a restaurant in a major hotel). Charges
shall be pro-rated for additional hours.
Note 4 This charge also applies to separate bar in a restaurant.
Note 5 Based on 10 hours of weekly use; additional use to be prorated.
Note 6 Based on 30 hours of weekly use; additional use to be prorated.
Note 7 A domestically equivalent waste is one that possesses the
following characteristics:
a. Biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solid
concentrations less than 225 mg/L.
b. Meets the standards for acceptable waste (through
pretreatment, if necessary) described in the Utility's Rules
and Regulation or the Middlesex County Utilities Authority
regulations, or the State approved NJPDES permits.
If wastes exceed these requirements in concentration or
constituents, the Utility may: 1) refuse to accept the wastes, or
2) may require pre-treatment to acceptable levels, or 3) may
impose charges based on the cost of transporting or treating
the wastes, including industrial cost of recovery charges, if
imposed.
Note 8 Minimum number of service units shall be one-half the
preceding years' service units. For a new establishment with
no water consumption history, the Utility will estimate water
consumption at full plant capacity and will set the minimum
service unit charge at 50% of plant capacity.
Note 9 250% of the computed minimum service unit charges.
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:859
Chapter 221
WEAPONS
§ 221-1. Restrictions on hunting.
§ 221-2. Restrictions on use of firearms. [Amended 2-10-86 by Ord.
No. 86-730]
Note
10
Where the industrial waste flow has less than one-half the
strength of average domestic waste, the daily flow of process
waste is greater than 100,000 gallons, and, at the option of the
EBSU, is introduced into the EBSU system only during hours
to be specified, the service charge unit shall be 0.75, and the
initial connection charge unit shall be 0.01.
Note
11
Unless otherwise noted, use shall be assumed to be for an 8
hours daily, 5 day week.
GENERAL NOTES REGARDING SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
1. Interest will be charged on delinquent accounts at the maximum
rate permitted by statute.
2. Charges for new installations, connections, inspections, etc., will
be made on the basis of actual cost to the Utility.
3. Employees working less than 20 hours per week shall be counted
as one-half.
4. Charges are levied in advance of service.
5. Sewer charges shall be reviewed and revised (if necessary) on a
semi-annual basis.
6. Extraneous flows originating from infiltration and inflow shall be
considered an equal burden and shall be equally apportioned
throughout the rate system.
7. Mixed use properties may be charged service charges and
connection charges based on each separate use. Allowance may be
made for overlapping usage.
A. No person shall hunt or kill wild birds or animals, other than destructive
animals and birds as defined in the fish and game laws of New Jersey,
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the shores of those bodies of water
commonly known as "Farrington Lake," "Weston's Mill Pond" and
"Lawrence Brook."
B. No person shall hunt or go for the purpose of hunting upon the lands of
another person, except with the written permission of that person. Such
permits shall not extend beyond the calendar year for which they are
issued.
§ 219-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-2
1:860
A. No person shall discharge a firearm within six hundred (600) feet of any
dwelling, house, school, place of worship, playground, public street or
highway, barn, out-building, field where domestic animals are grazing,
commercial or industrial development, parking area, or any other place
where people or animals customarily congregate. This section shall not
be construed to prohibit the use of firearms for the protection of life,
person or property or the discharge of firearms on any firing range
equipped with proper safeguards for the protection of persons and
property. Any firing range which is constructed in accordance with
range plans provided by the National Rifle Association shall be
considered as having proper safeguards.
B. No firearms may be carried in a loaded condition or discharged in any
part of East Brunswick Township except in the following designated
areas.
(1) Northwest of Fresh Ponds Road to the Public Service High Tension
Electric Line, bounded on Southwest by Irelands Brook, the
boundary line with South Brunswick Township; bounded on the
Northeast by the Henry Street Conservation Area and the end of
Hillcrest Avenue; and on the Southeast by Helair Drive.
(2) West of Crescent Avenue bounded on the South by Miller Avenue
and the boundary line of the Boro of Helmetta and on the North by
Old Stage Road to Helmetta Boulevard, and all property Southwest
of Helmetta Boulevard bounded on the Southeast by the Boro of
Helmetta boundary line, on the Northwest by Cranbury Road and
along the boundary lines between the Township of East Brunswick
and the Township of South Brunswick to the boundary line between
the Township of East Brunswick and the Township of Monroe.
(3) East of Edgeboro Road and Weston Place between Brick Plant Road
and the South River to the Southeast, the Raritan River to the
Northeast and North and the Lawrence Brook to the North.
(4) Southeast of Fresh Ponds Road to the New Jersey Turnpike
bounded on the Southwest by Hardenburg Lane; and on the
Northeast by Bog Brook, the boundary line with the Borough of
Milltown.
(5) From the intersection of Irelands Brook and Dunhams Corner Road
along the Easterly side of Dunhams Corner Road South-Southeast
to Cranbury Road, then 3,000 feet Northeast to the County
Fairgrounds, then in a North by Northwest direction to Irelands
Brook, following the same back to its intersection with Dunhams
Corner Road.
(a) No person shall possess or have under his control any arrow
with an explosive tip or poison arrow or any bow which is
drawn by mechanical means, unless he can establish that such
bow or arrow is possessed because of its historical or similar
value and is not intended for use.
§ 221-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-2
1:861
§ 221-3. Restrictions on bows and arrows. [Amended 2-10-86 by
Ord. No. 86-730]
§ 221-4. Exceptions. [Added 2-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-730]
Nothing in this section shall apply to the following activities:
§ 221-5. Posting of signs. [Added 2-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-730]
The Department of Public Safety shall be responsible for posting signs
on each road entering the Township indicating to persons entering the
Township by way of such roads that there are designated areas of the
Township in which the discharging of firearms is prohibited.
Chapter 223
WEED CONTROL
(b) No person shall discharge any arrow within three hundred
(300) feet of any dwelling, house, school, place of worship,
playground, public street or highway, barn, out-building, field
where domestic animals are grazing, commercial or industrial
development, parking areas, or any other place where people
or animals customarily congregate, except upon an archery
range equipped with proper safeguards for the protection of
persons and property.
(c) No bow shall be carried with an arrow strung or discharged in
East Brunswick Township, except in those areas enumerated in
Section 2-B.
A. No person shall possess or have under his control any arrow with an
explosive tip or poison arrow or any bow which is drawn by mechanical
means, unless he can establish that such bow or arrow is possessed
because of its historical or similar value and is not intended for use.
B. No person shall discharge any arrow within three hundred (300) feet of
any dwelling, house, school, place of worship, playground, public street
or highway, barn, out-building, field where domestic animals are
grazing, commercial or industrial development, parking areas, or any
other place where people or animals customarily congregate, except
upon an archery range equipped with proper safeguards for the
protection of persons and property.
C. No bow shall be carried with an arrow strung or discharged in East
Brunswick Township, except in those areas enumerated in Section 2-B.
A. Landowners hunting upon their own property in accordance with state
laws.
B. Farmers carrying and discharging firearms in the process of animal
control in accordance with state law.
§ 221-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-5
1:862
ARTICLE I
Noxious Plants
[Adopted as Sec. 11-8 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 223-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-12-76 by Ord. No. 75-14-N]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOXIOUS PLANT — Any plant likely to have an adverse effect on the health
or comfort of human beings, including but not limited to ragweed, poison
oak, poison ivy and sumac.
§ 223-2. Noxious plants declared a nuisance.
The growth or existence of any noxious plant in a public or private place is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health.
§ 223-3. Duty of owners and occupants.
No owner, occupant or other person having control over any parcel of land
shall cause or permit noxious plants to grow thereon.
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-3
1:863

ARTICLE II
Weed Control Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code]
Editor's Note: See Ch. l, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 223-4. Adoption of standard code by reference.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
township in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing penalties
for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A
copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 223-5. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this Article is described and
commonly known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 223-6. Copies on file.
Three (3) copies of the said Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk upon the introduction
of this Article and will remain on file there for use and examination by the
public so long as said Article is in effect.
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-6
1:865
Chapter 225
WELL DRILLING
§ 225-1. Permit required and fee.
Any person drilling a well shall be required to obtain a permit from the
Department of Health for which a fee of one hundred dollars ($100) shall be
charged.
§ 225-2. Interpretation and application of provisions; purposes.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other
purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for an adequate water
supply which is free from deleterious substances and fit for human
consumption, and to protect both private and public property owners from
false statements as to the depth wells are sunk and from excessive charges
based thereon.
§ 225-3. Relationship to statutory provision.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey or the Uniform Construction Code dealing with wells, except that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction or duty than is imposed or
required by such existing provisions of law, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 225-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WELL — An excavation, whether drilled, bored or cored, for water or in
the exploration for water. Drive point wells or hand dug wells are included
within this definition.
WELL DRILLER — A state licensed person, firm association or corporation
who engages in the drilling, digging, driving, boring coring, construction or
altering of any well.
§ 225-5. Minimum depth of wells.
If a well to be constructed on a lot of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or
less, such well shall be a driven-type well, to be drilled a minimum depth of
fifty (50) feet. In the event the lot size is larger than thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet, then dug wells of a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet shall be
permitted.
§ 223-6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 225-6
1:866
§ 225-6. Well casings.
The casing for all wells shall be steel pipe, plastic pipe or steel pipe with a
plastic liner, as approved by the Health Officer, the thickness and weight of
which, for the diameter required, shall conform to the minimum standards
for such pipe contained in the Plumbing Code of the Township of East
Brunswick and statutes of State of New Jersey.
§ 225-7. Pumps and seals.
Pumps for all wells drilled to a depth of fifty (50) feet or greater shall be
the kind and type commonly designated as "deep well pumps" and shall be
capable of delivering a sustained flow of at least five (5) gallons per minute
for a test period of four (4) hours. All wells shall be sealed with a patented
well seal of an approved type. Installation of the pump and seal shall be the
responsibility of a well driller licensed in the State of New Jersey.
§ 225-8. Plumbing of wells.
Upon the completion of any well, the well driller shall arrange to plumb or
sound the well to ascertain the correct depth of such well in the presence
of a municipal representative designated by the Township Health Officer or
his agent.
§ 225-9. Report.
Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the drilling of any well, a report
shall be filed by the well driller with the Township Health Officer, giving the
log (i.e., description of materials penetrated), the size and depth of the well,
the diameters and lengths of the casing and screen installed therein, the
static and pumping levels and yield of the well, and such other information
pertaining to the construction or operation of the well as may be required by
the Township Health Officer. The well driller shall also deliver or mail a copy
of this report to the owner of the well. This report shall be identical in all
respects to the report submitted to the Division of Water Policy and Supply
of the State Department as required by N.J.R.S. 58:A-14 and amendments
thereto, and may be submitted to the Township Health Officer or his agent
on the forms prescribed by the Division of Water Policy and Supply.
§ 225-10. Water analysis.
A. Water analysis.
(1) Within ten (10) days of the completion of any well, the well driller
or owner shall file a report of the analysis of the water from the well
with the Township Health Officer or his agent, which shall include
the following tests as a minimum.
(a) Bacteria.
(b) Nitrates.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:867
§ 225-11. Certification.
New wells installed within East Brunswick Township are required to be
certified by the Township Health Officer or his agent, prior to use.
Certification is based on compliance with all provisions contained in the
previous sections of this ordinance.
§ 225-12. Violations and penalties.
Any well driller violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500) or be imprisoned for a term of not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, for each offense, as the court may direct. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 228
ZONING
(c) Iron.
(d) Manganese.
(e) pH.
(f) Volatile organics.
(g) Heavy metals.
Water quality for above test must fall within recommended
analysis standards set forth by the E.P.A. and D.E.P.
(2) The costs for the above analysis shall be borne by the well driller or
owner. The report to be filed shall be a confirmed copy of the
original report made by the person, firm association, corporation,
or state agency who analyzed the water.
§ 225-10 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 225-12
1:868
ARTICLE I
Title; Interpretation; Intent; Definitions
§ 228-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of East Brunswick."
§ 228-2. Interpretation and intent.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is
not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or with any
rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the uses of building or
land, or with any private restrictions placed upon a property by covenant or
deed; provided, however, that where this chapter requires a greater width
or size of yards, courts or other open spaces or requires a lower height
of buildings or less number of stories or requires a greater percentage of
lot to be left unoccupied or imposes restrictions more extensive than ones
required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, the provisions
of the regulations in this chapter shall govern.
§ 228-3. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 6-13-61; 3-12-63;
amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-10; 5-13-91 by Ord. No. 91-47;
4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12; 8-23-93 by Ord. No. 93-46; 12-27-93 by
Ord. No. 93-73; 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23; 4-22-96 by Ord. No. 96-8;
12-23-96 by Ord. No. 96-41; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22; 2-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-8; 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-45; 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-2;
5-1-00 by Ord. No. 00-11; 8-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-15; 8-27-01 by
Ord. No. 01-28; 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12; 8-26-02 by Ord. No. 02-20;
5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07; 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25; 8-28-06 by
Ord. No. 06-28; 5-9-11 By Ord. No. 11-07; 09-21-15 by Ord. No.
15-16; 11-28-16 by Ord. No. 16-20; 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22;
10-9-17 by Ord. No. 17-34; 8-13-18 by Ord. No. 18-18; 12-10-18 by
Ord. No. 18-39]
Meanings. For the purpose of this Ordinance, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, the term "shall" indicates a mandatory
requirement, and the term "may" indicates a permissive action. The singular
shall also mean the plural and person(s) shall also mean other legal entities.
All definitions in Chapter 132, Land Use Procedures, shall also apply to
this Ordinance. Certain words and terms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose thereof as follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure detached from
a principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal building or use. No accessory structure
shall have cooking facilities installed therein or be used for dwelling
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:869
purposes.[Added 8-26-02 by Ord. No. 02-20; amended 5-9-11 by Ord.
No. 11-07]
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use or building, the purpose of which
is incidental to that of a main use or building on the same lot.[Amended
8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
ADULT CABARET — (1) An establishment devoted to adult entertainment,
either with or without a liquor license, presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas; (2) an establishment that
features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainers for observation by patrons.[Added
7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23]
ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or a distinct part of a
facility which is licensed by the New Jersey State Department of Health
to provide preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services
under medical supervision to meet the needs of functionally impaired adult
patients. Adult day care facilities provide services to patients for a period
of time which does not exceed 12 hours during any calendar day.[Added
5-1-00 by Ord. No. 00-11]
AGRICULTURE — Land shall be deemed to be an agricultural use when
devoted to the production for sale of plants and animals useful to man;
including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and feed crops;
dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock;
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats,
including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals, trees
and forest products, and which meets the requirements of the "Farmland
Assessment Act".[Added 6 27 83 by Ord. No. 83 508]
ALLEY — A service road that provides a secondary means of access to
lots.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTERS (ATC) — A permitted alternative
treatment center authorized to grow and/or provide registered qualifying
patients with medicinal marijuana in accordance with N.J.S.A. 24:61-1 et
seq. or to sell or dispense marijuana pursuant to New Jersey Law.[Added
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-39]
APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent, self-contained living space intended for or
occupied by one family or household in a building containing other dwelling
units.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
ATRIUM HOUSE — A single-family dwelling unit which may be structurally
joined to at least one but not more than two other similar dwelling units,
not exceeding one story or 20 feet in height. All major rooms in such a unit
open onto a central court or atrium surrounded by three or four sides of the
unit.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
AUTO CAB — Means and includes any automobile or motor car with a
carrying capacity of not more than 9 passengers, not including the driver,
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:870
used in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or public highways of this State, and which is hired by
charter or for a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed
period, or to transport passengers to a specified place or places, or which
charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between operator and the
passenger.[Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — General repair, rebuilding, or
reconditioning of engines, and other mechanical parts of motor vehicles,
collision service, body repair and frame straightening, painting and
upholstering, vehicle steam cleaning and undercoating. No repair or sales
of trucks shall be permitted.[Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22;
amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR — Minor repairs, incidental replacement
of parts and motor service to motor vehicles excluding trucks.[Added
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22; amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD — An area where motor vehicles are
disassembled, dismantled or junked, or where vehicles not in operable
condition, or used parts of motor vehicles are stored.[Added 10-27-97 by
Ord. No. 97-22]
AWNING SIGN — A fireproof space frame structure with translucent
flexible reinforced vinyl covering designed in awning form, but whose
principal purpose and use is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated
by fluorescent or other light sources in fixtures approved under National
Electrical Codes and BOCA code.[Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
BANQUET FACILITY — A banquet facility shall be incorporated as an
extension of a restaurant and provides a dining facility for gatherings of
large groups of people usually for special occasions such as weddings, bar
mitzvahs, etc. which are held in a private room. The arrangements for such
gatherings are made in advance.[Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No. 83-494]
BAR — A portion of a restaurant or hotel establishment in which the sale of
alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages is accessory to the sale of food and/
or meals.[Added 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23]
BILLBOARD — A freestanding sign that identifies or communicates a
message related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a
commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.[Added
2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-2]
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured from the outside of
the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings
on a lot.[Added 10-26-87 by Ord. No. 87-871]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:871
point of the roof for flat roofs; to the mean height level (between the eaves
and ridge) for gable and hipped roofs; and to the deck line for mansard
roofs.
BUSINESS — Any lawful commercial endeavor to engage in the
manufacturing, purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of goods and/or the
provision of services.[Added 8-26-02 by Ord. No. 02-20]
CANTILEVER — An overhanging part of a structure supported at one end
only.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-05]
CARGO CONTAINER — A pre-manufactured storage facility designed to
hold or enclose commodities, be carried on a motor vehicle, or be
transported by rail car or ship.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign whose informational content can be changed
or altered by manual or electric, electromechanical, or electronic
means.[Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
CHIEF CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Chief Construction Official of the
Division of Construction Inspection and any of his duly authorized deputies,
assistants, and representatives.[Amended 6-26-67 by Ord. No. 67-8 K;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-89]
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and
a constitution and by-laws.[Added 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A form of planned development that permits a
reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in
the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase
in the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is
devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally
sensitive features or agriculture.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-28;
amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
COMMERCIAL USE — Activity involving the sale of goods or services
carried out for profit.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — All trucks and trailers, loaded or unloaded,
buses or other vehicles used for commercial purposes and/or with linear
measurements greater than any one of the following: 20 feet in length,
seven feet in width excluding rearview mirrors, or eight feet in height
excluding radio antenna. Also included are all cabs or tractors capable of
pulling a trailer. This does not include privately used campers and motor
homes or vehicles in the course of making deliveries or rendering services
requested by an adjacent resident.[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-819;
amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Includes the term common recreation lands. An
open space area within or related to a site designated as a development,
and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners
of the development. Common open space may contain such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:872
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Includes the term
common recreation lands.[Added 4-10-72 by Ord. No. 72-8EE]
CONTIGUOUS ACRES — The lands that abut each other or are separated
only by streets, ways, easements, pipelines, electric power lines, conduits,
or rights-of-way owned in fee or less than fee by third parties.[Added
5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store offering for sale convenience
goods, such as prepackaged food items, tobacco, periodicals, limited
grocery items and other household goods.[Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No.
17-22]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Single-family dwellings on individual
lots requiring no public or community open space. Characterized by the
division of the entire subject parcel into lots.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No.
01-28]
COTTAGE INDUSTRY — Sale, display and fabrication or assembly of sitecrafted
items including silver smithing, metal smithing, fine cabinet work,
cloth weaving, ceramics, pottery, leather working and printing subject to
the following[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-28]:
DAY CARE — See Nursery School.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.[Added 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in use of any building
or other structure, or land or extension of use of land for which permission
may be required pursuant to this act.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that directs the movement or placement
of pedestrians or vehicular traffic on a lot.[Added 5-29-84 by Ord. No.
84-570]
No article may be sold, offered for sale, except as may be crafted onsite.
Articles shall be site-crafted items of a nature distinct from general
manufacturing.
A.
No business may be conducted with members of the public later than
10:00 p.m.
B.
Not more than three persons who are not a resident of the property may
be employed.
C.
No firearms may be used in any form in said business including repair
of nonfunctioning parts.
D.
The following examples, but not an exhaustive list of uses which are
prohibited cottage industries: motor vehicle repair facilities, excavating
business, outdoor storage yards/junkyards, restaurants, repair shops.
E.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:873
DIRECTORY SIGN — A freestanding sign which lists the occupants or
tenants of a site or building.[Added 5-29-84 by Ord. No. 84-570]
DRIVE IN RESTAURANT — A public eating facility where patrons purchase
food while outside the physical premises of the establishment, whether or
not such patrons purchase such food while in their cars from a waiter or
waitress or from an employee over a counter for consumption either within
the patron's car or away from the premises, and which does not require the
patron to enter the building in order to be served.[Added 1-24-77 by Ord.
No. 76-8JJJ, amended 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12]
DRIVEWAY — An improved space providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure and accessory to the use
served.[Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-8]
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to two or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.[Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No.
02-12]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof used or designated
as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other
and doing their own cooking in the building, including apartment houses,
apartment hotels and flats, but not including automobile courts or hotels as
defined by this subsection.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family. A single-family dwelling contains only
one kitchen.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-7]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building where
the individual family units are entirely separated by vertical walls or
horizontal floors, unpierced except for access to the outside or to a common
basement.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen
facilities comprising an independent, self-contained living space intended
for or occupied by one family or household.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION LINES — Lines for the transmission of
electrical power other than those lines required for the furnishing and
conveyance of electrical power to individual properties and users within the
Township of East Brunswick.[Added 10-27-71 by Ord. No. 71-8DD]
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic or other powered device
that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person
inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic
cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe.[Added 2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING EQUIPMENT — The physical device that
provides a connection from a power source to an electric vehicle.[Added
4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION — A public or private space that
is served by electric vehicle charging equipment that has as its primary
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:874
purpose the transfer of electricity to a battery or other energy storage
device in an electric vehicle.[Added 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
EXCAVATING BUSINESS — A business involved with the removal or
recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rock, minerals, mineral
substances or organic substances other than vegetation, from water or land
on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface, whether
exposed or submerged.[Added 8-23-93 by Ord. No. 93-46]
FACADE SIGN — A sign attached to, painted on or erected against the
exterior wall or window of a building or an awning.[Added 5-29-84 by
Ord. No. 84-570]
FAMILY — One or more persons living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit, and sharing common living, sleeping, bathrooms, cooking and eating
facilities, as distinguished from individuals or groups occupying a hotel,
rooming house, club or fraternity or sorority house.[Amended 5-9-11 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.).[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — A public eating facility where patrons
purchase food while within the physical premises of the restaurant, or from
an attached drive-through facility, which is obtained by self-service or from
an employee of the establishment over a counter, for consumption either
within the establishment or away from the premises. Food is usually served
in edible containers, wrappers or other disposable containers.[Added
5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29; amended 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas.[Added 8-14-00
by Ord. No. 00-15]
FLOOR AREA — See "gross floor area" definition.[Amended 5-9-11 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings
or structures compared to the total area of the site.[Added 9-24-84 by
Ord. No. 84-604]
FORESTRY — Establishments engaged in the operation of timber tracts,
tree farms, forest nurseries and related activities such as forestation
services and the gathering of gums, barks, balsam needles, and maple sap,
and which meets the requirements of the Farmland Assessment Act.[Added
6-27-83 by Ord. No. 83-508]
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by poles, columns, upright or
foundations affixed to the ground but not attached to any part of any
building.[Added 5-29-84 by Ord. No. 84-570]
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:875
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation"; provided, however, in
designating a wetland, the three-parameter approach (that is, hydrology,
soils and vegetation) enumerated in the April 1, 1987, interim final draft
"Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual," developed by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, and any subsequent amendments
thereto shall be used.[Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-37]
GARAGE — A building used for the housing or storing of self-propelled
motor vehicles, or unit portions thereof, designated for use on public
highways.
GARAGE SALES — By way of exception to the foregoing, any person may
conduct not more than three sales, commonly known as "garage, porch,
attic, basement or lawn sales," on his or her premises in any one calendar
year. The sale shall generally be known as a "garage sale," which is defined
as a public sale of used personal property in a residential area of the
municipality, commencing not earlier than 9:00 a.m., terminating by
sundown and extending no more than a three-day period. Garage sales shall
offer only used items and personal property owned by the resident of the
property when the sale is held. No new merchandise shall be offered for
sale nor may merchandise from sources other than homes be brought in
and offered for sale.[Amended 12-8-75 by Ord. No. 75-8WW; 11-8-82
by Ord. No. 82-475; 7-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-591]
GAS STATION — Buildings and premises used for the retail dispensing or
sales of vehicular fuels, and minor repair of motor vehicles excluding trucks,
and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants,
tires, batteries and similar vehicle accessories. (Includes automobile service
station).[Added 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
GAS STATION MINIMART — A facility associated with the sale of gasoline
products, that also offers for sale prepackaged food items and tangible
consumer goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer.[Added
8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
GRADE — The mean average finished ground elevation at the front of the
building.
GRAPHIC — Any pictorial, illustrative form of communication utilized to
identify or bring attention to a specific premise. This communication may
be in the form of a company logo, artwork, illumination or other pictorial
representation.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage intended for and used by the private
motor vehicles of the families resident upon the premises. Where
permitted, such garage may include commercial vehicles of the number,
size and capacity specified in this chapter. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord.
No. 68-8M]
A.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage not included within the definition of a
"private garage."
B.
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:876
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from
the centerline of a wall separating two buildings.[Added 4-11-88 by Ord.
No. 88-819]
HEALTH CLUB — A facility where members or nonmembers use equipment
or space for the purpose of physical exercise.[Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No.
17-22]
HEAVY WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or remove other vehicles which
have registered gross vehicle weights in excess of 10,000 pounds.[Added
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
HIGH VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION TOWERS — Large metal
towers used to support high voltage electrical transmission wire.[Added
10-27-71 by Ord. No. 71-8DD]
HOME OCCUPATION —
Any lawful use customarily conducted for profit entirely within a
dwelling and carried on solely by the inhabitants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof, subject to the
following: [Amended 11-8-82 by Ord. No. 82-475; 11-12-91 by Ord.
No. 91-108]
No article may be sold, offered for sale, except as may be produced
by members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling.
1.
No machinery or equipment may be used which will cause
electrical or other interference with radio and television reception
in adjacent residences or cause offensive noise, odor, vibration,
heat or glare.
2.
No advertising sign may be displayed. [Amended 11-12-91 by
Ord. No. 91-108]
3.
No permitted home occupation may be conducted with members of
the public later than 10:00 P.M.
4.
There shall be no external display of goods. [Added 11-12-91 by
Ord. No. 91-108]
5.
Not more than one person who is not a resident in the dwelling may
be employed. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
6.
There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home
occupation. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
7.
No such use shall require external alterations to the dwelling other
than those necessary to provide barrier-free access. [Added
11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
8.
A.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:877
HORTICULTURE — Land shall be deemed to be in horticulture use when
devoted to the production for sale of fruits of all kinds, including grapes;
nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery; floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products, and which meets the requirements of the "Farmland Assessment
Act."[Added 6-27-83 by Ord. No. 83-508]
HOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public
for compensation, and which is open to transient guests and is not a
rooming or boarding house.[Amended 10-9-17 by Ord. 17-34]
JUNKYARD — The use of any lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of
junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of structures, automobiles or other vehicles,
equipment and machinery or parts thereof; provided, however, that this
definition shall not be deemed to include any of the foregoing uses which
are accessory and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in any zones.
The term "junkyard" as herein defined includes automobile wrecking yards.
KITCHEN — Any room principally used, intended or designed to be used
for cooking or the preparation of food. The presence of a range or oven, or
utility connections suitable for servicing a range or oven, and/or a full size
Any deliveries of materials to or from the residence shall be made
by either car, station wagon or other six-wheel vehicle or van and
shall only occur during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
9.
No firearms may be used in any form in said business including
repair of non-functioning parts. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No.
91-108]
10.
Customer/client parking shall not interfere with residential parking
on the street. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
11.
Not more than one home occupation shall be conducted on an
individual lot. [Added 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
12.
Prohibited Occupations in Home. The following are examples, but not
an exhaustive list, of uses which are prohibited home occupations:
clinics, hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, coffee shops, tourist
homes, animal hospitals, motor vehicle repair facilities, excavating
business, outdoor storage yards, medical offices, real estate brokers,
dental offices, chiropractor offices. [Amended 1-31-83 by Ord. No.
83-489; 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
B.
Permitted Occupations in Homes. The following are examples, but not
an exhaustive list, of uses which are home occupations: a studio of
instruction for art, music, dance, ceramics, sculpture or any academic
subject provided there are not more than four non-residents present
at any one time; a nursery school or baby-sitting service permitted
as a home occupation under state law; sewing or clothing alteration;
offices of accountant, bookkeeper, lawyer, architect, engineer, planner.
[Amended 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-108]
C.
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:878
sink and/or a dishwasher shall be considered as establishing a kitchen. The
existence of more than one range, sink and/or dishwasher within the same
room will meet the definition of one kitchen.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
LANDSCAPE BUFFER — A strip of land extending along the lot's property
lines restricted to landscape elements and which may include plantings,
earth berms, and lawns and which may include natural features, sculpture,
signs, lighting and pedestrian or bicycle pathways. It shall not include
motor vehicle parking or driveways, except driveways connecting adjacent
parking areas or to provide access from the street, may cross a landscape
buffer. The width of the landscape buffer shall be measured at right angles
to the lot line.[Added 10-26-87 by Ord. No. 87-871; amended 4-11-88
by Ord. No. 88-819]
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTING — A business that deals with the design
and installation of landscapes which shall include planting of lawns, trees,
shrubs and the addition of decorative features to the land. The business
may also include grading and clearing of land to facilitate planting of lawns
or the installation of other landscape materials. Also includes businesses
involved in the maintenance of grass and landscaping.[Added 8-23-93 by
Ord. No. 93-46]
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Means and includes the business of
carrying passengers for hire by auto cab.[Added 8-29-89 by Ord. No.
89-51]
LOADING SPACE — An off street space or berth on the same lot with a
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street primarily designed to provide
vehicular access to abutting residential properties.[Added 8-28-06 by
Ord. No. 06-28]
LOFT — The floor placed between the roof and the floor of the uppermost
story within a single-family detached dwelling, the floor area of which is
not more than one-third of the floor area of the story above which it is
placed.[Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
Corner lots have a front yard for each street that it abuts.[Added 5-9-11
by Ord. No. 11-07]
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot covered by buildings and
structures and all other man-made improvements on the ground surface
which are more impervious than the natural surface, such as paving,
driveways, etc. In instances where a building is elevated and parking is
placed under the building both the parking area and building footprint area
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:879
are included in the total lot coverage calculation..[Added 10-26-87 by
Ord. No. 87-871; amended 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-819]
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line, provided that in triangular lots having no rear lot line, the
distance shall be measured to the midpoint of a line parallel to the front lot
line, which shall be not less than 10 feet in length measured between its
intersections with the side lot lines.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public
space.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
LOT SIZE AVERAGING — A design technique permitting one or more lots
in a subdivision to be undersized, providing the same number of lots in
the same subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area.[Added
8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-28]
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal width or the horizontal width at the
setback line, both measured at right angles to the lot depth, whichever is
less.
MASSAGE PARLOR — A place where persons pay either a membership fee
or an admission fee or any other fee, and where the activity on the premises
includes touching, massaging or rubbing of specified anatomical areas or
by which specified sexual activities are permitted or encouraged.[Added
12-13-82 by Ord. No. 82-480]
MEDICINAL MARIJUANA PROGRAM (MMP) — The program within the
Department of Health and Senior Services, which is responsible for the
administration and implementation of activities related to the New Jersey
Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act.[Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No.
18-39]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods over land. Includes the terms
automobile, motorcycle, truck and vehicle.[Added 8-11-03 by Ord. No.
03-25]
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES — Any temporary or permanent
structure, stand, platform, booth, stall, box, machine or other device used
for the distribution of newspapers, magazines or other printed materials
which are operated by coins and which do not have a salesperson
present.[Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment in which at least one of the principal
activities conducted within the premises is devoted to music, dancing or
entertainment (including, but not limited to, music played by a disc jockey,
live bands or other forms of live entertainment) and in which meals,
refreshments or alcoholic and/or non-alcoholic beverages may be served,
irrespective of whether or not such establishment charges an admission
fee or cover charge to gain entry. A "restaurant-banquet" facility as a
conditional use under § 228-8.1 of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:880
deemed to be a "nightclub" for purposes of this Zoning Ordinance.[Added
7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.[Added 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-45]
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which was erected legally, but which
does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and
regulations.[Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
NURSERY SCHOOL — An establishment providing for the care, supervision,
and protection of children. Also referred to as day care or preschool.[
Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
OPEN LANDS — That portion of land including any farm-related dwelling
located thereon, that is voluntarily deed-restricted by the landowner for
agricultural use or open space conservation use in order to qualify for the
open lands ratio bonus in a planned development pursuant to § 228-6.06B
and C of this chapter.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-28; amended
5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land and/or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of land.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
OPEN SPACE RATIO (O.S.R.) — The total area of the site not covered
by buildings divided by the gross area of the project site, which thereby
establishes the maximum permitted building footprint coverage allowed by
zone.[Added 9-24-84 by Ord. No. 84-604]
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The keeping, in an area not enclosed by a building,
of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more
than 24 hours.[Added 10-26-87 by Ord. No. 87-871; amended 4-11-88
by Ord. No. 88-819; 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.[Added
12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than 9 x 18 feet, either within a
structure or garage or in the open, and exclusive of driveways or access
drives, for the parking of a motor vehicle.[Amended 12-23-68 by Ord. No.
68-8U; 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-33]
PARSONAGE — The permanent place of residents of the pastor, minister or
religious leader of a congregation.[Added 9-21-15 by Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:881
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services to individuals generally related to the care of the person or his
or her personal needs, such as beauty and barber shops and tailor
shops.[Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — A building or structure devoted to the gathering
together of persons for a common reason, such as legislative, religious,
civic, educational, recreational or social purposes.[Added 9-21-15 by Ord.
15-16]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Encompasses the terms "planned unit
development," "planned unit residential development," "residential cluster,"
"planned commercial development" or "planned industrial
development."[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
PLANNED SENIOR CITIZEN RESIDENCE (APSCR) DEVELOPMENT —
An age-restricted planned development that provides common amenities,
primarily of a social and recreational nature, and that is consistent with the
requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No.
01-28]
PORCH — A roofed open area, which may be screened but many not contain
heat or air conditioning, attached to the outside of a building. A porch may
not be more than 50% enclosed by walls.[Added 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOILS — Soils that are designated as prime
farmland by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, and the Soil Survey of Middlesex County.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord.
No. 01-28]
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — A member of a recognized profession
involving the dispensation of a service that involves either some skill or
knowledge, including doctors or physicians, dentists, architects,
professional engineers, lawyers, musicians, etc. The issuance of a state
license for regulations of any gainful occupation need not be deemed
indicative of professional standing. A distinction is made between purveyors
of professions and purveyors of merchandise or repair of
articles.[Amended 5 24 71 by Ord. No. 71-8BB; 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports and leisure-time activities, and operated as a business and
open to the public for a fee or operated by a nonprofit organization and
open only to bona fide members and guests of such nonprofit organization
or open to the general public.[Added 12-23-2019 by Ord. No. 19-41A]
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.[Added
12-23-96 by Ord. No. 96-41]
RECYCLING CENTER — Any facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing and transferring source-separated
nonputrescible or source-separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:882
glass, paper, plastic containers, and corrugated and other cardboard, or
other recyclable materials approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection as contained in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.12, or any subsequent statutory
amendment to same, as hereinafter adopted.[Added 12-23-96 by Ord. No.
96-41]
RESTAURANT — A public eating facility where patrons are first seated at
tables, booths or counters, after which food ordered by them is served to
the patrons by waiters or waitresses at such tables, booths or counters.
The term "restaurant" does not include drive-in restaurants or fast-food
restaurants as otherwise defined in this section. A cafeteria-type operation
where food and/or beverages are consumed within the restaurant building
constitutes a restaurant.[Added 2-27-67 by Ord. No. 67-8H; amended
1-24-77 by Ord. No. 76-8JJJ; 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29; 4-14-93 by
Ord. No. 93-12]
RETAIL — A business that provides goods to the consumer, including goods
sold at wholesale.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
RETAIL ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any
establishment that sells or offers for sale electronic smoking devices and/or
products designed for consumption through inhalation.[Added 2-10-2020
by Ord. No. 20-04]
ROOFTOP EQUIPMENT — Mechanical equipment such as heating,
ventilation or air-conditioning units placed on the roof of a building or
structure.[Added 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-37]
ROOFLINE — The profile of a roof; the maximum height of the actual
building cover.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or
roof eave, or on top of or extending above a parapet or any architectural
appendage above the roofline or roof eave.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
SCHOOL — A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and
secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary
schools, junior high schools, and high schools.[Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No.
01-28]
SETBACK — The required minimum distance between every structure and
the lot lines on the lot on which the structure is located.[Added 5-9-11 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
SETBACK LINE — The line that is the required minimum distance from any
lot line and that establishes the area within which the structure must be
erected or placed.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
SEX CLUB — A public or private place where persons pay either a
membership fee or an admission fee and where the activity on the premises
consists, in whole or in part, of direct sexual contact between and among
the patrons. Notwithstanding the fact that the owners or operators of a "sex
club" contend that the club is private, nevertheless such places shall be
deemed to be public if there is nothing about the operation to distinguish a
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:883
"member" from anyone else who seeks admittance to the premises.[Added
12-13-82 by Ord. No. 82-480]
SHED — A utility structure of 200 square feet or less that has walls and
a roof and is designed and used for storage. A metal storage container,
cargo container, train car, trailer and portable storage module are not a
shed.[Added 8-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-15; amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07; 8-13-18 by Ord. No. 18-18]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of architecturally unified commercial
establishments built on a site which is planned, developed, owned and
managed as a total entity.[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-819]
SIGN — Any structure or device designed or intended to convey information
or attract attention of persons not on the premises to the subject premises
in written or pictorial form. This includes but is not limited to letters, logos,
graphics and illumination.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
SIGNS, DOUBLE FACED — One (l) sign painted on both sides or two signs
of identical size and shape attached to each other back to back. Whenever
there is an angle between the two sign faces, it shall be considered as two
separate signs.
SOLID WASTE — Means garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials
resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from
domestic and community activities, and shall include all other waste
materials including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes
collected by swine producers licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own
farms.[Added 12-23-96 by Ord. No. 96-41]
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — Mean and include the plants, structures and
other real and personal property acquired, constructed or operated or to be
acquired, constructed or operated by any person pursuant to the provisions
of P.L. 1970, c. 39 (C. 13:1E et seq.), P.L. 1970, c. 40 (C. 48:13A-1 et seq.)
or any other act, including transfer stations, incinerators, resource recovery
facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal of solid
waste, and all vehicles, equipment and other real and personal property
and rights therein and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient
for the collection or disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.[Added
12-23-96 by Ord. No. 96-41]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS[Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No. 82-480]
— Means:
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals
2. Pubic area
3. Buttocks
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola;
a.
4.
A.
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:884
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES[Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No. 82-480]
— Means:
STORAGE — A space or place where goods, materials or personal property
is placed and kept.[Added 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
STORAGE YARD — Premises used for the safekeeping of automobiles, goods
or materials that are not abandoned.[Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next about it.[Added
11-28-16 by Ord. No. 16-20]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way (1) which is an existing State, county or municipal roadway, or
(2) which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or (3)
which is approved by official action as provided by this act, or (4) which is
shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording
officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and grant to such board
of the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved a or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street lines.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
STREET LINE — The line which separates the publicly owned or controlled
street right-of-way from the private property which abuts upon the street, as
distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge of pavement line. On a street
or highway shown on the adopted Master Plan of East Brunswick Township,
the "street line" shall be considered to be the proposed right-of-way line for
the street.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.[Amended 5-9-11 by Ord. No. 11-07]
TAVERN — An establishment where the serving of liquor by the drink to
the general public is the principal use and the serving of food or the sale
of packaged liquors, if any, are accessory to the principal use. All such
establishments shall conform to all Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations
of the State of New Jersey and the Township of East Brunswick.[Added
7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23]
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject
of a development application.[Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
b.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic areas,
buttocks, or female breasts.
C.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:885
TRACTOR-TRAILER — A vehicle type classified by the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission as "Class A" which typically consists of the combination
of a trailer having wheels only in the rear with the front supported by the
towing vehicle commonly known as the tractor.[Added 8-28-06 by Ord.
No. 06-28]
TRAILERS — A structure without a fixed foundation, standing on wheels,
towed or hauled by another vehicle and used for human occupancy,
materials, goods or objects storage. Includes the term portable storage
module.[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-819]
TRUCKING BUSINESSES, TERMINALS AND REPAIR SHOPS —
Establishments furnishing local or long-distance trucking or transfer
services. Also included are non-terminal facilities which specialize in truck
maintenance, repair and service. Terminal facilities include land and
buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle
to another or one party to another. The terminal facility may include storage
areas for trucks, and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated
with the terminal.[Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-10; amended 5-13-91
by Ord. No. 91-47]
USE — The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A use primarily engaged in
storage, and distribution of materials, supplies, equipment, parts, goods,
products, machinery, printed material, etc.[Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No.
91-10; amended 5-13-91 by Ord. No. 91-47]
WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or remove other vehicles usually so
damaged or disabled that they cannot proceed under their own
power.[Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, of uniform
width or depth on the same lot with a building or a group of buildings, which
open space lies between the principal building or group of buildings and
the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as herein permitted.
YARD FRONT — An area extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
When a lot is so situated that it abuts two nonintersecting streets, that area
which lies within the confines of the street line and the front of the building
shall be considered a "front yard." The depth of the "front yard" shall be
measured at right angles to the front line of the lot.[Amended 6-25-79 by
Ord. No. 79-139]
YARD, REAR — An area extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. When a
lot is so situated that it abuts two nonintersecting streets, that area which
lies within the confines of the street line and the rear of the building shall
be considered a "rear yard." The depth of a "rear yard" shall be measured at
right angles to the rear of the lot in the same manner as specified herein for
the measurement of lot depth.[Amended 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-139]
§ 228-3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-3
1:886
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot
and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front or rear lot
lines, as the case may be. The width of a "side yard" shall be measured at
right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, Chap. 291.[Amended 5-9-11 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:887

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 228-4. Designation of districts. [Amended 3-8-82 by Ord. No.
82-443; 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-452; 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-580;
8-14-84 by Ord. No. 84-598; 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918; 8-28-89 by
Ord. No. 89-63; 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39; 7-8-02 by Ord. No.
02-11]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of East Brunswick is hereby
divided into Twenty seven (27) types of districts as follows:
Symbol Names
RP Single Family Rural Preservation District [Added 1-14-80
by Ord. No. 79-203]
RP-2 Single-Family Rural Preservation Transition District [Added
8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-63]
R-l Single Family Rural Residence District
R-2 Single Family Suburban Residence District
R-3 Single Family Residence District
R-4 General Residence District
R-5 Residence District [Added 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39]
O-l Office, Professional and Apartment District
HR Historic District-Residence District [Added 8-25-75 by
Ord. No. 75-8-TT]
HC Historic District Commercial District [Added 8-25-75 by
Ord. No. 75-8-TT]
HRC Historic District - Residential/Commercial District [Added
8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-8-TT]
HRP Historic District - Residential/Preservation District [Added
8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-8-TT]
C-l Professional and Office District
C-2 Neighborhood Business District
C-3 General Commercial District
C-4 Highway Commercial District [Deleted 5-9-83 by Ord. No.
83-509]
C-5 Business Zone (Shopping Center) [Deleted 4-11-88 by
Ord. No. 88-918]
I/M Industrial/Manufacturing District [Added 3-8-82 by Ord.
No. 82-443]
P-I Planned Industrial Park District
§ 228-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-4
1:889
Symbol Names
HC-1 Neighborhood Highway Commercial District [Added
4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
HC-2 General Highway Commercial District [Added 4-11-88 by
Ord. No. 88-918]
HC-3 Highway Commercial Shopping Center District [Added
4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
OP-1 Office Professional District [Added 5-24-76 by Ord. No.
76-8DDD; amended 4-11-77 by Ord. No. 77-8LLL]
OP-2 Office Professional District [Added 7-25-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-000]
MXD Mixed Use District [Added 4-3-78 by Ord. No. 78-4]
O/I Office/Industrial Planned Development Option Zone [Added
4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-452]
MMH Modular Manufactured Houses and Mobile Manufactured
Houses [Deleted 10-10-16 by Ord. 16-18]
H-1 Hotel Convention Center [Added 8-14-84 by Ord. No.
84-598]
SCMXD Senior Citizen Mixed Use Planned Development [Added
7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-11]
§ 228-5. Adoption of Zoning Map. [Amended 9-12-66 by Ord. No.
66-8-F; 1-23-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-G; 6-26-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-K;
11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39; 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-25; 3-8-99 by
Ord. No. 99-6; 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-3; 3-26-01 by Ord. No. 01-16;
8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-30; 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-11; 6-28-10 by
Ord. No. 10-16; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20; 9-25-17 by Ord. 17-33]
Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk. Zoning map amendments are included in Article XXXIV.
A. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a
map entitled "Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick", dated
August 22, 1966, which accompanies and is hereby made a part of this
chapter, except that any application for a major subdivision which was
classified as such by the Planning Board on or before October 4, 1966,
shall be processed on the basis of the Zoning Map as it existed at the
time the application was classified.
B. The East Brunswick Township Council hereby adopts the Zoning Map
for the Township of East Brunswick, dated July 1978, in accordance
with a resolution of approval adopted by the East Brunswick Planning
Board. A copy of the Official Zoning Map is on file in the Township
Clerk's office. [Added 10-9-78 by Ord. No. 78-67]
§ 228-4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:890
C. Adoption of Zoning Map. The P-1 (Planned Industrial Park) District as
shown and described on the zoning map of the Township of East
Brunswick, dated July, 1978, is hereby enlarged to include that general
area bounded by Ryders Lane to the West, Sawmill Brook to the North
and the New Jersey Turnpike to the East, also known as Blocks 29.02
and 6.05, which is hereby rezoned to P-1 from R-3, notwithstanding the
fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on the zoning map.
[Added 9-10-79 by Ord. No. 79-169]
D. The OP-1 (Office Professional) District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July 1978 is
hereby enlarged to include Lot 17.04, Block 319, which is hereby
rezoned from P-1 to OP-1, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the zoning map. [Added 9-8-80 by Ord.
No. 80-284]
E. Adoption of Zoning Map. The OP-1 (Office Professional) District as
shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick, dated July, 1978, is hereby enlarged to include Block 131,
Lots 11.07, 11.08, 11.09, 12.04, a portion of 18.04 extending for a
distance of 400 feet from the center line of Summerhill Road, and
18.05, which area is more particularly referred to on a map entitled
"Proposed Expansion of OP-1 Zone" which was approved and adopted
by the East Brunswick Planning Board on August 6, 1980, and all of
which is hereby rezoned to OP-1 from R-2 and C-4, notwithstanding the
fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on the zoning map.
[Amended 9-22-80 by Ord. No. 80-289]
F. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-5 Business Zone (Shopping Center) as
shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Blocks 89.06,
101 and 101.01, Block 89, Lots 4.26, 4.27, 4.28 and 4.29, which plans
are more particularly referred to in a resolution adopted by the East
Brunswick Planning Board on December 17, 1980 which incorporated a
map showing the changes and all of which are hereby rezoned from C-3,
General Commercial District, to C-5 Business Zone (Shopping Center),
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the Zoning Map. [Added 1-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-323]
G. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 Single Family Residence District and
Zone as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick, dated July, 1978, is hereby enlarged to include that
general area bounded on the West by the westerly line of a newly
created lot consisting of 2.44 acres from Lot 25, Block 6.05, on the
Northwest by the northwest block line of Block 6.05, on the North by
Sawmill Brook, on the East by the New Jersey Turnpike, and on the
South by Tices Lane up to the Westerly line of the newly created lot,
which property is hereby rezoned from P-1 to R-3, notwithstanding the
fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map.
[Added 2-23-81 by Ord. No. 81-330]
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:891
H. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-4 single family residence district and
zone as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick, dated July, 1978, is hereby enlarged to include Lots
3.07, 3.10, 3.12, a portion of 4.07, 5.01 and 6.01, which property is
hereby rezoned from C-3 to R-4, notwithstanding the fact that the
enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. [Added
4-27-81 by Ord. No. 81-343]
I. Adoption of Zoning Map. The HR Historic Residential District and Zone
as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby enlarged to include property more
particularly described on Schedule A annexed hereto, which property is
hereby rezoned from Historic Residential/Commercial (HRC) to
Historic Residential (HR), notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. (See § 228-283E)
[Amended 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-405]
J. The M-2 General Industrial District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July, 1978, is
hereby enlarged to include all of that area previously zoned M-3,
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries for the M-2
General Industrial District are not shown. [Added 2-8-82 by Ord. No.
81-426]
K. Adoption of Zoning Map. The M-1 (Research and Limited
Manufacturing District) Zone as shown and described on the Zoning
Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby
deleted and all lands previously zoned M-1 are hereby rezoned P-1,
Planned Industrial Park District, notwithstanding the fact that the
enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. [Added 3-8-82
by Ord. No. 82-443]
L. Adoption of Zoning Map. The M-2 (General Industrial District) Zone as
shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby deleted and all lands previously
zoned M-2 are hereby rezoned I/M, Industrial/Manufacturing District,
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the Zoning Map. [Added 3-8-82 by Ord. No. 82-443]
M. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created an O/I (Office/
Industrial Planned Development) Option Zone in the area of Harts Lane
between Tices Corner Road, also known as Tices Lane and Kimberly
Road as more particularly set forth in Schedules A and B annexed
hereto, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July,
1978. [Added 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-452]
N. Adoption of Zoning Map: The C-4 (Highway Commercial District) Zone
as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby deleted and all lands previously
zoned C-4 are hereby rezoned C-3; General Commercial District;
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:892
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the Zoning Map. [Added 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509]
O. Adoption of Zoning Map. The OP-1 (Office Professional) Zone as shown
and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated July, 1978 is hereby enlarged to include all that area previously
zoned, VG-II (Village Green), R-2 (Single Family Suburban Residence)
between the existing zone line and the center line of relocated Ryders
Lane between Summerhill Road and Rues Lane, all as more particularly
shown on a map annexed hereto as Schedule A and as more particularly
described in a metes and bounds description annexed as Schedule B.
The Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick shall be deemed to
have been changed in accordance with this Ordinance notwithstanding
the fact that the enlarged boundaries for the OP-l Zone are not shown
thereon. (See § 228-280I, J) [Added 4-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-567]
P. Adoption of Zoning Map. The VG-II (Village Green) R-2 (Single Family
Suburban Residence) Zones are shown and described on the Zoning
Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July, 1978 are hereby
enlarged to include all that area previously zoned OP-l (Office
Professional) between the existing zone line and the center line of
relocated Ryders Lane between Summerhill Road and Rues Lane all as
more particularly shown on a map annexed hereto as Schedule A and as
more particularly described in a metes and bounds description annexed
as Schedule C. The Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick shall
be deemed to have been changed in accordance with this Ordinance
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries for the VG-II/R-2
Zones are not shown thereon. (See § 228-285A) [Added 4-25-84 by
Ord. No. 84-567]
Q. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 (Neighborhood Business) Zone as
shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby enlarged to include all that area
previously zoned OP-l bounded by the southerly side of Helmetta
Boulevard and the northerly side of Old Stage Road and as more
particularly described in Schedule A annexed hereto. The Zoning Map
of the Township of East Brunswick shall be deemed to have been
changed in accordance with this Ordinance notwithstanding the fact
that the enlarged boundaries for the C-2 Zone are not shown thereon.
This amendment is being made pursuant to a settlement of litigation
against the Township of East Brunswick. (See § 228-272B) [Added
7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-583]
R. Adoption of Zoning Map. The MMH (Modular Manufactured Housing
and Mobile Manufactured Housing) Zone is hereby created to include
all that area previously zoned R-1 (Single Family Rural Residence)
bounded by Helmetta Boulevard on the northeast, Cranbury Road on
the northwest, the municipal boundary between the Township of East
Brunswick and the Township of Monroe on the southwest, and as more
particularly described in the metes and bounds description annexed
hereto as Schedule A. The Zoning Map of the Township of East
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:893
Brunswick shall be deemed to have been changed in accordance with
this Ordinance notwithstanding the fact that the MMH Zone is not
shown thereon. This amendment is being made pursuant to a
settlement of litigation against the Township of East Brunswick. (See
§ 228-286A) [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-579]
S. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-1 (Single Family Rural Residence) Zone
as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 and as more particularly described on
Schedule A annexed hereto is hereby amended to include a VG-II
(Village Green II) option. The Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be deemed to have been changed in accordance with
this Ordinance notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries
for the Village Green II Option Zone are not shown thereon. This
amendment is being made pursuant to a settlement of litigation against
the Township of East Brunswick. [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-584]
T. (See § 228-285C) Adoption of Zoning Map. The I/M (Industrial/
Manufacturing) Zone as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick dated July, 1978 and as more particularly
shown on Schedule A annexed hereto is hereby amended to include a
Village Green II (VG-II) Option Zone subject to the following: [Added
7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-586]
(a) The zoning change will not become effective until all active mining
in the Zone has ceased, as certified to by the Township of East
Brunswick or until December 31, 1989, but in no event later than
December 31, 1989. The Township Engineer shall annually inspect
the subject property and shall report to the Township Council upon
receiving a report that active mining has ceased, the Township
Council shall forthwith certify by ordinance the effective date of the
change of zoning set forth herein. The Zoning Map of the Township
of East Brunswick shall be deemed to have been changed in
accordance with this Ordinance to provide the VG-II Option in the
subject property with a notation that the Township shall have the
responsibility of determining when active mining has ceased.
(b) No part of the tract described on Schedule A annexed hereto may
be developed to Village Green II standards until the Township has
certified that all active mining has ceased throughout the tract, or
until December 31, 1989, whichever is sooner.
(c) This amendment is being made pursuant to a settlement of
litigation against the Township of East Brunswick.
U. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created an MXD/R (Mixed Use
Development/Residential) Zone as more particularly described on the
metes and bounds description annexed hereto as Schedule A and
covering the tract known as Weingarten Turnpike Drive In as an Option
Zone for the existing O-l (Office), Professional and Apartment District
and C-3, General Commercial District. The Zoning Map of the Township
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:894
of East Brunswick shall be deemed to have been changed in accordance
with this Ordinance notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries for the MXD/R (Mixed Use Development/Residential) Zone
are not shown thereon. This amendment is being made pursuant to a
settlement of litigation against the Township of East Brunswick. (See
§ 228-287A, B) [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-585]
V. Adoption of Zoning Map. The MMH (Modular Manufactured Housing
and Mobile Manufactured Housing) Zone is hereby enlarged and
substituted for the MMH Zone on Block 324, Lot 1 which is bounded by
the southerly side of Helmetta Boulevard and the southeasterly side of
Cranbury Road to include all that area previously zoned R-1 (Single
Family Rural Residence) as more particularly described in the metes
and bounds description annexed hereto as Schedule A, contingent
nevertheless upon the following: [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-582;
amended 4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
1. In the event that no application for development of at least twentyfive
(25) acres in the MMH Zone covering Block 324, Lot 1 has been
filed with the East Brunswick Department of Planning and
Engineering by July 1, 1986, then the MMH zoning designation for
Block 324, Lot 1 shall be rescinded and that zoning shall revert to
R-1 (Single Family Rural Residence). [Amended 4-24-89 by Ord.
No. 89-12]
2. The Director of the Department of Planning and Engineering shall
certify to the Township Council on July 1, 1986 the extent to which
an application for development, if any, has been filed to provide low
and moderate income housing on Block 324, Lot 1. [Amended
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
3. In the event that the Director of the Department of Planning and
Engineering shall certify to the Township Council that an
application for development of low and moderate income housing
has not been filed for at least twenty-five (25) acres on Block 324,
Lot 1 by July 1, 1986, the zoning map of the Township of East
Brunswick shall be deemed to have been changed in accordance
with this Ordinance thereby deleting the MMH designation for
Block 324, Lot l and providing the MMH designation for the
property described in Schedule A annexed hereto. [Amended
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12]
4. This amendment is being made pursuant to a settlement of
litigation against the Township of East Brunswick.
W. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created an H-1 (Hotel -
Convention Center) option zone on lands bounded by Naricon Place to
the south, Route 18 to the west, Lawrence Brook to the north and
northwest and the New Jersey Turnpike to the east, notwithstanding
the fact that the boundary of the new H-1 option zone is not shown on
the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July, 1978.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:895
The following lot and block is to be removed from the H-1 Option Zone:
Block 2.02, Lot 2.15. [Added 8-14-84 by Ord. No. 84-598; amended
9-24-84 by Ord. No. 84-605]
X. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-3 (General Commercial) District and
Zone as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Block
26.01, a portion of Lot 7, and Lot 9.02 and the entirety of Lot 8 as more
particularly described on Schedule A annexed hereto, which property is
hereby rezoned from O-1 (Office, Professional and Apartment) to C-3,
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the Zoning Map. (See § 228-273I) [Added 3-11-85 by Ord. No.
85-646]
Y. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 Single Family Residence District (and
zone) as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated July 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Block 84, Lot 7.18, as
more particularly described on Schedule A annexed hereto, which
property is hereby rezoned from P-l (Planned Industrial Park) to R-3
(Single Family Residence), notwithstanding the fact the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. (See § 228-268F) [Added
11-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-792]
Z. Adoption of Zoning Map. The O-1 (Office, Professional and Apartment
District) and Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Block 85, Lots
1, 2, 5.03 as more particularly described on a map on file in the Office of
the Township Clerk, which property is hereby rezoned from P-1
(Planned Industrial Park) to O-1 (Office, Professional and Apartment
District), notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not
shown on the Zoning Map. [Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-814]
AA. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 (Neighborhood Business) Zone as
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July,
1978 is hereby enlarged to include Block 322.05, Lots 1 and 2, as more
particularly described on the East Brunswick Township Tax Map, which
property is hereby rezoned from P-1 (Planned Industrial Park) to C-2
(Neighborhood Business), notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. [Added 12-22-86 by
Ord. No. 86-812]
BB. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-1 (Single Family Rural Residence)
District and Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July, 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Block 25, Lot
2, bounded by Ryders Lane, the border with the Borough of Milltown,
and Westons Mill Pond, as more particularly shown on the East
Brunswick Township Tax Map, which property is hereby rezoned from
R-3 (Single Family Residence District) to R-1 (Single Family Rural
Residence District) notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. (See § 228-266E) [Added
12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-811]
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:896
CC. Adoption of Zoning Map. The Senior Citizen Housing Option Zone
referred to in § 228-42.1 et seq. of the East Brunswick Township Code
shall include Lots 5 and 6 in Block 322.61, located at the intersection of
Cranbury Road and Rues Lane, and Lots 1 and 2 in Block 86, located at
Ryders Lane, as more particularly reflected on maps on file in the Office
of the East Brunswick Township Clerk, notwithstanding the fact that the
Senior Citizen Housing Option Zone is not reflected to cover these
properties on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated
July, 1978. (See § 228-288A) [Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-809;
amended 5-22-89 by Ord. No. 89-28]
DD. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 (Single-Family Residence District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated July 1978) is hereby enlarged to include Block 85, Lots 1, 2 &
5.03 as more particularly described on a map on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk, which property is hereby rezoned from O-1 (Office,
Professional and Apartment District), to R-3 (Single-Family Residence
District,) notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not
shown on the zoning map. [Added 4-25-88 by Ord. No. 88-921,
Reiterated 7-9-90 by Ord. No. 90-37]
EE. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 (Neighborhood Commercial) district
and zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July 1978 is hereby enlarged to include Lots 37 and 38
in Block 307.12, as more particularly shown on Schedule A annexed
hereto, which property is hereby rezoned from RP (Single Family Rural
Preservation) to C-2 (Neighborhood Commercial), notwithstanding the
fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map.
(See § 228-272D) [Added 2-14-89 by Ord. No. 89-991]
FF. Adoption of Zoning Map. The RP (Single-family rural preservation
districts) and Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July 1978 is hereby enlarged to include a portion of
Lots 7.01, 10.01, 11, 12 and 13.03 and all of Lot 13.02 in Block 309.14
on Riva Avenue and Patrick Street, as more particularly shown on
Schedule A annexed hereto, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the zoning map, by rezoning from C-2.
[Added 4-10-89 by Ord. No. 89-4]
GG. Adoption of Zoning Map. The P-1 (Planned Industrial Park) District and
Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated July 1978 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
322.05, Lots 1 and 2, as more particularly described on the East
Brunswick Tax Map, which property is hereby rezoned from C-2
(Neighborhood Business) to P-1 (Planned Industrial Park),
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the Zoning Map. [Added 7-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-44]
HH. Adoption of Zoning Map. The RP-2 (Single-Family Rural Preservation
Transition) District and Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick dated July 1978 and as amended is hereby
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:897
enlarged to include Block 308.21, Lot 18.24, as more particularly
described on the East Brunswick Tax Map, which property is hereby
rezoned from C-2 (Neighborhood Business) to RP-2 (Single-Family
Rural Preservation Transition) notwithstanding the fact that the
enlarged boundaries are not shown on the zoning map. [Added
8-30-89 by Ord. No. 89-68]
II. Adoption of Zoning Map. The HC-2 (General Highway Commercial)
District and Zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated July 1978 and as amended is hereby enlarged to
include lot 1 in block 713.02, as more particularly described on the East
Brunswick Tax Map, which property is hereby rezoned from R-3 (Single
Family Residence) to HC-2 (General Highway Commercial),
notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries are not shown on
the zoning map. [Added 5-14-90 by Ord. No. 90-17]
JJ. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 lands on Riva Avenue are to be
rezoned to RP in accordance with the Master Plan adopted on April 4,
1990. These include Bl. 310, portions of lots 37, 38, and 39, as more
particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-266.1(B)) [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-60]
KK. Adoption of Zoning Map. Portions of land located on the following
streets are to be rezoned in accordance with the Master Plan adopted
on 4-9-90, as more particularly described on pages annexed hereto:
Smith Farm (Refer to section 228-268(G)), Church Lane (Refer to
section 228-266.1(D) &(E)), Tices Lane (W. of Tpk.)(Refer to section
228-280(O)), W. Prospect (Refer to section 228-280(K) & (L)), Cranbury
Road (Refer to section 228-280(P)), and Vo-Tech (Refer to section
228-280(M) & (N)), Main St.(Refer to section 228-272(E)), Harts Lane
(I/M - P-I Boundary)(Refer to sections 228-278(B), 279(C) & (D)), N.W.
Corner of Milltown Rd. & 18 (Refer to section 228-273.1(A) & (C)), and
Edgeboro & 18 (Refer to section 228-273.1(B)). [Added 11-19-90 by
Ord. No. 90-61]
LL. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-5 (residence) District and zone is
hereby created and shown on the zoning map of the Township of East
Brunswick to include the Blocks and Lots as more particularly
described on a map on file in the office of the Township Clerk, and as
more particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-269.1) [Added 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39]
MM.Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated July 1978 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include that
portion of Block 87.33, Lot 1, in accordance with the Town Green
Amendment of the Comprehensive Master Plan. These lands include the
Blocks and Lots as more particularly described on a map and a metes
and bounds description on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and
as more particularly described on pages annexed hereto (Refer to
section 228-272) [Added 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-25]
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:898
NN. Adoption of Zoning Map. The VG-I Village Green I District and zone as
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated July
1978 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include all of Block 87, Lots
10.02, 10.03 in accordance with the Comprehensive Master Plan. The
R-2 and Town Green designations for the property is deleted. These
lands include the Block and Lots as more particularly described on a
map and a metes and bounds description on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed
hereto. (Refer to section 228-289) [Added 3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-6]
OO. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District and
zone is hereby enlarged and shown on the zoning map of the Township
of East Brunswick to include the Blocks and Lots as more particularly
described on a map on file in the office of the Township Clerk, and as
more particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-272G) [Added 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-3]
PP. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 (Single Family Residence District) and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include lands
formerly zoned OP-1. These lands include the Block and Lots as more
particularly described on a map and a metes and bounds description on
file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly
described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to sections 228-268I)
[Added 3-26-01 by Ord. No. 01-16]
QQ. Adoption of Zoning Map. The RP Rural Preservation District and zone
as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated
March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include lands
formerly zoned R-1, R-3, OP-1, C-2 and MMHC in accordance with a
Master Plan Amendment to the Comprehensive Master Plan. These
lands include the Block and Lots as more particularly described on a
map and a metes and bounds description on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed
hereto. (Refer to sections 228-266.1.) [Added 8-27-01 by Ord. No.
01-30]
RR. Adoption of Zoning Map. The SCMXD (Senior Citizen Mixed Use
Planned Development) District and zone is hereby created and shown
on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick to include the
Blocks and Lots as more particularly described on a map on file in the
Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on
pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.1) [Added 7-8-02 by
Ord. No. 02-11]
SS. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R1 Single Family Rural Residence District
and zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to
include lands formerly zoned RP these lands include the Block and Lots
as more particularly described on a map and a metes and bounds
description on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as more
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:899
particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-266) [Added 6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-16]
TT. Adoption of Zoning Map. The RP-3 Rural Preservation Low Density
Residential District and zone is hereby created and shown on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick to include the Blocks
and Lots as more particularly described on a map on file in the Office of
the Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages
annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-266.2). [Added 6-28-10 by Ord.
No. 10-16]
UU. Adoption of Zoning Map. The HC-2 General Highway Commercial
District and zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to
include Block 6.04, Lot 37 and a portion of Block 6.04, Lot 36 in
accordance with the reexamination report of the Master Plan. The C-1
designation for the property is deleted. These lands include the Block
and Lots as more particularly described on a map and a metes and
bounds description on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as
more particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-273.1.)
The HC-2 General Highway Commercial District and zone as shown
on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated March
1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block 132.05, Lots
21.09 and 21.10 in accordance with the reexamination report of the
Master Plan. The R-3 designation for the property is deleted. These
lands include the Block and Lots as more particularly described on a
map on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly
described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-273.1.)
VV. Adoption of Zoning Map. The HC-1 Neighborhood Highway Commercial
District and zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to
include Block 131.04, Lots 25.01-35.01, Block 132.05, Lots 14-18 and
Lot 21.07, and Block 132.04, Lot 1 These lands include the Block and
Lots as more particularly described on a map on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed
hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.2).
WW. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 Single Family Residence District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
132.04, Lot 2. These lands include the Block and Lots as more
particularly described on a map on file in the Office of the Township
Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed hereto.
(Refer to section 228-268 J.)
XX. Adoption of Zoning Map. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:900
17.24, Lot 1.01 and Block 17.26, Lot 18.33. These lands include the
Block and Lots as more particularly described on a map on file in the
Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on
pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-279 E.)
YY. Adoption of Zoning Map. The VG-II Village Green II zone as shown on
the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated March 1999
and as amended is hereby enlarged to include part of Block 134.01, Lot
79. These lands include the Block and Lots as more particularly
described on a map on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as
more particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-289.2)
ZZ. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created a MDA (Multiple
Dwelling/Apartment) zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township
of East Brunswick and as amended to include lands formerly zoned O/I
Office/Industrial, P-1 Planned Industrial and I/M Industrial
Manufacturing in accordance with a Master Plan Amendment to the
Housing Element. The lands include the following Blocks and Lots:
Block 29.01, Lots 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 and Block 29.06, Lots 1
through 7 and as more particularly described on a map on file in the
Office of the Township Clerk, and as described on pages annexed
hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.4) [Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20;
Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. 17-13]
AAA. Adoption of Zoning Map. The TG (Town Green) District and zone as
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby
enlarged to include Block 243, Lot 6.04 and as more particularly
described on a map on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as
described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.5)
[Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20]
BBB. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created a MXD-2 (Mixed Use
— 2) zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick and as amended to include lands formerly zoned I/M
Industrial/Manufacturing in accordance with a Master Plan
Amendment to the Housing Element. The lands include the following:
Block 32, Lot 1.33, known as 110 Tices Lane and as more particularly
described on a map on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as
described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.6)
CCC. Adoption of Zoning Map. There is hereby created a MXD-3 (Mixed Use
— 3) zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East
Brunswick and as amended to include lands formerly zoned HC-2
General Highway Commercial in accordance with a Master Plan
Amendment to the Housing Element. The lands include the following:
Block 6.01, Lot 16.03, and as more particularly described on a map on
file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as described on pages
annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-289.7)
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:901
DDD. Adoption of Zoning Map. The R-3 Single Family Residence District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
317.17, Lots 17-19, 24-32, Block 317.29, Lots 1-14, Block 317.13, Lots
21.10, 30-34, 35.01, 36.04, 36.06, Block 317.34, Lots 26-28, Block 85,
Lots 4.07, 3.10, 3.11, 3.06, 29, 3.13, Block 641, Lots 20 & 21.10, in
accordance with the reexamination report of the Master Plan. The P-I,
OP-1, or C-3 designation for the properties are deleted. These lands
include the Block and Lots as more particularly described on a map and
a metes and bounds description on file in the Office of the Township
Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed hereto.
(Refer to section 228-268 K.). [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
EEE. Adoption of Zoning Map. The VG-II Village Green Two District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
317.33, all Lots, in accordance with the reexamination report of the
Master Plan. The P-I, OP-1 and R-3 designations for the properties are
deleted. These lands include the Block and Lots as more particularly
described on a map on file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as
more particularly described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section
228-285 D.). [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
FFF. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-3 General Commercial District and
zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
dated March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block
317.13, Lots 22 & 43.01, Block 85, Lots 3.16 & 3.17, in accordance with
the reexamination report of the Master Plan. The OP-1 and P-I
designations for the properties are deleted. These lands include the
Block and Lots as more particularly described on a map on file in the
Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly described on
pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-273 J.). [Added 12-10-18
by Ord. No. 18-30]
GGG. Adoption of Zoning Map. The C-2 Neighborhood Commercial zone as
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated
March 1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block 741,
Lot 22.02, Block 175.20, Lot 19.03, in accordance with the
reexamination report of the Master Plan. The OP-1 designations for the
properties are deleted. These lands include the Block and Lots as more
particularly described on a map on file in the Office of the Township
Clerk, and as more particularly described on pages annexed hereto.
(Refer to section 228-272 H.). [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
HHH.Adoption of Zoning Map. The OP-1 Office Professional zone as shown
on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick dated March
1999 and as amended is hereby enlarged to include Block 741, Lots
1.01 and 2, in accordance with the reexamination report of the Master
Plan. The C-2 designations for the properties are deleted. These lands
include the Block and Lots as more particularly described on a map on
file in the Office of the Township Clerk, and as more particularly
§ 228-5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-5
1:902
§ 228-6. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where there is uncertainty as to the boundaries of any of the districts shown
on the aforesaid map, the following shall apply:
described on pages annexed hereto. (Refer to section 228-280 Q.).
[Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
A. The district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines
and lot or property lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this
chapter unless indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map.
B. Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall
be determined by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with rules and
regulations which may be adopted by it as hereinafter provided.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6
1:903

ARTICLE II-A
Regulations for the RP Single-Family Rural Preservation District
[Amended 1-14-80 by Ord. No. 79-203; 8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-28;
09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Editor's Note: RP Ordinance was amended in its entirety 8-27-01 by Ord.
No. 01-28.
§ 228-6.1. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all R-P Districts.
§ 228-6.2. Purposes.
The purposes of the RP Single-Family Rural Preservation District are:
§ 228-6.3. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
A. To promote the retention of existing agricultural lands and to support
ongoing agricultural activities through a combination of land use policy,
acquisition of development rights, creative development techniques
and limitations on land use activities that interfere with continued
farming;
B. To retain the largely undeveloped and rural character which pervades
western and southwestern East Brunswick, in part by limiting the
introduction of growth-inducing infrastructure;
C. To provide land use management strategies which promote the
conservation of sensitive natural resources and which limit the impact
of future development of this area;
D. To promote the conservation of open space through public acquisition,
acquisition of less than fee interests and implementation of land use
policies supportive of permanent preservation of open space areas;
E. To support the objectives of the State Development and Redevelopment
Plan including the retention of large contiguous areas of agriculture
and open space, and providing for development which respects the
carrying capacity of land and water resources while also preserving
unique and sensitive natural areas.
A. Single Family dwellings.
B. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds
including but not limited to parks and playgrounds.
§ 228-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.3
1:905
§ 228-6.4. Conditional uses.
§ 228-6.5. Permitted accessory uses. [Added 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted are as follows:
C. Structures used for private and commercial horticultural, agricultural
or forestry purposes, exclusive of greenhouses; provided that no
structure or areas enclosing farm animals of any kind shall be within
seventy-five (75) feet of any lot line.
D. All agricultural activities and farm related uses of land which meet the
definition in the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act.
E. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
government for public purposes.
F. Family day care home. [Added 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Places of assembly based upon the following standards: [Amended
09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
1. Minimum lot size shall be twelve (12) acres;
2. Maximum lot coverage shall be forty (40) percent (%);
3. Maximum building coverage shall be 10 percent (%)
4. Septic system approval shall be obtained prior to Board action.
B. Schools for Academic Instruction based upon the following standards:
1. Minimum lot size shall be twelve (12) acres;
2. Maximum lot coverage shall be forty (40) percent (%);
3. Maximum building coverage shall be 10 percent (%)
4. Septic system approval shall be obtained prior to Board action.
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter, provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
C. Greenhouses are a permitted accessory use and structure provided that
the aggregate square footage of all structures situated on the site do
not exceed 55,000 square feet or fifteen percent (15%) coverage of the
total lot area, whichever is less.
D. As part of a permitted principal agricultural, nursery or horticultural
use, landscape contracting and sales of products grown on the site are
§ 228-6.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.5
1:906
§ 228-6.6. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings are as follows:
§ 228-6.7. Density and lot area requirements.
permitted accessory uses provided the activities are subordinate to the
permitted primary use of the site, including but not limited to a farm,
forest tract or nursery.
E. Cottage industry when conducted as an accessory use on the same tract
as a permitted principal agricultural or horticultural use and as defined
in § 228-3A of this chapter. Such use shall be clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the property for agricultural or horticultural
purposes and does not change the character thereof.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-6.3, 228-6.4 and 228-654
above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
E. Newspaper Vending Machines.
F. Limousine or livery service.
G. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation.
H. Sale of products not crafted on the agricultural property from which
they are sold.
I. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings. [Amended 09-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Conventional Development - one dwelling unit per six (6) acres.
1. Lot size averaging is permitted provided that no lot shall be less
than two acres in area.
2. All lots created shall be deed restricted against further subdivision.
B. Contiguous Parcel - Open Lands Cluster Development - one dwelling
unit per three and one-half (3.5) acres provided that:
1. The application for development shall involve a tract with a
minimum of seven (7) contiguous acres.
2. Development may be arranged on lots no less than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet in area;
§ 228-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.7
1:907
3. Sixty-five percent (65%) of the tract shall be designated as "open
lands" and deed restricted against further development;
4. The design of a development utilizing this option and the open
lands resulting from it shall promote the following Township
objectives: Retention of large contiguous farmland areas, stream
corridor and wetlands preservation, steep slope protection,
reduction of impervious coverage, protection of the site's natural
features, connections to and between approved open lands on
neighboring parcels, and compliance with the design criteria set
forth in subsection 6.10;
5. The development is in compliance with Municipal Land Use Law
40:55D-45 "Findings for Planned Development";
6. All lots created shall be deed restricted against further subdivision;
7. The required open lands shall be contained in one deed restricted
contiguous parcel;
8. Preliminary Approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining Health Department approval and Department of
Environmental Protection approval (to the extent required by state
law) for any proposed community septic system.
C. Planned Development Utilizing Noncontiguous Parcel Clustering - one
dwelling unit per three and one-half (3.5) acres provided that:
1. The application for development shall involve tracts with a
minimum of seven (7) total acres.
2. All parcels shall be in the RP Rural Preservation Zone;
3. Minimum lot area shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet;
4. The development is in compliance with Municipal Land Use Law
40:55D-45 "Findings for Planned Developments";
5. Preliminary Approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining Health Department approval and Department of
Environmental Protection approval (to the extend required by state
law) for any proposed community septic system;
6. Seventy-five percent (75%) of the combined area of the noncontiguous
parcels shall be designated as "open lands" and deed
restricted against any further development.
7. The design of a development utilizing this option and the open
lands resulting from it shall promote the following Township
objectives: Retention of large contiguous farmland areas, stream
corridor and wetlands preservation, steep slope protection,
reduction of impervious coverage, protection of the site's natural
features, connections to and between approved open lands on
§ 228-6.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.7
1:908
neighboring parcels, and compliance with the design criteria set
forth in subsection 6.10;
8. All lots created shall be deed restricted against further subdivision.
D. Dedication of Prime Agricultural Lands - one Dwelling Unit per three
acres.
1. For either Contiguous Open Land Cluster Development or Planned
Development Utilizing Non-Contiguous Parcel Clustering, the
density of a development where all the designated "open lands"
consist of Prime Agricultural Soils may be one dwelling unit per
three acres.
E. Planned Senior Citizen Residence ("PSCR") Option Within RP Zone -
one dwelling unit per two acres.
1. The application for development shall involve a tract with a
minimum of three hundred and fifty (350) contiguous acres.
2. Minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. The development shall be found to be in compliance with Municipal
Land Use Law 40:55D-45 "Findings for Planned Developments".
4. Preliminary Approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining Health Department approval and Department of
Environmental Protection approval (to the extent required by state
law) for any proposed community septic system or sewer system.
5. No extension of the sewer system to service such a development
will be approved unless the extension is confined to the area
immediately contiguous to the end of the existing sewer system
northwest of Cranbury Road.
6. Eighty percent (80%) of the total area of all tracts shall be
designated as "open lands" and deed restricted against any further
development.
7. The design of a development utilizing this option and the open land
resulting from it shall promote the following Township objectives:
Retention of large contiguous farmland areas, stream corridor and
wetlands preservation, steep slope protection, reduction of
impervious coverage, creation of public recreation and open space,
protection of the site's natural features, connections to and
between approved open lands on neighboring parcels, and
compliance with the design criteria set forth in subsection 6.10.
8. All lots created as part of the PSCR shall be deed-restricted against
further subdivision.
§ 228-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.7
1:909
§ 228-6.8. Bulk requirements applicable to § 228-6.7 A, B and C.
[Added 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.9. Agricultural buffer.
A twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer is required to be located on the
residential lot where any proposed subdivision abuts an existing
agricultural use or open lands to be dedicated for agricultural use. All
buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with a dense screen of trees,
shrubs and evergreens of such a type and nature as to provide a solid allseason
screen. Such plant material shall be at least six (6) feet in height
when properly planted and the use of indigenous native species arranged to
resemble existing woodland patterns shall be maximized. Existing tree lines
and hedgerows are encouraged to be incorporated into this buffer area.
§ 228-6.10. Design criteria.
9. At least ten percent (10%) of the units constructed as part of the
PSCR shall be affordable to and occupied by low-and moderateincome
households.
10. All units are to be one story, single-family detached.
11. Bulk requirements are as follows:
a. Front yard setback: twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side yard setbacks: 10 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 20 feet.
d. Maximum height: eighteen (18) feet.
e. Setback between development and adjacent properties: fifty
(50) feet.
f. Maximum building coverage: forty percent (40%).
A. Minimum Lot Width: one hundred twenty (120) feet.
B. Front Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Structures: fifty (50)
feet.
C. Side Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Structures: one side: 20
feet; two sides: forty (40) feet.
D. Rear Yard Setback: forty (40) feet.
E. Accessory Building Rear Yard Setback: fifteen (15) feet.
F. Maximum Height: thirty-five (35) feet.
G. Building coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 228-6.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.10
1:910
§ 228-6.11. Open lands.
Open lands created as a result of these regulations may be used for
recreation, agriculture, resource protection or amenity purposes. Open
lands shall be freely accessible to all residents of a development if retained
in private ownership or to the general public if in municipal ownership with
the exception that agricultural open land shall be permitted to have access
to that land restricted to those solely engaged in agricultural pursuits,
provided that such open lands are accessible to other agricultural uses and
lands. Land designated as "open lands" shall be maintained as such and may
not be separately sold, subdivided or developed.
§ 228-6.11A. Existing nonconforming former Office-Professional
Zone (OP-1) lots.
Any existing structure that was lawfully in OP-1 zone use as of the effective
date of this act may be enlarged or expanded provided that such
modification shall be carried out in accordance with the OP-1 standards
applicable as of the effective date of this act.
A. Where development must be located on open fields or pastures due to
greater constraints in other parts of the site, dwellings shall be sited on
the least prime agricultural soils, and in locations at the far edges of the
parcel, as far as possible from existing collector or higher classification
roads.
B. Residential lots in the subdivision shall be visually buffered from
existing roads by a fifty (50) foot wide planting screen consisting of a
variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs and wildflowers to maintain
the rural character of the district.
C. The subdivision shall be designed to protect existing hedgerows and
treelines between fields or meadows.
D. Site development shall be arranged to leave significant views and vistas
unblocked or uninterrupted particularly as seen from existing public
roads.
§ 228-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.11A
1:911

ARTICLE II-B
REGULATION FOR THE RP-2 SINGLE FAMILY RURAL
PRESERVATION TRANSITION DISTRICT
[Amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.12. Applicability of provisions of Article. [Added 8-28-89 by
Ord. No. 89-63]
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all RP-2 Districts.
§ 228-6.13. Permitted uses. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-63]
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-6.14. Permitted accessory uses. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No.
89-63; amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted as follows:
§ 228-6.15. Prohibited uses. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-63;
amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings are as follows:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Family day care home. [Added 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is not greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
C. Greenhouses are a permitted accessory use and structure provided that
the aggregate square footage of all structures situated on the site do
not exceed 55,000 square feet or fifteen percent (15%) coverage of the
total lot area, whichever is less.
D. Structures used for private horticultural, agricultural or forestry
purposes, exclusive of greenhouses and stables housing not more than
four horses for private use by the owner or leasee, provided that no
structure and no area enclosing farm animals of any kind shall be
permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of any lot line.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in § 228-6.13 and 228-6.14 above.
B. Professional occupations.
§ 228-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.15
1:913
§ 228-6.16. Removed. [09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.17. Density, area and yard requirements. [Added 8-28-89 by
Ord. No. 89-63; amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76; amended
09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.18. Removed. [09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.19. Removed. [09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. (Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service.
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation.
I. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings. [Added 09-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Density; one dwelling unit per one and a half (1.5) acres.
B. Minimum lot width: one hundred fifty (150) feet.
C. Minimum Lot Area: one and a half (1.5) acres, corner lots 1.65 acres.
D. Front Yard Setback for principal and accessory structures fifty (50) feet.
E. Side Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Structures - one side: 20
feet; two sides: fifty (50) feet.
F. Rear Yard Setback - forty (40) feet.
G. Accessory Building Rear Setback - 20 feet.
H. Maximum height: thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 228-6.15 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.19
1:914
ARTICLE II-C
Regulations for the RP-3 Rural Preservation Low Density
Residential District
[Added 6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-16; Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-6.20. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all RP-3 Districts.
§ 228-6.21. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to implement the Superior Court of New
Jersey Appellate Division's ruling in Bailes v. Township of East Brunswick,
380 N.J. Super 336, 348 (App. Div.), certif. denied, 185 N.J. 596 (2005)
which deemed that the Rural Preservation Zone (RP) standards which had
been applicable to the following properties before the adoption of the
1999 and 2001 Rural Preservation Zone ordinance amendments shall be
reinstated: Block 307.12, Lots 31, 32.10 & 32.11; Block 310, Lot 57.01;
Block 309.04, Lots 16.12, 16.13, 17 & 18.02; Block 310, Lots 23 § 24;
Block 312, Lot 16.01; Block 310, Lot 2; Block 316.01, Lot 22.06. The Rural
Preservation Zone applicable to these properties is hereby renamed RP-3
Rural Preservation Low Density Residential District.
§ 228-6.22. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
A. Single family dwellings.
B. Public recreational and community-center buildings and grounds
including but not limited to parks and playgrounds.
C. Structures used for private and commercial horticultural, agricultural
or forestry purposes, exclusive of greenhouses and stables housing not
more than four horses for private use by the owner or leasee, provided
that no structure or areas enclosing farm animals of any kind shall be
permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any lot line.
D. All agricultural activities and farm related uses of land, including, but
not limited to:
(1) The sale of agricultural, horticultural or forestry produce or
products which has been raised on the farm from which they are
sold and freezing lockers or other similar facilities for the sale,
storage and processing of farm and livestock produce, including
the sale of firewood, which has been raised on the property from or
on which it is to be sold, stored or processed; provided, however,
that adequate parking space is provided for customers and
employees. Sale of any products not grown on the farm from which
they are sold is specifically prohibited.
§ 228-6.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.23
1:915
§ 228-6.23. Conditional uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted subject to a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board:
§ 228-6.24. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
A. Places of assembly and parsonages. [Amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
B. Public and parochial schools and colleges for academic instruction.
C. Noncommercial dog kennels housing not more than six (6) dogs,
provided that no building or outside enclosures shall be permitted
within fifty (50) feet of any lot line.
D. Private, nonprofit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi-public social fraternal or
recreational character such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veterans or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
E. Housing facilities for transient or migratory farm workers, to be located
upon the farm of any employing farmer; provided, however, that the
facilities are adequately constructed and safeguarded against fire
hazards, that sleeping places shall contain sufficient air space and
partitions to assure an adequate supply of fresh air and reasonable
privacy for each occupant, that provision is made for an adequate
supply of potable water, that provision is made for suitable bathing
facilities and that provision is made for a suitable sewage disposal
system and an adequate number of toilet facilities, and that all
applicable federal state and local codes are met.
No conditional use permit shall be granted, however, unless the
applicant has established that:
1. The proposed site is sufficient for the intended purpose;
2. Adequate parking facilities are provided while limiting within
reason the amount of impervious surface;
3. That the proposed septic system will be adequate and will have no
appreciable adverse effect on ground water pollution;
4. The means of vehicular ingress and egress are sufficient to prevent
traffic hazard, congestion, or excessive interference with normal
traffic movement on adjacent public streets and thoroughfares;
5. The buildings and use are appropriately located and designed and
will meet a community need without adversely affecting the
neighborhood.
A. Any accessory use permitted in the R-1 District.
§ 228-6.23 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.24
1:916
§ 228-6.25. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings are as follows:
§ 228-6.26. Density, area and yard requirements.
§ 228-6.27. Buffer.
B. Greenhouses are a permitted accessory use and structure provided that
the aggregate square footage of all structures situated on the site do
not exceed 55,000 square feet or fifteen percent (15%) coverage of the
total lot area, whichever is less.
C. Landscape contracting, tree pruning services, firewood processing,
wood mulches, and sales of products grown on the site are permitted
accessory uses to the permitted primary use of the site, of a farm, forest
tract or nursery.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-6.22, 228-6.23, and 228-6.24
above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
E. Newspaper vending machines.
F. Limousine or livery service.
G. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation.
A. Density: one dwelling unit per two acres.
B. Minimum lot width: one hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
C. Minimum Lot Area: two acres.
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Structures:
fifty (50) feet.
E. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 20 feet; two sides: fifty (50) feet.
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: forty (40) feet.
G. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: 20 feet.
H. Maximum Building Height: thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building coverage: twenty-five percent (25%).
§ 228-6.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6.27
1:917
A. A 100 foot wide buffer is required where a proposed minor subdivision,
major subdivision or major site plan abuts an existing agricultural use.
All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with a dense screen of
trees, shrubs and evergreens of such a type and nature as to provide a
solid screen and must be at least 6 feet in height when properly planted.
B. A six foot high fence shall be installed along the property line of any
proposed development abutting farmland by the applicant and/or the
developer prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy. Details of
such fencing shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning
Board.
§ 228-6.27 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-6.27
1:918
ARTICLE III
Regulations for the R-1 Single Family Rural Residence District
[Amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-7. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all R-l Districts.
§ 228-8. Permitted uses. [Amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-8.1. Conditional uses. [Added 1-31-83 by Ord. No. 83-494;
Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16; 10-9-17 by Ord. 17-34]
Principal uses and buildings permitted subject to a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board:
A. Single family dwellings.
B. Places of assembly and parsonages.
C. Public and parochial schools and colleges for academic instruction.
D. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
E. Public libraries and museums.
F. Parks and playgrounds.
G. Nursery schools.
H. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
I. Private, nonprofit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veterans
or fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
J. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes.
K. Structures used for private and commercial horticultural, agricultural
or forestry purpose exclusive of greenhouses and stables housing not
more than four horses for private use by the owner or leasee, provided
that no structure and no area enclosing farm animals of any kind shall
be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of any lot line. [Amended
6-27-83 by Ord. No. 83-508; amended 09-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
L. All agricultural activities and farm related uses of land which meet the
definition in the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act.
M. Family Day Care Home.
§ 228-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-8.1
1:919
A. Restaurant Banquet facilities.
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the following
conditions are met:
1. The lot shall be located on a minor arterial street as defined in the
Township Master Plan.
2. Parking shall not be permitted within seventy-five (75') feet of any
front lot line, thirty-five (35') feet of a side lot line and one hundred
(100') feet of a rear lot line.
3. Planted buffers, a minimum twenty-five (25') feet in depth, shall be
provided alongside and rear lot lines. This buffer shall consist of
massed evergreen and deciduous trees, planted in such a fashion
that will produce within three growing seasons a screen at least six
(6) feet in height. The quantity of natural screening existing shall
be taken into consideration upon evaluation of the site plan.
4. The building shall be designed in a character compatible to the
surrounding area.
5. The lot shall be serviced by public sewers.
6. Fifty (50%) percent of the proposed restaurant facility shall be
dedicated to the purpose of active banquet facilities and shall have
a minimum of 25,000 square feet of building area.
7. Area and Yard Requirements.
a. Minimum lot width - 400 feet.(a)=b. Minimum lot area - 8
acres.
b. Maximum building coverage - 25 percent.
c. Minimum front yard setback - 120 feet.
d. Minimum side yard setback to principle and accessory building
and structure - 50 feet.
e. Minimum rear yard setback to any building or structure - 100
feet.
f. Maximum lot coverage - sixty (60%) percent.
B. Planned Residential Cluster development:
1. Minimum Tract Area: 20 acres.
2. Maximum Density: one dwelling unit per acre. Maximum density
shall be the same as in a conventional R-1 subdivision. The
applicant shall submit a sketch of a feasible conventional
subdivision to establish the allowable number of developable lots
within the cluster subdivision.
§ 228-8.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-8.1
1:920
3. Developable lots shall be located to minimize impact of adjacent
nuisances, such as highway noise or glare. The applicant shall
demonstrate that adjacent nuisances are mitigated.
4. Common Open Space: twenty-five (25) percent of the site with a
minimum of five (5) contiguous acres.
5. Minimum Lot Size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
6. Minimum Lot Width: one hundred twenty (120) feet.
7. Minimum Front Yard Setback: forty (40) feet for principal or
accessory buildings.
8. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 20 feet; two sides: forty (40)
feet.
9. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: forty (40) feet.
10. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: fifteen (15)
feet.
11. Maximum Height: 35 feet.
12. Building coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
C. Hotels adjacent to and ancillary to existing restaurant-banquet
facilities.
a. Minimum lot size: three acres.
b. Maximum number of rooms: 130 rooms.
c. Maximum height: four stories.
d. Front setback: 100 feet.
e. Side setback: 25 feet.
f. Rear setback: 75 feet.
g. Building coverage: 25%.
h. Landscape Buffer: 25 feet to adjacent existing residential
developments.
i. Parking/Driveway Setback: 25 feet; can be reduced to 10 feet if a
planted Buffer consisting of evergreen and deciduous trees are
installed at a minimum height of 10-12 feet.
j. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
k. Cross access, cross parking and walkways connecting the banquet
facility and hotel shall be provided.
§ 228-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-8.1
1:921
§ 228-9. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No.
68-8-M; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB; amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-10. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-M;
2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-N; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB; 10-27-97
by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings are as follows:
l. One freestanding sign of a maximum size of 35 square feet and at a
maximum height of eight (8') feet is permitted.
m. Façade signs on the facades facing Cranbury Road and facing the
existing banquet facility shall be permitted. The façade signs can
be a maximum of five (5%) percent of the façade they are attached
to.
n. The lot shall be serviced by public sewers.
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3B of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3B of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
C. Greenhouses are a permitted accessory use and structure provided that
the aggregate square footage of all structures situated on the site do
not exceed 55,000 square feet or fifteen percent (15%) coverage of the
total lot area, whichever is less.
D. Landscape contracting as part of a permitted nursery and sales of
products grown on the site are permitted accessory uses provided the
activities are subordinate to the permitted primary use of the site,
including, but not limited to a farm, forest tract or nursery.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-8, 228-8.1 and 228-9 above.
[Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
§ 228-8.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-10
1:922
§ 228-11. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-12. Density, area and yard requirements. [Amended 9-12-66
by Ord. No. 66-8-F; 6-12-89 by Ord. No. 89-36; 12-13-93 by Ord. No.
93-76; 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-13. (Reserved)
§ 228-14. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-15. Deleted. [4-20-09 Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-15.1. Moved to 218.1. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
(Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
I. Second kitchen in single-family dwellings. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Density: one dwelling unit per acre.
B. Minimum lot width: one hundred fifty (150) feet.
C. Minimum Lot Area: one acre, corner lots: 47,000.
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Structures:
fifty (50) feet.
E. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 20 feet; two sides: fifty (50) feet.
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: forty (40) feet.
G. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: 20 feet.
H. Maximum Building Height: thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 228-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-15.1
1:923

ARTICLE IV
Regulations for the R-2 Single Family Suburban Residence District
§ 228-16. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all R 2 Districts.
§ 228-17. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-27-83 by Ord. No. 83-508,
amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-17.1. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted subject to a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Public and parochial schools and colleges for academic instruction.
C. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
D. Public libraries and museums.
E. Parks and playgrounds.
F. Private, nonprofit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veterans
or fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
G. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes
H. All agricultural activities and farm related uses of land which meet the
definition in the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act.
I. Places of assembly and parsonages.
J. Nursery Schools.
K. Family Day Care Home.
A. Planned Residential Cluster Development
1. Minimum Tract Area: fifteen (15) acres.
2. Maximum Density: one dwelling unit per twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. Maximum density shall be the same as in a
conventional R-2 subdivision. The applicant shall submit a sketch of
a feasible conventional subdivision to establish the allowable
number of developable lots within the cluster subdivision.
[Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
§ 228-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-17.1
1:925
§ 228-18. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-19. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-M;
2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-N; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB; 10-27-97
by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
3. Developable lots shall be located to minimize impact of adjacent
[environmental] nuisances, such as highway noise or glare. The
applicant shall demonstrate that adjacent [environmental]
nuisances are mitigated [to levels specified in the Township's
performance standards (T.C. 228-216) at each developable lot's
property line].
4. Common Open Space: twenty-five (25) percent of the site with a
minimum of five (5) contiguous acres.
5. Minimum Lot Size: fifteen (15,000) square feet.
6. Minimum Lot Width: one hundred (100) feet.
7. Minimum Front Yard Setback: thirty-five (35) feet for principal or
accessory buildings.
8. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 10 feet; two sides: twentyfive
(25) feet.
9. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.
10. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: 10 feet.
11. Maximum Height: 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet measured from grade.
12. Lot areas may be reduced as indicated provided that the land which
would otherwise be required for house lots, but which is not so
used under the permitted lot size reduction provisions of this
section, shall be devoted instead to open space, and further
provided that the average lot area shall not be less than the
minimum lot area otherwise required in the Zoning District
referred to in this section.
A. Home occupations as defined in § 223-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-17, 228-17.1 and 228-18
above. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-17.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-19
1:926
§ 228-20. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-21. Density, area and yard requirements. [Amended 6-12-89
by Ord. No. 89-36; 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76; 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-22. (Reserved)
§ 228-23. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 9-15]
§ 228-24. Deleted. [4-20-09 Ord. No. 09-11]
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord No. 82-480]
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
(Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
I. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Density: one dwelling unit per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
[Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
B. Minimum Lot Width: One hundred twenty (120) feet for residential lots;
one hundred fifty (150) feet for lots for all other permitted uses.
C. Minimum Lot Area: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for
residential lots; one acre for all other permitted uses. Corner lots:
twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet for residential uses.
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Forty (40) feet.
E. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 20 feet; two sides: forty (40)
feet.
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: forty (40) feet.
G. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: fifteen (15) feet.
H. Maximum Height: thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building Coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 228-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-24
1:927

ARTICLE V
Regulations for the R-3 Single Family Residence District
§ 228-25. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all R-3 Districts.
§ 228-26. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-26.1. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted subject to a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board:
A. Single family dwellings.
B. Places of assembly and parsonages.
C. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
D. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
E. Public libraries and museums.
F. Parks and playgrounds.
G. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
H. Nursery schools.
I. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
[Amended 4-14-80 by Ord. No. 80-242]
J. Family Day Care Home. [Added 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Planned Residential Cluster Development.
1. Minimum Tract Area: fifteen (15) acres.
2. Maximum density: one dwelling unit per fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet. Maximum density shall be the same as in a
conventional R-3 subdivision. The applicant shall submit a sketch of
a feasible conventional subdivision to establish the allowable
number of developable lots within the cluster subdivision.
[Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
§ 228-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26.1
1:929
§ 228-27. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
3. Developable lots shall be located to minimize impact of adjacent
nuisances, such as highway noise or glare. The applicant shall
demonstrate that adjacent nuisances are mitigated.
4. Common Open Space: Twenty-five (25) percent of the site with a
minimum of three contiguous acres.
5. Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet, except that in no case may the
area of lots which adjoin either existing residential lots or open
spaces that adjoins existing residential lots be reduced in area to
less than 90 percent of the average area of the adjoining existing
residential lots.
6. Minimum lot width: sixty (60) feet.
7. Minimum front setback: 25 feet for principal buildings.
8. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet for principal buildings.
9. Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet between structures on
adjacent lots.
10. Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any clustered development, the front and
side setbacks for each lot in such a development shall be
established by the location of the structures approved on the
preliminary subdivision or site plan for each particular
development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the approved
locations of the principal structures in the development, and no
development shall take place within the front yard, or side yard
setbacks as defined herein.
11. Accessory structures: shall not be permitted in the front yard area
and shall be setback a minimum of 5' from the rear and side lot
lines.
12. Lot areas may be reduced as indicated provided that the land which
would otherwise be required for house lots, but which is not so
used under the permitted lot size reduction provisions of this
section, shall be devoted instead to open space, and further
provided that the average lot area shall not be less than the
minimum lot area otherwise required in the Zoning District
referred to in this section.
A. Home occupations ad defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
§ 228-26.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-27
1:930
§ 228-28. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-M;
2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-N; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB; 10-27-97
by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-29. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-30. Density, area and yard requirements. [Amended 6-12-89
by Ord. No. 89-36; 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
Every lot in an R-3 District shall comply with the following requirements:
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-26, 228-26.1 and 228-27
above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
(Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
I. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Density: one dwelling unit per fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
[Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
B. Minimum Lot Width: one hundred (100) feet for residential lots, lots for
public utility uses and for § 228-26H; one hundred fifty (150) feet for
lots for § 228-26B, C, D, E, F, G, and I.
C. Minimum Lot Area: fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for residential
lots, lots for public utility uses and for § 228-26H; one acre for lots for
§ 228-26B, C, D, E, F, G, and I.
§ 228-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-30
1:931
§ 228-31. (Reserved)
§ 228-32. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-33. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback: No principal or accessory building shall
be closer than thirty five (35) feet to the street line, including both
streets of a corner lot.
E. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 10 feet; two sides: twenty-five
(25) feet.
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.
G. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: 10 feet.
H. Maximum Height: thirty-five (35) feet. [Added 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
I. Building Coverage: twenty-five (25% percent. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
§ 228-30 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-33
1:932
ARTICLE VI
Regulations for the R-4 General Residence District
§ 228-34. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all R-4 Districts.
§ 228-35. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-36. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 6-27-83 by Ord. No.
83-508; amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Places of assembly and parsonages.
C. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
D. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
E. Public libraries and museums.
F. Parks and playgrounds.
G. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
H. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
I. Nursery Schools.
J. Family Day Care Home.
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in
§ 228-224C.
§ 228-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-37
1:933
§ 228-37. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-M;
2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-N; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB; 10-27-97
by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-38. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-39. Density, area and yard requirements. [Amended 6-12-89
by Ord. No. 89-36; 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76; 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Every lot in an R-4 District shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-35, 228-35.1 and 228-36
above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
(Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
I. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
A. Density: one dwelling unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
[Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76]
B. Minimum Lot Width: seventy-five (75) feet for single family dwellings
and public utility uses. One hundred fifty (150) feet for lots for all other
permitted uses.
C. Minimum Lot Area: ten thousand (10,000) square feet for single family
dwellings and public utility uses. One (1) acre for lots for all permitted
uses. Corner lots: eleven thousand (11,000) square feet for residential
uses.
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Thirty (30) feet.
E. Minimum Side Yard Setback: one side: 10 feet; two sides: 20 feet.
§ 228-37 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-39
1:934
§ 228-40. (Reserved)
§ 228-41. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-42. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.
G. Minimum Accessory Building Side or Rear Setback: 10 feet.
H. Maximum Height: thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building Coverage: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 228-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-42
1:935

ARTICLE VI-A
Senior Citizen Housing Option Zone
[Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-810]
§ 228-42.1. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be:
§ 228-42.2. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and structures permitted shall be:
§ 228-42.3. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-42.4. Density. [Amended 5-23-88 by Ord. No. 88-924]
Maximum Gross Density:
A. Senior citizen housing complex.
A. Recreational facilities.
B. Health care facilities.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-42.1 and 228 42.2 above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
F. Newspaper Vending Machines. (Repealed 1-8-90 by Ord. No. 89-94)
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Not to exceed 36 units per acre. The Planning Board shall determine
appropriate site density upon site plan review after consideration of the
following land use concerns.
1. The nature and extent of the impact of the development on the
surrounding neighborhood.
2. The nature, extent and adequacy of active and passive recreation
areas and facilities.
3. The provision of site improvements adequate for the permitted use.
§ 228-42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-42.4
1:937
§ 228-42.5. Affordable units.
At least Fifty (50%) percent of the units shall be affordable to low income
residents as defined by § 132-42.1.
§ 228-42.6. Area and bulk requirements. [Amended 5-23-88 by Ord.
No. 88-924]
§ 228-42.7. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
4. The adequacy of off street parking and loading areas.
5. The suitability and provision of barrier free improvements for
residents of the development.
6. The adequacy of vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation to,
from and across the site.
7. The adequacy of access for fire and other emergency vehicles.
8. The provision of adequate light, air, landscaping and buffer areas.
9. Such other matters as are reasonably related to site plan review
and approval.
A. Minimum Lot Size - two acres.
B. Minimum Lot Width - 200 feet.
C. Front Yard Setback for Principal and Accessory Buildings - 50 feet.
D. Rear and Side Yard Setback for Principal Buildings - 50 feet.
E. Side and Rear Yard Setback for Accessory Buildings - 10 feet.
F. Maximum Height - 4 stories.
G. Impervious Coverage - 65 percent.
H. Open Space - 35 percent.
§ 228-42.4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-42.7
1:938
ARTICLE VII
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT ZONING
[Removed entirely 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-42.7
1:939

ARTICLE VII-A
REGULATION FOR THE R-5 RESIDENCE DISTRICT
[Added 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39]
§ 228-48.1. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all R-5 Districts.
§ 228-48.2. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and building permitted are as follows:
§ 228-48.3. Permitted accessory uses. [Added 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-48.4. Prohibited uses. [Added 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39]
Prohibited buildings and uses are as follows:
§ 228-48.5. Density, area and yard requirements. [Added 11-25-96
by Ord. No. 96-39; Amended 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Family Day Care Home. [Added 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the garage shall be for not more than three private cars
or two private cars and one commercial vehicle that is no greater than
20 feet in length, 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height, as defined in §
228-224C.
A. Any uses and building not listed in § 228-48.2 and § 228-48.3.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
F. Limousine and livery service.
G. Second kitchens in single-family dwellings.
A. Density: one dwelling unit per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: eighty (80) feet.
§ 228-48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-48.5
1:941
C. Minimum Lot Area: eight thousand (8,000) square feet. Corner lots:
8,800 square feet.
D. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: thirty-five
(35) feet.
E. Side Yard Setback for principal and accessory structures: one side: Ten
(10) feet; two sides: 20 feet.
F. Rear Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet.
G. Accessory Building Rear Yard Setback: Ten (10) feet.
H. Maximum Height: Thirty-five (35) feet.
I. Building Coverage: twenty-five (25% percent. [Added 9-21-15 Ord.
15-16]
§ 228-48.5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-48.5
1:942
ARTICLE VIII
Regulations for the O 1 Office, Professional and Apartment District
[Added 12-27-65 by Ord. No. 65-8-E]
§ 228-49. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses in all O-1 Districts.
§ 228-50. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-815]
§ 228-50.1. Conditional uses. [Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-815]
A. Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings and
parish houses.
B. Public or parochial schools, colleges, private schools and technical
schools.
C. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
D. Public libraries and museums.
E. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
F. Professional occupations, including the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, minister, architect, engineer, attorney, or other member of a
recognized profession.
G. The studio of a photographer, teacher of music, dancing or art.
H. Banks, savings and loan, finance companies.
I. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant or
bookkeeper.
A. Nursery schools, subject to the following conditions:
1. Adequate lot area and yard spaces are provided.
2. Buildings and uses are appropriately located and designed.
3. The building in use meet a community need without adversely
affecting the neighborhood.
B. Multiple dwelling groups or garden apartment developments,
hereinafter referred to as "projects", subject to the following
conditions:
1. The project shall be developed, maintained and operated on a
parcel of land of not less than four acres and the total number of
residential units shall not exceed nine (9) units per acre.
§ 228-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-50.1
1:943
2. The area of the lot or parcel of land covered by buildings shall not
exceed twenty (20%) percent.
3. No structure shall exceed two and one half stories in height.
4. A minimum of two off street parking spaces, including garages,
shall be provided for every apartment with two or more bedrooms
and a minimum of one and five-tenths (1.5) off street parking
spaces, including garages, shall be provided for every one bedroom
apartment.
5. All street lights and lighting along pedestrian walks and parking
areas shall be shaded and installed on ornamental standards with
underground wiring. They shall be of a style and design compatible
with the nature and design of the project and shall be approved by
the Planning Board and utility company.
6. All dwelling units within the project shall have not less than two
exterior exposures, so as to provide through or cross ventilation.
7. Each dwelling unit within the project shall have at least one front
and one rear entrance. All exterior stairways shall be of brick or
equivalent masonry construction, but in no event shall an exterior
stairway exceed four (4') feet in height.
8. Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private, or any common parking area shall be ten (10') feet.
Minimum setback for all structures from any collector or arterial
street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be fifty (50') feet.
9. In appropriate cases, project shall be screened from adjoining
areas by a buffer zone or barrier approved by the Planning Board.
10. Adequate provisions shall be made for the storage and removal of
garbage.
11. Adequate provisions shall be made for snow removal on all
sidewalks, streets, roads, driveways and parking areas within the
project.
12. Each dwelling unit within a project shall have a separate
thermostat to control heat.
13. Each dwelling unit shall be air conditioned by an air conditioning
system with separate thermostats in each unit or in the alternative
at least two through the wall air conditioner units shall be installed
in each dwelling unit, but they shall not project outward more than
one (1") beyond the face of the wall of the building in which they
are installed.
14. Provisions shall be made for a master television antenna and no
individual antenna shall be permitted on the exterior of any
building.
§ 228-50.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-50.1
1:944
§ 228-51. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-52. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses in buildings shall be:
15. All buildings within the project shall be designed and constructed
with a sound proofing barrier between adjoining units, both
horizontally and vertically.
16. No building shall contain more than twenty-eight (28) dwelling
units and no wing of any one building shall contain more than
twelve (12) units.
17. The maximum length of any one building as measured from one end
to the other shall not exceed two hundred eighty (280') feet, but
wherever any one building wall exceeds one hundred twenty five
(125') feet in length, there shall be at least one five (5') foot setback
every 125 feet. Common walls between wings of a building shall not
exceed ten (10') feet in length.
A. Private garages, subject to the following:
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed space
for six (6) automobiles or two automobiles and three commercial
vehicles as defined in § 228-224C. [Amended 3-10-80 by Ord.
No. 80-222; 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-815]
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an accessory
building within the required rear yard space not to exceed six (6)
automobiles or two automobiles and three commercial vehicles as
defined in 228-224C. [Amended 3-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-222;
12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-815]
A. Any use not listed in § 228-50 and 228-51 above and specifically
including the following:
(1) Single family dwellings.
(2) Uses primarily engaged in the sale of merchandise from the
premises.
(3) Beauty parlors, barber shops, shoe repair shops and television or
appliance repair shops.
(4) Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles as restricted in
§ 228-224C. [Amended 2-5-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-M; 2-26-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-N; 5-24-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-BB]
(5) Fast food restaurants. [Added 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29]
§ 228-50.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-52
1:945
§ 228-53. Height limitations.
Height limits shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-54. Area and bulk requirements. [Amended 12-22-86 by Ord.
No. 86-815]
(6) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
(7) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
(8) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(9) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot area: fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet.
C. Front yards:
1. Front yard setback for principal and accessory buildings: thirty five
(35) feet from any streetline including both streets on a corner lot.
2. All front yards shall be provided with a landscaped surface over the
whole yard space, except that one 24 foot or two 12 foot paved
driveways may be permitted to cross this required yard space.
D. Side yards:
1. Side yard setback for principal building: one side 10 feet, other side
fifteen (15) feet. Within the fifteen (15) foot side yard, a driveway
may be constructed provided that it is no closer than five (5) feet to
the side lot line.
2. Private garages and paved off street parking areas are permitted
within a side yard except that they shall not be closer than five (5)
feet to a side lot line.
E. Rear yards:
1. Rear yards for principal buildings: 20 feet except that where there
is to be a private garage or paved off street parking area located
within the rear yard, no principal building shall be closer than fifty
(50) feet to the rear lot line.
2. Private garages and paved off street parking spaces may be
permitted within this rear yard space provided that no private
garage or paved off street parking space shall be closer than 10
feet to the rear lot line.
§ 228-52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-54
1:946
§ 228-55. Off street parking. [Amended 9-12-66 by Ord. No. 66-8-F]
Off street parking requirements shall be:
§ 228-56. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
3. No other accessory uses shall be permitted within the rear yard
space.
F. Maximum height: two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35)
feet.
G. Off street parking requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-56.
A. Two (2) spaces for each single family dwelling.
B. All other uses to be approved by the Planning Board as provided for in
§ 228-56.
C. Development requirements for off street parking space:
(1) All driveways and off street parking spaces under the requirements
of this section shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or concrete
material so as to be hard surfaced and dust free.
(2) All off street parking spaces shall be provided with curbing or the
equivalent so that vehicles cannot drive onto required landscaped
areas.
(3) Screen planting of a dense evergreen material not less than four
feet nor more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided in any
locations where lights from vehicles within the off street parking
area may shine directly into windows of adjacent residence
buildings.
(4) In lieu of screen planting, a wooden fence of woven lattice, louvre
type or split cedar with a maximum of one inch spacing shall be
provided not less than four feet nor more than six (6) feet in height.
§ 228-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-56
1:947

ARTICLE IX
Historic Districts
[Added 8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-8-TT; amended 11-12-79 by Ord. No.
79-193]
§ 228-57. Purpose.
The Township Council finds that the historic heritage of the Township is
among its most valued and important educational, cultural and economic
assets. It is the intent of the Township Council to provide for the protection
of historic districts, sites and structures within the Township in order to:
§ 228-58. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Historic District Zone are as set forth in Schedule A
referred to in § 228-280A, B, and C, to be renumbered § 228-283A, B, and C.
The location of other landmarks and improvements within the jurisdiction
of this article are as set forth in Schedule B annexed hereto.
§ 228-59. Relationship to remainder of chapter.
The Historic District code as provided herein for districts, landmarks, and
open spaces within the Township are intended to preserve and protect
the historic or architecturally worthy districts, landmarks, improvements,
open spaces, monuments, streetscapes and neighborhoods of the Township.
Whenever there is a conflict between the Township Code and those of the
Historic District Regulations the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
A. Protect and improve the quality of its environment through the
identification, recognition, conservation, maintenance and
enhancement of districts, sites, structures, fixtures and open spaces
which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the political,
economic, social, cultural or architectural history of the Township and
its distinctive physical features.
B. Foster appropriate use and wider public knowledge and appreciation of
such features, districts, landmarks and open spaces.
C. Resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to such purposes.
D. Encourage commercial development which may not adversely affect the
integrity of an historic area.
E. Encourage private and public efforts in support of such purposes, and
by furthering such purposes, promote the public welfare, to strengthen
the cultural and educational life of the Township and State, and to make
the Township a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and
work.
§ 228-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-60
1:949
§ 228-60. Historic District Residential Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the Historic District Residential
Zone.
§ 228-61. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-62. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 6-27-83 by Ord. No.
83-508]
Permitted accessory uses in Historic District Residential Zone Accessory
uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Churches, synagogues and other places of worship and Sunday school
buildings and parish houses.
C. Public and parochial schools and colleges for academic instruction.
D. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds and
public governmental buildings used exclusively by the municipality,
county, state or federal governments.
E. Public libraries and museums from converted existing edifices of
historic origin.
F. Parks and playgrounds; subject to site plan review.
G. One family dwelling units may be converted to two family dwelling
units. The Planning Board shall insure that the following minimum
standards are met:
(1) Under no circumstances shall more than two dwelling units within
any existing structure be permitted.
(2) The lot size shall be fifty percent (50%) larger than the minimum lot
size of the zone.
(3) All units of a dwelling unit being converted from one to two units
shall contain the following minimum square footage:
Efficiency 370 sq. ft.
1 Bedroom 600 sq. ft.
2 Bedrooms 700 sq. ft. first floor
(4) Off street parking shall be provided for two cars per dwelling unit
screened and evergreen plant materials or fencing. Adequate
ingress and egress to the property shall be provided.
A. Any accessory uses permitted in § 228-9A & B.
§ 228-60 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-63
1:950
§ 228-63. Conditional uses permitted:
§ 228-64. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
A. Public Utility uses: such as telephone switching stations, sewerage
pumping stations, water pumping stations, and electrical substations.
The Planning Board, in its consideration of said use, shall require the
following:
(1) Where the proposed use is immediately contiguous or adjacent to
any residential zone or residential use, a thirty foot (30')
landscaped buffer shall be installed of deciduous and coniferous
plant materials at a minimum height of five feet (5') at time of
planting and maintained a minimum height of not less than fifteen
feet (15'). An earthberm of minimum height of five feet (5') may be
constructed in which case the Planning Board may lessen its
requirements for plant materials, provided that determination by
the Township Engineer that there shall be no adverse impact upon
drainage upon the site or upon other adjacent site.
(2) All structures within two hundred feet (200') of residential zones or
uses shall be designed in a residential character emulating the
architectural style of adjacent residential areas in scale, height of
buildings, facade materials and general structural treatment.
(3) No noise of a non residential type and sound intensity shall
emanate from the site at the property line borders.
(4) There shall be no noxious fumes emanating from any structure.
(5) All such utilities are to have no regular full time or permanent
employees at the facility except as may be required on an
occasional maintenance basis.
(6) There shall be no loading other than loading during construction
and/or occasional installation or removal of equipment.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in § 228-61, § 228-62 and § 228-63.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in 228-224C. [Amended 3-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-222]
D. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
E. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No. 84-560]
F. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
§ 228-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-64
1:951
§ 228-65. Height limitations.
Height limitations shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-66. Area and yard requirements.
Every lot in a Historic District Residential Zone shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 228-67. Minimum habitable floor area for residential buildings.
Minimum floor area of residential buildings shall be the same as required in
the R-4 District except as set forth in § 228-63.
G. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Lots of single family dwellings and for public utility uses and for uses
described in § 228-61D above; minimum lot area of forty five hundred
(4500) square feet and minimum width of fifty feet (50').
B. Lots for uses described in § 228-61 B through F and § 228-62 above
shall conform to the area requirements of the R-4 District or as is
additionally restricted by Conditional Use requirements.
C. No principal building or accessory structure shall be situated closer
than ten feet (10') to the street line, including both streets on a corner
lot.
D. No principal building or structure shall be situated closer than ten feet
(10') from the side property line.
E. No principal building or structure shall be closer than twenty feet (20')
from the rear lot line.
F. No accessory building or structure shall be closer than five feet (5')
from any side or rear lot line.
G. Where a lot is situated between two lots, each of which is developed
with a principal building which projects beyond the required front yard
setback established by this ordinance or which has been so maintained
since November 25, 1958 the required front yard setback may be
reduced to the average of the front yards of the adjacent principal
buildings. Where a lot adjoins one lot developed as described above and
a vacant lot, the required front yard setback of such lot may be the
average setback of the front yard of the adjacent building and the
required front yard setback line established by this ordinance.
H. Where an existing dwelling is on a lot the width of which is less than the
minimum prescribed for the district in which such lot is situated, the
minimum side line requirements for the erection of a garage or carport
shall be five feet (5').
§ 228-64 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-68
1:952
§ 228-68. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking space shall be provided as follows:
§ 228-69. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-70. Historic District Commercial Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the Historic District Commercial
Zone.
§ 228-71. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Two (2) spaces for each single family dwelling unit.
B. For all other uses, new site plan approval as required in § 228-15.
A. All uses and buildings permitted in the Historic District Residential
Zone, subject to the restrictions and procedures set forth in § 228-61.
B. Libraries, museums, art galleries and cultural centers, including
outdoor amphitheaters.
C. Historic houses and building exhibits.
D. Public parks and recreational areas.
E. Commercial schools of music, art or sciences.
F. Offices or studios of artists, musicians and teachers of individual
instruction.
G. Specialty stores, antique and gift shops, markets, taverns, restaurants
or other retail business or services, offices, banks and other financial
institutions, not exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square
feet for any individual business operation permitted.
H. Sale, display and fabrication or assembly of site crafted items including
silversmithing, metalsmithing, fine cabinet work, cloth weaving,
ceramics, pottery, leatherworking and printing, when such fabrication
or assembly is clearly of a cottage industry nature, as distinct from
general manufacturing, and provided further that the major part of any
product so fabricated or assembled is to be sold at retail on the
premises.
I. Any retail shopping facility or service established which supplies
commodities or performs a service primarily for residents of the
surrounding neighborhood, such as grocery store, delicatessen, meat
market, drugstore, confectionery store, bakery store, barbershop,
beauty parlor, clothes cleaning and laundry pickup establishments (no
§ 228-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-71
1:953
§ 228-72. Conditional uses permitted.
§ 228-73. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory buildings and uses permitted shall be:
§ 228-74. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
cleaning to be done on the premises), bank, real estate office and
business or professional offices.
J. Clubs, lodges and association buildings, meeting rooms and halls.
K. Federal, state, county or Township government offices.
A. Apartment dwelling units as secondary uses within retail, commercial,
service and office uses. In one story structures, the residential
apartment use may not constitute more than forty percent (40%) of the
gross floor area. If the structure is two stories or more, the residential
apartment dwelling unit or units shall be located to the rear of the first
story not constituting more than thirty five percent (35%) of the gross
floor area of the first floor, and/or located on the upper stories in which
case, the residential apartment use may constitute up to one hundred
percent (100%) of the gross floor area of the upper stories.
B. All Conditional Uses listed in § 228-63 subject to restrictions set forth
therein.
A. Garages to house not more than two commercial vehicles.
B. All accessory uses permitted in § 228-9A and B. [Amended 6-27-83 by
Ord. No. 83-508]
A. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage, or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices and for the storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
B. Car washes.
C. Gasoline service stations and the performance of any other auto
repairs, painting or body work.
D. Automotive dealerships and used car sales lots.
E. Any uses not permitted in § 228-71, § 228-72 and § 228-73 above.
F. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
§ 228-71 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-74
1:954
§ 228-75. Height limitations.
Height limitations shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-76. Area and yard requirements.
§ 228-77. Minimum habitable floor area for residential buildings.
The minimum floor area of residential buildings shall conform to the
minimum floor area requirements of the least restricted residence district
immediately adjacent to the Historic District Commercial Zone.
§ 228-78. Off street parking and loading.
Off street parking and loading requirements shall be:
§ 228-79. Deleted. [12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
§ 228-80. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-81. Historic District Residential/Commercial Zone. [Amended
11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202]
The following regulations shall apply in the Historic District Residential/
Commercial Zone.
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Every lot for uses permitted by § 228-71 and § 228-73 of this article
shall have a minimum lot area of forty five hundred square feet (4500)
and a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50').
B. Front yard set backs shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the street
line if no parking is permitted in front of the building. If there is parking
in front of the building, front yard setback from the street line shall be
not less than fifty-five feet (55'). All property not used for parking lying
within the front yard setback shall be landscaped in a manner approved
by the Planning Board and shall not be used for display of merchandise.
C. Side yards shall comply with § 228-66D of this ordinance.
D. Rear yards shall comply with § 228-66E of this ordinance.
E. No more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the total lot area shall be
developed with structures and pavement.
F. An attached group of stores may be considered as one building in
applying the above yard space requirements.
A. Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
B. For all other uses as required by § 228-15.
§ 228-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-82
1:955
§ 228-82. Permitted uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-83. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-202]
Accessory buildings and uses permitted shall be the same as in the Historic
District Commercial Zone.
§ 228-84. Conditional uses permitted.
A. All uses and buildings permitted in the Historic District Residential
Zone, subject to the restrictions and procedures set forth in § 228-61.
A. All uses and buildings permitted in the Historic District/Commercial
Zone subject to the following standards and criteria:
(1) Commercial and/or business uses shall only occupy the first floor
area of any structure.
(2) All buildings shall be designed in a residential character emulating
the architectural style of residential areas in scale, height of
buildings, facade materials and general structural treatment.
(3) All means of vehicular ingress and egress which service non
residential uses in this zone shall be located within one hundred
feet (100') of the Main Street street line.
(4) No commercial or other non residential use can be developed in
this zone unless the principle orientation of the structure is to Main
Street.
B. Home professional occupation. A professional occupation as defined in
§ 228-3A shall be permitted, subject to the following standards and
criteria:
(1) The professional is an inhabitant of the dwelling.
(2) The professional use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
(3) The professional use does not change the residential character of
the structure.
(4) No machinery or equipment is used which will cause electrical or
other interference with radio and television reception in adjacent
residences or cause offensive noise or vibration.
C. All Conditional Uses listed in § 228-63 and § 228-72 subject to
restrictions set forth therein.
§ 228-82 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-85
1:956
§ 228-85. Prohibited uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202;
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Any uses or structures not referred to in § 228-82, § 228-83, and § 228-84.
§ 228-86. Height limitations. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-202]
Height limitations shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-87. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord.
No. 79-202]
§ 228-88. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 11-26-79 by
Ord. No. 79-202]
Off street parking and loading requirements shall be the same as in the
Historic District Commercial Zone.
§ 228-89. Deleted. [12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
§ 228-90. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-91. Historic District Cluster Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the Historic District Cluster Zone.
§ 228-92. Permitted uses.
A. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
B. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
C. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Every lot used for residential uses shall conform to Historic District
Residential Zone standards.
B. Every lot used for uses permitted in § 228-83 and § 228-84 above, shall
conform to Historic District Commercial standards, or as additionally
restricted by Conditional Use requirements.
A. Single family detached residential structures.
B. Public buildings, including public schools and Township facilities.
C. Quasi public buildings and places of worship.
D. Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational and open space uses.
§ 228-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-93
1:957
§ 228-93. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 6-27-83 by Ord. No.
83-508]
Accessory buildings and uses permitted shall be the same as in § 228-9A
and B.
§ 228-94. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-95. Standards.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in § 228-91 and § 228-92 above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking or trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as
restricted in § 228-224C.
D. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
E. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Residential Uses:
1. No cluster residential development under this chapter shall take
place except upon tracts of land having a minimum of five (5)
contiguous acres having sufficient access to an existing improved
street.
2. The gross density per acre shall be three dwelling units per acre.
3. The net density per acre shall be seven (7) dwelling units per acre.
4. Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total land area of any
cluster residential development shall be designated for open space
or common recreation lands. Such designated open space shall
consist of land in a natural state or land developed for specific
recreational purposes and shall be specified as to its intended use,
including areas for wildlife preservation. Such designated open
space shall not include yard areas of lots in private individual
ownership, land area within the right-of-way of a public or private
street and buildings wherein the principal use of such lands is to
provide pedestrian access to and from buildings. Such open space
shall be dedicated to a homeowners' association, which
incorporation and bylaws and declaration of covenants shall be
approved by the Planning Board, subject to but not limited to the
provisions of Article VI of Chapter 192, Design Guidelines and
Standards (Cluster Subdivision), and Article VII of Chapter 228,
Zoning (Cluster Zoning).
§ 228-93 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-95
1:958
§ 228-96. Exceptions.
In the event that an Applicant does not seek to develop property in the
Historic District Cluster Zone in accordance with the provisions of § 228-90
through § 228-95 inclusive, then the applicant shall comply with the
requirements for an R 1 Zone as follows: § 228-11 Height Limitations;
§ 228-12 Area and Yard Requirements; § 228-13 Minimum Amount of Floor
Area for Residential Buildings; § 228-14 Off Street Parking.
§ 228-96.1. Sidewalks and curbing in Historic Districts. [Added
3-22-82 by Ord. No. 82-446]
§ 228-97. Historic District Residential/Preservation Zone.
[Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202]
The following regulations shall apply in the Historic District Residential/
Preservation Zone.
§ 228-98. Permitted uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
5. The architectural character of each dwelling unit shall be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with all proposed
dwelling units in the same neighborhood surrounding the unit.
6. Height shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet.
7. Minimum lot size shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
8. Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private or from any common parking area for two adjacent units
shall be 10 feet. Minimum setback for all structures from any
collector or arterial street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter,
shall be fifty (50) feet.
9. Parking requirements shall average two and twenty-five one
hundredths (2.25) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior
citizen housing for which parking requirements may be reduced by
the Planning Board to not less than five tenths (0.5) spaces per unit.
Parking may be reduced by the Planning Board to average not less
than one and five tenths (1.5) spaces.
B. All other uses permitted in § 228-91 and § 228-92 above are subject to
the same restrictions and requirements as in the Historic District
Commercial Zone.
A. Sidewalks and curbing in all historic districts shall be constructed in
accordance with Chapter 189, Streets and Sidewalks of the Code of the
Township of East Brunswick.
A. Single family dwellings.
§ 228-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-98
1:959
§ 228-99. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-202; 6-27-83 by Ord. No. 83-508]
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-100. Prohibited uses. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No. 79-202;
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 228-101. Height limitations. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-202]
Height limitations shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-102. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord.
No. 79-202]
§ 228-103. Off street parking. [Amended 11-26-79 by Ord. No.
79-202]
Off street parking requirements shall be the same as required in the R-1
District.
B. Public parks and playgrounds and public recreational and community
center buildings and grounds.
C. Cemeteries.
A. Any accessory uses permitted in § 228-9A and B.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in § 228-98 and § 228-99 above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
E. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Every lot in a Historic District Residential/Preservation Zone shall have
a minimum width of one hundred seventy-five feet (175') and a
minimum area of two acres.
B. Setbacks for principal and accessory buildings to any street line shall
be the same as required in the R-1 District.
C. Side yard for principal and accessory buildings to any street line shall
be the same as required in the R-1 District.
D. Rear yard requirements for principal and accessory buildings shall be
the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-98 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-104
1:960
§ 228-104. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-104.1. Regulations for historical landmarks lying outside
Historic District Residential, Historic District Commercial, Historic
District Residential/Commercial and Historic District Cluster Zone.
[Amended 3-30-83 by Ord. No. 83-499]
All landmarks lying outside the boundaries of the Historic District Zone and
described in Schedule B shall be subject to the minimum lot size and yard
requirements of the zoning district in which they lie and shall otherwise be
subject to all of the requirements of this code.
§ 228-104.2. Definitions applicable to Code. [Amended 3-30-83 by
Ord. No. 83-499]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ALTERATIONS — Any material change in the exterior architectural features
of any improvement less than demolition, removal or construction of any
such improvement. Any renovation of the interior of such improvement
which has no appreciable effect upon the exterior architectural features of
such improvement shall not be deemed an "alteration".
APPLICANT — Any person, persons, association, partnership or
corporation, tenant or other person in charge as herein defined, who applies
for approval from the Historic Preservation Commission in order to make
any environmental change on property subject to the provisions of this
Historic Preservation Code. Persons other than the fee owner need the
owner's consent to apply.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The person charged with the administration
of any building code or with the issuance of building or demolition permits
in the Township.
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE — Any alteration, demolition, removal or
construction of any on site improvement in the district or at a designated
landmark according to the provisions of the Code.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — The architectural style, design,
general arrangement and components of all outer surfaces of an
improvement, as distinguished from the interior architectural features
enclosed by said exterior surfaces, including but not limited to the kind,
color and texture of the building material and type and style of all windows,
doors, lights, signs, decorative elements and other fixtures appurtenant to
such improvements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographic area with clearly defined boundaries
within the Township of East Brunswick including all improvements therein.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation
Commission established by this ordinance.
§ 228-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-104.2
1:961
LANDMARK — A site or structure located outside the geographic
boundaries of an Historic District Zone, but within the Township of East
Brunswick meeting the criteria set forth in § 228-104.4 of this Code.
MINOR EXTERIOR WORK — Any change in, addition to or removal from the
parts, elements and materials comprising a structure where such change,
addition or removal does not constitute a structural alteration and is of such
nature that it may lawfully be accomplished without a building permit.
OWNER — Any person or persons having title, in fee, to property which
is an improvement, landmark, district or part of a district so as to be
legally entitled, upon obtaining the required permits and approvals from
the Construction Official of the locality having jurisdiction over building
construction with respect to such property, to perform any construction,
alteration, removal, demolition or other works to which such person seeks
the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 228-104.3. Criteria for designation as a Historic District.
[Amended 3-30-83 by Ord. No. 83-499]
Any improvement, landmark, structure, or district may be designated as
Historic according to the provisions of this code provided it meets one (l) or
more of the following additional qualifying criteria:
A. Historical importance. The improvement, structure, landmark or
district has character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristic of the community; it is associated
with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
pattern of our history; it is associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; it exemplifies the cultural, political, economic,
social or historic heritage of the community; or it may have yielded or
may be likely to yield information on recorded history.
B. Architectural importance. The improvement, structure, landmark or
district portrays the environment of a group of people in an area of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style; it embodies
those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type, period or
method; it is the work of an architect or master builder whose
individual work has influenced the development of a municipality or
several municipalities; or it contains elements of architectural design,
detail, materials or craftsmanship which represents a significant
innovation.
C. Geographic importance. The improvement, structure, landmark or
district, because of being part of or related to a square, park or other
distinctive area should be developed or preserved according to a plan
based on historic, cultural or architectural motif; or due to its unique
§ 228-104.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-104.3
1:962
§ 228-104.4. Criteria for evaluating structures to be historically
significant and to be designated under Schedule B of the code.
[Amended 3-30-83 by Ord. No. 83-499]
An improvement, a site or structure may be designated a landmark under
Schedule B if it meets the following two criteria:
§ 228-104.5. Deleted. [2-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-640]
§ 228-104.6. Criteria to apply in reviewing plans. [Amended 3-30-83
by Ord. No. 83-499; 2-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-640]
In reviewing the plans, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board shall give
consideration to:
location or singular physical characteristics represents an established
and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or state.
A. The structure has retained its integrity either in original workmanship,
materials, design, setting or association.
B. The structure is fifty (50) or more years old.
And meets one or more of the following:
C. The structure has outstanding historical, cultural or architectural
significance to the community and be part of the pattern of our
heritage, be it National, State, County, or Municipality.
D. The structure exemplifies the broad cultural, economic, and social
history of East Brunswick.
E. The structure has distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style representative of a recognized historical or unique period or
method of construction.
a. The general compatibility of the exterior design of the building, site
plan arrangement and materials to be used.
b. Any other factor listed in § 228-57 of this Code, as well as aesthetics
and the arrangements and materials of the building in question and the
relationship of such factors to similar features of historic structures in
the immediate surroundings and the position of such structures to the
street or public way.
c. Height. The height of a proposed building shall be visually compatible
with adjacent buildings.
d. Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width of
the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible to buildings, squares and places to which it is visually
related.
§ 228-104.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-104.6
1:963
e. Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the width
of the windows to height of windows in a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings, squares and places to which the building is
visually related; respect the stylistic period or periods a building
represents for all windows and doors; if replacement of windows/or
doors is necessary, the replacement should duplicate the material,
design, and the hardware of the older window/or door.
f. Rhythm of solids to voids in facades. The relationship of solids to voids
in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with
buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related.
g. Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of a building
to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually
compatible to the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually
related.
h. Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship of
entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building site shall be
visually compatible to the buildings, squares and places to which it is
visually related. Retain porches or steps which are appropriate to the
building and its development. Porches or additions reflecting later
architectural styles are often important to the building's historical
integrity and, wherever possible, should be retained. Repair or replace,
where necessary, deteriorated architectural features of wood, iron, cast
iron, terracotta, tile and brick.
i. Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of the
materials, texture and color of the facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings to
which it is visually related. Discover and retain original paint colors, or
repaint colors based on the original to illustrate the distinctive
character of the property.
Existing Buildings: Exterior Features.
(1) Masonry buildings: retain original masonry and mortar, whenever
possible, without application of surface treatment. Duplicate old
mortar and composition, color and textures. Repair or replace,
where necessary, deteriorating materials with new material that
duplicates the old as closely as possible. Replace missing
architectural features, such as cornices, brackets, railings and
shutters.
(2) Frame Buildings: retain original, whenever possible. Repair or
replace, where necessary, deteriorating material with new material
that duplicates the old as closely as possible.
j. Roof shapes. The roof shapes of a building shall be visually compatible
with the buildings to which it is visually related. Preserve the original
roof shape. If additions or alterations essential to the feasibility of
continued usage is necessary, roof slopes and the original roofing
§ 228-104.6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-104.6
1:964
§ 228-104.7. Intent. [Amended 3-30-83 by Ord. No. 83-499; 2-25-85
by Ord. No. 85-640]
It is the intent that the Planning Board and the Zoning Board shall
encourage alterations or repairs to structures in the Historic District and
on Schedule B made in the spirit of their architectural style and that any
additions will be made in such a manner as not to detract from a building's
original appearance.
§ 228-104.8. Demolition. [Amended 3-30-83 by Ord. No. 83-499;
2-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-640]
material should be retained whenever possible. When new materials
are selected, try to match the color and texture of the original. Replace
deteriorating roof coverings with new material that matches the old
one in composition, size, shape, color and texture. Preserve or replace,
where necessary, all architectural features which give the roof its
essential character, such as dormer windows, cupolas, cornices,
brackets, chimneys, cresting, and weather vanes. Place television
antennae and mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, in an
inconspicuous location.
k. Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls, wrought
iron fences, evergreen landscape masses and building facades, shall, if
necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to ensure
visual compatibility of the building to the buildings, squares and places
to which it is visually related.
l. Scale of a building. The size of a building, the building mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings,
square and places to which it is visually related.
m. Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, whether this be vertical character,
horizontal character or nondirectional character.
1. The structures described in this Ordinance are valuable for the periods
they represent and important to the neighborhood within which they
exist. It is intended that demolition of these structures should be
discouraged, as their loss will be a common loss to the Township and
the area. Moving of a structure within the Historic District as an
alternative to its demolition is recommended if there is no other way to
save the structure.
2. Applications for demolition or removal of buildings will be forwarded by
the Construction Official who shall have a period of six (6) months
within which to consult with the East Brunswick Historical Society, the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Historic Sites
Division, the League of Historic Societies or other similarly qualified
§ 228-104.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-104.8
1:965
§ 228-105. Relocation of historic buildings.
When it is necessary to move an historic building to another site within
the Historic District, the Planning Board shall provide a site evaluation
report. All applications receivable under this Code, whether for site plan,
subdivision approvals or variance approval, shall be submitted first to the
Planning Board for its consideration.
§ 228-106. Powers of the Planning Board. [Amended 2-25-85 by
Ord. No. 85-640]
§ 228-107. Actions not affected by Article.
Nothing in this Code shall prohibit repairing or rebuilding any structure
in the Historic District or on Schedule B so as to maintain or return
the structure to is original condition prior to deterioration or destruction.
Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of any structure
which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outer
appearance thereof, nor to prevent any environmental change which the
Construction Official shall certify is required for public safety because of
any unsafe or dangerous condition.
organizations to ascertain how the Township may preserve the building
and/or the premises. The Planning Board is empowered to assist the
owner in developing plans to preserve the structure when moving or
demolition thereof would be a great loss to the Township.
3. If a plan has not been developed within six (6) official months of the
date of filing with the Construction Official, demolition or removal
permits will be issued. If a plan has been developed and has not been
accepted by the applicant within six (6) months of the date of filing with
the Construction Official, no demolition or removal permits will be
issued pending appeal by the applicant to the Township Council.
1. When an application in the Historic District or on Schedule B shall be
submitted to the Planning Board, that Board may engage or retain
experts, including historians, architects and representatives of the
Department of Environmental Protection, Historic Sites Division, to aid
in its deliberations.
2. On those matters where the Planning Board is required to take action
under this Code, it shall have the power to approve or disapprove the
recommendations, but in the event of disapproval, it shall state its
reasons therefor at a public meeting. The Planning Board may make
recommendations to the applicant with respect to the suitability of
design, arrangement and construction.
3. The Planning Board shall indicate on its plans its approval, which shall
be dated and signed by the Secretary of the Planning Board.
§ 228-104.8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-108
1:966
§ 228-108. Subdivision of Historic District Property.
§ 228-109. Additions and deletions to Schedule B. [Amended
2-25-85 by Ord. No. 85-640]
Such additions of historical sites and structures are to be recommended
when documented and in compliance with established criteria.
SCHEDULE B
Allwood Road
19 Block 588 Lot 25
Beekman Road
25 Block 313 Lot 5.02 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
Church Lane
10 Block 315.01 Lot 28.02
48 Block 315.01 Lot 29.06, 29.07, 29.08
98 Block 310 Lot 2 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
132 Block 310 Lot 8.02
143 - 2
structures
Block 312 Lot 7
144 Block 310 Lot 10.06
155 Block 312 Lot 5
Cranbury Road
350 Block 88 Lot 2.13
437 (on tax
list)
Block 88 Lot 15.01
645 Block 320 Lot 21.04 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
Deerfield Road
3 Block 88.01 Lot 9.03
Dunhams Corner Road
109 Block 86.11 Lot 48.01
116 Block 87 Lot 11.14
A. The following criteria shall apply:
Property shall be judged by the composite of existing structures,
natural setting, configuration of the land, and distinctive physical
features, such as large trees, waterways, garden settings, natural
approaches or components that maintain the integral original qualities,
and such appurtenances as accessory buildings, wells, monuments, that
provide significant unique character of the property as a whole.
§ 228-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-109
1:967
SCHEDULE B
133 Block 738.01 Lot 3.01
188 Block 319.15 Lot 6
199 Block 317.26 Lot 2.17
204 Block 319.15 Lots 2.01, 5 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
208 Block 319.15 Lot 4
210 Block 319.15 Lot 3
228 Block 319.13 Lot 1.08
271 Block 315.12 Lot 19.01
295 Block 315.08 Lot 34
341 Block 315.02 Lot 23.01
349 Block 315.02 Lot 24.05
350 Block 320 Lot 27
370 Block 320 Lot 27
400 Block 320 Lot 6
416 Block 320 Lot 5.03
440 Block 320 Lot 4
Dutch Road
142 Block 317.14 Lot 14
Farrington Avenue
32 Block 307.06 Lots 26.01, 27 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
Fern Road
101 Block 320 Lot 19
103 Block 320 Lot 18.04
Fresh Ponds Road
43 Block 308.19 Lot 24
45 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
210 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
Hardenburg Lane
157 Block 310 Lot 60.02
Hilltop Blvd.
9 Block 727 Lot 11
Milltown Road
78 Block 58 Lot 2.03
87 Block 709 Lot 5
§ 228-109 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-109
1:968
SCHEDULE B
186 Block 633 Lot 14
190 Block 633 Lot 16
301 Block 317.13 Lot 32
Old Bridge Turnpike
97 Block 122 Lot 10.01
105 Block 122 Lot 9.01
155 Block 113 Lot 72
157 Block 113 Lot 24-26
171 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
367 Block 55.01 Lot 3.02
419 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
917 Block 132.06 Lot 12
957 Block 132.14 Lot 6
Old Stage Road
550 Block 322.09 Lot 1
630 Block 321 Lot 13
Prigmore Street
149 Block 107 Lots 49-51 [Added 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
Riva Avenue
245 Block 307.12 Lot 31
296 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
318 [Deleted 8-24-81 by Ord. No. 81-377]
335 Block 307.12 Lot 5.12
342 Block 308.19 Lot 3.04
370 Block 308.19 Lot 2
429 Block 309.02 Lot 36
443 Block 309.02 Lot 37.05
Route #18
9 Block 5.04 Lot 3.01
190 Block 17.01 Lot 17
Rues Lane
252 Block 88 Lot 11.03
304 Block 88 Lot 13 [Demolished]
Ruth Street
§ 228-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-109
1:969
SCHEDULE B
1 Block 6.03 Lot 6.19
Ryders Lane
428 Block 721 Lot 33
497 Block 317.27 Lot 52.08
546 Block 735 Lot 3.02
571 Block 319 Lot 10.06
600 Block 87 Lot 1
Smith Lane
27 Block 317.13 Lot 21.18
Sullivan Way
29 Block 584 Lot 15.02
Summerhill Road
135 Block 88.14 Lot 1
138 Block 89 Lot 3.04
192 Block 131 Lot 13.03
Lonczak Farmhouse
Block 88 Lot 7.08
Weston Mills Road
19 Block 1 Lot 2
§ 228-109 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-109
1:970
ARTICLE X
Regulations for the OP 1 Office Professional District
[Added 5-24-76 by Ord. No. 76-8-DDD; amended 4-11-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-LLL; 6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-72]
§ 228-110. Permitted uses.
Uses permitted shall be:
A. General offices, including but not limited to:
(1) Finance insurance and real estate services. These include banking
services, bank related functions, savings and loan associations;
actuarial business and personal credit services, security brokers,
dealers and flotation services; commodity contracts, brokers and
dealers services; security and commodity exchanges; security and
commodity allied services; insurance carriers; insurance agents,
brokers and services; real estate operators, except developers and
resources; real estate agents, brokers and management services;
title abstracting services; real estate subdividing and development
services; real estate operative builders; combination of real estate,
insurance, loan and law services; other real estate and related
services; holding and investment services; and other finance,
insurance, travel and real estate services.
(2) Personal services: photographic services; beauty services; and
barber services.
(3) Business services: advertising services; outdoor advertising
services; other advertising services; consumer and mercantile
credit reporting services; adjustment and collection services; direct
mail advertising services; blueprinting and photocopying services;
stenographic services and other duplicating and mailing services;
news syndicate services and informant services.
(4) Research, development and testing services: business and
management consulting services; and detective and protective
services.
(5) Professional services: physician services; chiropractic services;
psychologist and psychiatric services; dental services; medical
laboratory services; dental laboratory services; legal services;
engineering and architectural services; educational and scientific
research services; accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;
urban planning services; data processing services; and other
professional services.
(6) Governmental services: executive, legislative and judicial
functions; and postal services.
§ 228-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-110
1:971
§ 228-111. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses permitted shall be:
§ 228-112. Conditional uses.
The following additional uses may be permitted by the Planning Board in
this zone, upon a showing by the developer that each proposed use will
comply with the appropriate criteria set forth below:
§ 228-113. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
(7) Miscellaneous services: business associations; professional
membership organizations; labor unions and similar labor
organizations; and civic, social and fraternal associations.
B. Residential dwellings. Where a single family dwelling existed on a lot in
a residential zone at the time this section was adopted (May 24, 1976),
the residential use may be thereafter continued and the structure may
be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as the proposed alteration
conforms to the minimum requirements for height, area, yard and off
street parking as they existed prior to May 24, 1976. If the proposed
alteration does not conform to the prior bulk regulations, an application
for a bulk variance shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No. 79-159]
C. Undertaking establishments. [Added 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-400]
A. Any accessory building and uses permitted in the C-2 District.
A. Recreational activities such as tennis courts, athletic clubs and
gymnasiums; provided, however, that the criteria set forth in § 228-8H
shall apply, except for the area and bulk requirements which shall
comply with the standards described in this OP-1 Zone.
B. Deleted. [6-24-91 By Ord. No. 91-72]
A. All uses not specifically listed above as permitted are hereby prohibited
and specifically the following: [Amended 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29]
(1) Fast food restaurants.
(2) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
(3) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
(4) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(5) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
§ 228-110 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-114
1:972
§ 228-114. Height limitations.
No building or structure in an OP-1 District shall be erected or enlarged to
exceed thirty five (35) feet in height, measured as the average grade around
the structure, or two and one half (2 1/2) stories.
§ 228-115. Area and yard requirements.
A. Minimum lot size for office and residential use shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet. Minimum lot size for undertaking establishments
shall be 1.5 acres. [Amended 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-400]
B. Maximum coverage for buildings and structures shall be thirty percent
(30%) of the total lot area. Total lot coverage, including buildings,
structures, parking, loading, drives, walkways and other paved
surfaces, shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the total lot area.
C. Every lot used for buildings and uses permitted in the OP-1 District as
listed under § 228-86A shall have a minimum width of one hundred
twenty (120) feet at the street line, except that one side of a corner lot
shall have a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) feet at the street line.
D. Front yards of business lots shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet from
the street line if off street parking space is to be provided at the side or
rear of the building and a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet from the
street line if off street parking space is to be provided in front of the
building. In any location where the land on the opposite side of the
street is in a residence district, the twenty foot strip of front yard
adjacent to the street line shall be improved with a landscaped buffer,
installed with a mixture of deciduous and coniferous plant materials at
a minimum height of four feet and maintained at a height of a minimum
of six (6) feet, excluding areas necessary for adequate sight distance,
and this area shall not be used for off street parking purposes or for the
display of merchandise. An earth berm of a minimum of three feet may
be installed in such a twenty foot landscaped buffer area, in which case
the height of the plant materials may be revised as approved by the
Planning Board at the time of site plan approval.
E. Side yards of business lots shall have a minimum width of 20 feet each
from the side lot lines.
F. Rear yards of business lots shall have a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet
from the rear lot line.
G. An attached group of businesses and offices may be considered as one
building in applying the above yard space requirements.
H. In any OP 1 Zone where the zone line is immediately contiguous or
adjacent to any residential zone, a fifty foot landscaped buffer shall be
installed of deciduous and coniferous plant materials at a minimum
height of five (5) feet and maintained at a minimum height of not less
than fifteen (15) feet. An earth berm of a minimum height of five (5) feet
§ 228-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-115
1:973
§ 228-116. Off street parking. [Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No.
93-72]
Parking shall be provided at the rate of spaces to be approved by the
Planning Board as provided for in § 228-15.1.
§ 228-117. Deleted. [12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
§ 228-118. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
may be constructed, in which case the Planning Board may lessen
the requirements for plant materials. The Planning Board may waive
the requirements for buffering if equivalent screening is provided by
parks or by topography or other natural conditions. Such a buffer
area is required to shield adjacent residential areas from parking lot
illumination, headlights and fumes and to diminish the visual
encroachment of residential privacy and residential neighborhood
characteristics.
I. All buildings within two hundred (200) feet of residential zones shall be
designed in a residential character emulating the architectural style of
residential areas in scale, height of buildings, facade materials and
general structural treatment.
§ 228-115 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118
1:974
ARTICLE X-A
Regulations for Planned Unit Residential Developments
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20]
§ 228-118.1. Authority for provisions on planned unit residential
developments; purpose. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B;
amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-82]
§ 228-118.2. Planned unit residential development option zone.
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B]
The Planned Unit Residential Development (PURD) Option Zone includes
the land described in Schedule A annexed hereto, notwithstanding the fact
that the boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Maps.
A. Authority. § 228-118.1 through § 228-118.12 are adopted pursuant to
N.J.R.S. 40:55D-39.
B. Purpose and intent. In order for the Township of East Brunswick to
meet its responsibility to protect and defend its natural resources,
ecological systems, open spaces, natural beauty and the value of the
property within the Township, while at the same time recognizing the
increased urbanization occurring within its boundaries and attempting
to meet its responsibilities to bear its fair share of the region's need to
provide for the construction of housing; and the Township, having
studied and analyzed its environmental and natural resources and the
potential hazards to those resources in anticipation of future
development and having undertaken such studies as major steps in
creating long-range plans directed toward the accommodation of
housing and other development, while avoiding environmental
degradation and its attendant threats to public health and safety; the
Township Council of the Township of East Brunswick hereby declares it
to be in the general interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township of East Brunswick and in harmony with the
objectives of this chapter and the Township's adopted Master Plan to
permit greater flexibility in design, layout and construction in housing
development than heretofore permitted, so as to encourage retention
and preservation of woodlands, surface water, swamps, aquifers,
aquifer recharge areas, poorly drained soils, floodplains and other open
space land for aesthetic and scenic beauty, passive recreation,
rejuvenation of resources and preservation of the ecological systems of
the Township; and to encourage innovations in design and reflect
changes in land development technology and to provide for necessary
education and recreational facilities conveniently located to such
housing; and, in such zones where applicable, to provide for necessary
commercial facilities and services; to ensure compatibility among
various land uses; to conserve the value of the land; to encourage more
efficient use of land and of public services; to encourage better
transportation of people; to prevent strip commercial development; and
to preserve the residential integrity of the area.
§ 228-118.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.3
1:975
§ 228-118.3. Standards for planned unit residential developments.
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B: amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No.
84-581; 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26; 12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47;
3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13; 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20]
All existing planned unit residential development developed as of January
1, 2017 under this chapter shall take place upon tracts of land having
a minimum of forty (40) contiguous acres having sufficient access to an
existing improved street, except the Village Green Three A and MXD/R
(Mixed Use Development/Residential) which shall take place upon tracts
of land having a minimum of twenty-five (25) contiguous acres having
sufficient access to an existing improved street. In the Town Green Zone for
commercial and mixed use developments, the minimum tract of land shall
be fifteen (15) contiguous acres, having sufficient access to an improved
street. In the Village Green One zone a minimum of six (6) acres is required
for a planned unit residential development.
As of January 1, 2017 development of planned unit residential development
shall take place in the Village Green II zone on a minimum tract size of
seven (7) acres with a gross density of nine (9) units per acre which shall
include twenty (20%) percent affordable units as defined in Chapter 132
and in the Affordable Housing Compliance Plan.
As of January 1, 2017 development of planned unit residential development
shall take place in the Town Green zone on a minimum tract size of 10
acres with a gross density of twelve (12) units per acre which shall include
twenty (20%) percent affordable units as defined in Chapter 132 and in the
Affordable Housing Compliance Plan.
§ 228-118.4. Density limitations and affordable housing
requirements for planned unit residential developments. [Added
5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B; amended 3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-11;
12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47; 3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13; 3-6-17 by
Ord. No. 17-13]
A. The gross density per acre for a planned unit residential development,
which shall include twenty (20%) percent affordable units as defined in
§ 132-70 shall be as follows: [Amended 12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47]
(1) Village Green Two: six (6) dwelling units per acre for developments
existing as of January 1, 2017. As of January 1, 2017 nine (9)
dwelling units per acre. [Amended 2-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-496;
12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-13]
(2) Village Green Three and Village Green Three A: eight (8) dwelling
units per acre. [Amended 9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-52]
(3) Town Green: twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.
(4) Mixed Use Development/Residential: Nineteen (19) dwelling units
per acre. [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581]
§ 228-118.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.4
1:976
§ 228-118.5. Deleted. [12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47]
§ 228-118.6. Open spaces and common recreation lands for planned
unit residential developments. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264B;
amended 2-27-89 by Ord. No. 89-995; 3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13]
Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total land area of any planned
unit residential development shall be designated for open space or common
recreation lands. Such designated open space shall consist of land in a
natural state or land developed for specific recreational purposes and shall
be specified as to its intended use, including areas for wildlife preservation.
Parcel size shall be a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres, which may be
irregularly shaped. This five acre minimum shall not apply to planned unit
residential developments of less than fifteen (15) acres. Such designated
open space shall not include yard areas of lots in private individual
B. Affordable housing requirements. [Amended 2-14-83 by Ord. No.
83-496; 12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47; 3-6-17 by Ord. No. 17-13]
(1) The developer shall utilize uniform architectural and landscape
plans for all units in the PURD with no reduction or substantial
change for moderate-or-low-income units. [Amended 12-13-99 by
Ord. No. 99-47]
(2) The developer shall build the affordable units in a scatter site
fashion throughout the development. For purposes of this section,
scatter site shall mean that no more than two low or moderateincome
units shall be adjacent or attached to one another.
[Amended 12-13-99 by Ord. No. 99-47]
(3) For the purpose of this section, low or moderate-income housing
shall include very low, low and moderate income housing provided
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and the Township's
affordable housing regulations, whichever is the more restrictive,
and may include housing or mortgage financing which is provided
pursuant to any federal, state or private subsidy program whose
object is to provide low-and moderate-income housing. The
foregoing shall not preclude a developer from compliance with the
provision by any other means, provided that such alternate means
shall provide low-and moderate-income housing upon terms and
conditions substantially equivalent to those available through any
of the foregoing methods. The developer shall submit to the
municipal agency for its approval, in writing, a plan by which such
low-and moderate-income housing shall be provided by the
developer and maintained as such low-and moderate-income
housing thereafter.
C. The gross density per acre for a planned unit residential development in
the Village Green One zone shall be three dwelling units per acre. The
gross density for all other permitted residential development shall be
two dwelling units per acre. [Added 3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13]
§ 228-118.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.6
1:977
ownership, land area within the right-of-way of public or private street and
buildings wherein the principal use of such lands is to provide pedestrian
access to and from buildings. Such open space may be deeded to the
Township or dedicated to a homeowners' association or trust, which
incorporation and bylaws shall be approved by the Planning Board, subject
to but not limited to the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 192, Design
Guidelines and Standards (Cluster Subdivision), and Article VII of Chapter
228, Zoning (Cluster Zoning). In no event shall title to open space be
conveyed by the developer prior to the posting of maintenance guaranties.
§ 228-118.7. Standard for residences in planned unit residential
developments and mixed use development/residential. [Added
5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B: amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581;
5-24-90 by Ord. No. 90-16; 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26; 1-25-99 by
Ord. No. 99-5]
The following standards shall apply:
A. Single-family cluster, detached:
(1) The architectural character of each dwelling unit shall be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with all proposed
dwelling units in the same neighborhood surrounding the unit.
(2) Height shall be limited to thirty-five (35) feet. [Amended 1-25-99
by Ord. No. 99-5]
(3) Minimum lot size shall be three thousand two hundred (3,200)
square feet.
(4) Minimum front setback: twenty-five (25) feet. [Amended 5-24-82
by Ord. No. 82-460; 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-5]
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet for principal buildings.
[Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No. 99-5]
(6) Side setbacks shall be 10 feet. [Amended 1-25-99 by Ord. No.
99-5]
(7) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard and side yard setbacks for each lot in such a
development shall be established as the existing building line for
each unit. The rear yard setback shall be the existing building line,
however, decks and patios may be placed in the rear yard if they
shall not reduce the existing rear yard by more than 50%. At
developments where there is a homeowners' association, the
association shall first approve any deck or patio before a building
permit is filed. [Added 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-399; amended
5-14-90 by Ord. No. 90-16]
B. Single-family cluster, attached.
§ 228-118.6 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.7
1:978
(1) The architectural character of each dwelling unit must be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with proposed
dwelling units in the same neighborhood surrounding the unit.
(2) Height shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum lot size shall be three thousand two hundred (3,200)
square feet.
(4) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private or from any common parking area shall be 10 feet.
Minimum setback for all structures from any collector or arterial
street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be fifty (50) feet.
(5) Parking requirements shall be two and twenty-five one hundredths
(2.25) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
which may be reduced by the Planning Board to not less than fivetenths
(0.5) spaces per unit. Parking may be reduced by the
Planning Board to average not less than one and five-tenths (1.5)
spaces per dwelling unit for low and moderate income housing.
[Amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581]
(6) Units shall be attached in such a manner as to provide maximum
safety and privacy for adjoining units.
(7) All units shall be provided with an exterior private enclosed or
semi-enclosed space in the rear yard. The enclosures shall be
composed of materials compatible in style and color with the unit
and shall be no greater than six (6') feet in height. All enclosures
shall be of the same height throughout a single development
section. All units shall be provided with storage units which shall be
physically attached to and architecturally compatible with the
principal structure or shall be located with the private exterior
enclosed or semi-enclosed space and are to extend no higher than
the enclosure structure and are to be screened from view. [Added
5-12-80 by Ord. No. 80-250; amended 5-25-81 by Ord. No.
81-353].
(8) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks for each lot in such
a development shall be established by the location of the structures
approved on the preliminary subdivision or site plan for each
particular development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the
approved locations of the principal structures in the development,
and no development shall take place within the front yard, side
yard or rear yard setbacks as defined herein. [Added 9-28-81 by
Ord. No. 81-399]
(9) Distance between buildings including all projections:
§ 228-118.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.7
1:979
(a) Where both facing walls contain windows of habitable rooms:
40 feet but not less than two times the eave height of the
highest habitable room.
(b) Where only one of two facing walls contains windows of
habitable rooms: 25 feet but not less than the eave height of
the highest building.
(c) Where neither of two facing wall contains windows of habitable
rooms: 20 feet or the eave height of the highest building,
whichever is greater.
Buildings shall be considered facing if the walls form an angle
of less than forty-five degrees.
C. Patio houses:
(1) The architectural character of each dwelling unit must be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with proposed
dwelling units in the same neighborhood surrounding the unit.
(2) Height shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum lot size shall be three thousand two hundred (3,200)
square feet.
(4) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private or from any common parking area shall be 10 feet.
Minimum setback for all structures from any collector or arterial
street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be fifty (50) feet.
(5) Parking requirements shall be two and twenty-five one hundredths
(2.25) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
which may be reduced by the Planning Board to not less than fivetenths
(0.5) spaces per unit. Parking may be reduced by the
Planning Board to average not less than one and five-tenths (1.5)
spaces per dwelling unit for low and moderate income housing.
[Amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581]
(6) Units shall be attached in such a manner as to provide maximum
safety and privacy for adjoining units.
(7) No more than four dwelling units shall be connected to form one
structure.
(8) Distance between buildings including all projections:
(a) Where both facing walls contain windows of habitable rooms:
40 feet but not less than two times the eave height of the
highest habitable room.
(b) Where only one of two facing walls contains windows of
habitable rooms: 25 feet but not less than the eave height of
the highest building.
§ 228-118.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.7
1:980
(c) Where neither of two facing walls contain windows of habitable
rooms: 20 feet or the eave height of the highest building,
whichever is greater.
Buildings shall be considered facing if the walls form an angle
of less than forty-five degrees.
(9) Such patio area shall be not less than four hundred (400) square
feet in size, having no single dimension of less than fifteen (15) feet,
shall be completely clear of structures and shall be designed for the
recreational use of the occupants of the dwelling unit. The patio
may be at ground level or elevated and may be composed of any
materials designed to create a patio surface or may be a wood deck
area or other surface or structure or combination thereof, in whole
or in part. Adequate visual screening from neighboring dwelling
units, patios, adjacent parking areas and roadways shall be
provided which may consist of plantings, masonry structures or
wood fencing. Architectural elements, such as masonry walls and
fences, shall be compatible in both style and materials with the
dwelling unit of which it is a part.
(10) All units shall be provided with an exterior private enclosed or
semi-enclosed space in the rear yard. The enclosures shall be
composed of materials compatible in style and color with the unit
and shall be no greater than six (6') feet in height. All enclosures
shall be of the same height throughout a single development
section.
All units shall be provided with storage units which shall be
physically attached to and architecturally compatible with the
principal structure or shall be located with the private exterior
enclosed or semi-enclosed space and are to extend no higher than
the enclosure structure and are to be screened from view. [Added
5-12-80 by Ord. No. 80-250; amended 5-26-81 by Ord. No.
81-353].
(11) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks for each lot in such
a development shall be established by the location of the structures
approved on the preliminary subdivision or site plan for each
particular development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the
approved locations of the principal structures in the development,
and no development shall take place within the front yard, side
yard or rear yard setbacks as defined herein. [Added 9-28-81 by
Ord. No. 81-399].
D. Townhouses.
§ 228-118.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.7
1:981
(1) The architectural character of each dwelling unit must be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with proposed
dwelling units in the same neighborhood surrounding the unit.
(2) Height shall be limited to three stories or thirty-five (35) feet,
whichever is less.
(3) Minimum tract size shall be five (5) acres.
(4) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private, or from any common parking area shall be 10 feet.
Minimum setback for all structures from any collector or arterial
street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter shall be fifty (50) feet.
(5) Parking requirements shall be two and twenty-five one hundredths
(2.25) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
which may be reduced by the Planning Board to not less than fivetenths
(0.5) spaces per unit. Parking may be reduced by the
Planning Board to average not less than one and five-tenths (1.5)
spaces per dwelling unit for low and moderate income housing.
[Amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581]
(6) Units shall be attached in such a manner as to provide maximum
safety and privacy for adjoining units.
(7) Not more than twelve (12) dwelling units in any single townhouse
structure shall be constructed in a manner so as to form one linear
plane. No more than 20 such units may be included in a structure
having units constructed on more than one linear place.
(8) Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed
a length of three hundred (300) feet.
(9) The front facades of at least forty percent (40%) of the number of
units which are attached in a structure having a single linear plane
shall be set back not less than 10 feet behind the facades of the
remaining units in such structure.
(10) The rooflines of at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of units
which are attached in a structure having a single linear plane shall
be staggered in height by not less than five percent (5%) of the
height of the rooflines of the remaining units in such structure.
(11) Distance between buildings including all projections:
(a) Where both facing walls contain windows of habitable rooms:
40 feet but not less than two times the eave height of the
highest habitable room.
(b) Where only one of two facing walls contains windows of
habitable rooms; 25 feet but not less than the eave height of
the highest building.
§ 228-118.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.7
1:982
(c) Where neither of two facing wall contains windows of habitable
rooms: 20 feet or the eave height of the highest building,
whichever is greater.
Buildings shall be considered facing if the walls form an angle
of less than forty-five degrees.
(12) Where an outdoor living space is included for each or any
particular unit, it shall be provided with adequate visual screening
from all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living spaces,
parking areas and roadways. Screening may be accomplished with
plant materials, masonry structures or wood fencing. Architectural
elements, such as masonry walls and fences, shall be compatible in
both style and materials with the dwelling unit.
(13) All units shall be provided with an exterior private enclosed or
semi-enclosed space in the rear yard. The enclosures shall be
composed of materials compatible in style and color with the unit
and shall be no greater than six (6') feet in height. All enclosures
shall be of the same height throughout a single development
section.
All units shall be provided with storage units which shall be
physically attached to and architecturally compatible with the
principal structure or shall be located with the private exterior
enclosed or semi-enclosed space and are to extend no higher than
the enclosure structure and are to be screened from view. [Added
5-12-80 by Ord. No. 80-250; amended 5-26-81 by Ord. No.
81-353].
(14) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks for each lot in such
a development shall be established by the location of the structures
approved on the preliminary subdivision or site plan for each
particular development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the
approved locations of the principal structures in the development,
and no development shall take place within the front yard, side
yard or rear yard setbacks as defined herein. [Added 9-28-81 by
Ord. No. 81-399]
E. Apartments (multifamily units)
(1) Height shall be limited to three stories or thirty-five (35') feet,
whichever is less.
(2) Minimum tract size shall be four acres.
(3) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private, or any common parking area shall be ten (10') feet.
Minimum setback for all structures from any collector or arterial
street, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be fifty (50') feet.
§ 228-118.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.7
1:983
(4) A maximum of 20 units shall be contained in any one structure.
(5) Parking requirements shall be one and seventy-five one hundredths
(1.75) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
for which parking requirements may be reduced by the Planning
Board to not less than five-tenths (0.5) spaces per unit. Parking may
be reduced by the Planning Board to average not less than one and
five-tenths (1.5) per dwelling unit for low and moderate income
housing. [Amended 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-581]
(6) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks for each lot in such
a development shall be established by the location of the structures
approved on the preliminary subdivision or site plan for each
particular development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the
approved locations of the principal structures in the development,
and no development shall take place within the front yard, side
yard or rear yard setbacks as defined herein. [Added 9-28-81 by
Ord. No. 81-399]
F. Apartments in mixed use structures (applicable to Town Green Zone
only):
(1) Height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet or three stories for the
total structure.
(2) Parking requirements shall be one and seventy-five one hundredths
(1.75) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
for which parking requirements may be reduced by the Planning
Board is not less than five-tenths (0.5) spaces per unit.
(3) All other standards applicable to Subsection G shall apply.
(4) Residential uses shall not be located on the first floor.
G. Nonresidential uses and mixed uses (applicable to Town Green Zone
only):
A mixed use development which may contain a shopping center of
multiple retail and service establishments in accordance with the
following standards: [Added 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26]
(1) The setback for all structures from Cranbury Road, Ryders Lane
and Rues Lane shall be fifty (50') feet.
(2) The front setback for all principal buildings from interior streets
shall be thirty (30') feet.
(3) The minimum distance between all buildings, side to side, shall be
ten (10') feet.
§ 228-118.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.7
1:984
(4) The minimum distance between all buildings, rear to rear, shall be
twenty (20') feet.
(5) When the development proposes buildings to be situated side to
front, or rear to side, or front to rear, the aggregate setback
between structures shall be thirty (30') feet.
(6) The total maximum lot coverage for buildings, structures, parking
areas and loading areas, drives, walkways and other impervious
surfaces shall not exceed sixty-five (65%) percent of the total lot
area.
(7) No less than thirty-five (35%) percent of the site shall be
designated to usable open space for the purposes of landscaped
courtyards, walkways, sitting areas, planted buffers, ornamental
gardens and special water features and other site amenities.
(8) The sixty-five (65%) percent impervious coverage may be increased
by one (1%) for the provision of each of the following amenities
provided up to a maximum of seventy (70%):
(a) Fountain, waterfall, ornamental pond or other decorative
water feature;
(b) Bicycle paths and bicycle racks;
(c) Parking in front of buildings as on-street parking rather than in
parking lots
(d) Pedestrian plaza including sitting areas;
(e) Public sculpture and art work
(9) The mixed use center shall be residential in scale. Residential style
roofs are preferred. No flat roofs shall be permitted.
(10) The mixed use center described herein shall be of a village cluster
type layout not a linear strip center. It shall consist of multiple
buildings and maximize the use of a unified design theme or
integrated architectural design, high quality building materials,
including but not limited to ornamental lighting, architectural
planters, brick and other special paving materials, water features,
landscaped internal pedestrian courtyards, sitting areas, alleyways
and other site amenities. All facades and signage shall have
architectural treatment consistent with the selected design theme.
All materials and design concepts are subject to the review and
approval of the Planning Board.
(11) Landscape buffer, twenty (20') feet in width along Cranbury Road,
Ryders Lane and Rues Lane, including shade trees, earth berms
and landscaping. Street trees, planted thirty (30') feet on center,
are required on all internal streets.
§ 228-118.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.7
1:985
§ 228-118.8. Public facilities and improvements in planned unit
residential developments. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B;
5-14-90 by Ord. No. 90-16; 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-109]
§ 228-118.9. Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles in
planned unit residential developments. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No.
77-264-B; 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-109]
(12) Maximum height of buildings shall be thirty-five (35') feet.
(13) Notwithstanding anything otherwise depicted on the subdivision or
site plan approved for any Planned Unit Residential Development,
the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks for each lot in such
a development shall be established by the location of the structures
approved on the preliminary subdivision or site plan for each
particular development. Such setbacks shall coincide with the
approved locations of the principal structures in the development,
and no development shall take place within the front yard, side
yard or rear yard setbacks as defined herein. [Added 9-28-81 by
Ord. No. 81-399]
A. Parcel size and location of public facilities shall be substantially in
accordance with guidelines established in the Township Comprehensive
Master Plan; provided, however, that upon due cause shown the
Planning Board may vary the location of same from the location of same
from the location shown in the Master Plan.
(1) Sites to be dedicated for school purposes shall be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Education and the Planning Board.
(2) Sites to be dedicated for municipal purposes shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board. All deeds shall be approved by the
Township Attorney.
B. If a development provides centrally located mailboxes it shall also
provide a secure area where packages and other large items are to be
delivered.
A. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided in such locations, including
entrances and exits, where normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Where
appropriate, bikeways may be provided instead of sidewalks. Provision
of bikeways along streets shall be made upon determination and
requirement by the Planning Board and the Master Plan where
applicable.
B. Access to off-street parking areas shall not be through entrances
directly abutting streets, but shall be connected to streets by means of
access driveways situated between the parking areas and adjacent
streets, not less than fifteen (15) feet long.
§ 228-118.7 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-118.9
1:986
§ 228-118.10. Deleted. [11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-109]
§ 228-118.11. Required landscaping and recreation facilities for
planned unit residential development. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No.
77-264-B; amended 11-12-91 by Ord. No. 91-109]
A strip of land fifty (50) feet wide shall be reserved for a landscaped buffer
between any new development of townhouses or multi-family units pursuant
to this chapter and any single-family detached residential dwellings existing
as of the time when such new development is commenced. Such buffer
area shall be planted by the developer with a mixture of deciduous and
coniferous plant material at a minimum height of four feet and maintained
at a height of a minimum of six (6) feet. An earth berm of a minimum of
three feet in height may be installed in such a fifty-foot landscaped buffer
area, in which case the height of the plant materials may be revised as
approved by the Planning Board at the time of final site plan approval.
§ 228-118.12. Timing for development of planned unit residential
developments. [Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-264-B]
C. No off-street parking lot shall contain more than fifty (50) spaces. The
distance between parking lots and dwelling units shall be a minimum of
(10) feet.
D. Bike racks shall be provided outside public and commercial buildings.
A. The number of dwelling units and square footage of nonresidential uses
which may be constructed by the developer during any year may be
regulated by the Planning Board at a rate which would not create
excessive demands on any municipal facility or services available to
serve the area proposed for development. Such development as may be
allowed pursuant hereto shall be controlled by means of the issuance of
building permits at a rate allowed by the Planning Board at the time of
preliminary approval, based upon the projected development.
B. The time of development, including the type and number of residential
uses, number and type of nonresidential uses, public and semipublic
facilities and required utilities and services, shall be established by the
developer and by resolution of the Township Planning Board and
approved by the Planning Board at the time when preliminary approval
is granted.
§ 228-118.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-118.12
1:987

ARTICLE XI
Regulations for Village Green One
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-MMM]
§ 228-119. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses in Village Green One.
§ 228-120. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be:
§ 228-121. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Single family detached residential structures.
B. Accessory uses and structures customarily auxiliary thereto and as
further restricted by the prohibited uses in this zone. [Amended
8-11-80 by Ord No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-352]
C. Public buildings, including public schools and Township facilities.
D. Quasi public buildings and places of worships.
E. Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational and open space uses.
A. All uses and structures not specifically listed above as permitted are
hereby prohibited.
B. The following uses shall also be prohibited: [Added 6-25-79 by Ord.
No. 79-146; amended 8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by
Ord. No. 81-352; 12-11-88 by Ord. No. 89-82]
(1) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities.
(2) All accessory structures except in accordance with standards
established at time of P.U.R.D. preliminary approval pursuant to
§ 228-118.7.
(3) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
(4) Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No.
84-560]
(5) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(6) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
§ 228-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-122
1:989
§ 228-122. Height limitations. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Height limits shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned unit
residential development.
§ 228-123. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord.
No. 89-82; 3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13]
Area and yard requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned
unit residential development.
§ 228-124. Off street parking. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82; 3-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-13]
Off street parking requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1,
planned unit residential development.
§ 228-122 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-124
1:990
ARTICLE XII
Regulations for Village Green Two and Two A
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-MMM]
§ 228-125. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses in Village Green Two and
Two A.
§ 228-126. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be:
§ 228-127. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Single family detached residential structures.
B. Single family attached residential structures, including and
encouraging a variety of housing types and styles such as single-family
attached, patio houses, atrium houses, townhouses and other dwelling
unit types.
C. Multifamily residential structures, including and encouraging a variety
of housing types and styles.
D. Accessory uses and structures customarily auxiliary thereto and as
further restricted by the prohibited uses in this zone. [Amended
8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-352]
E. Public buildings, including public schools and Township facilities.
F. Quasi public buildings, including places of worship.
G. Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational and open space uses.
A. All uses and structures not specifically listed above as permitted are
hereby prohibited.
B. The following uses shall also be prohibited: [Added 6-25-79 by Ord.
No. 79-146; 8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by Ord. No.
81-352; 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-82]
(1) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities.
(2) All accessory structures except in accordance with standards
established at time of P.U.R.D. preliminary approval pursuant to
§ 228-118.7.
(3) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
§ 228-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-127
1:991
§ 228-128. Height limitations. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Height limits shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned unit
residential development.
§ 228-129. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Area and yard requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned
unit residential development.
§ 228-130. Off street parking. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Off street parking requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1,
planned unit residential development.
(4) Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No.
84-560]
(5) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(6) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
§ 228-127 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-130
1:992
ARTICLE XIII
Regulations for Village Green Three and Village Green Three A
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-MMM; amended 9-11-78 by Ord. No.
78-53]
§ 228-131. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses in Village Green Three and
Village Green Three A.
§ 228-132. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be:
§ 228-133. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Single family detached residential structures.
B. Single family attached residential structures, including and
encouraging a variety of housing types and styles such as single family
attached, patio houses, atrium houses, townhouses and other dwelling
unit types.
C. Multifamily residential structures, including and encouraging a variety
of housing types and styles.
D. Accessory uses and structures customarily auxiliary thereto and as
further restricted by the prohibited uses in this zone. [Amended
8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-352]
E. Public buildings, including public schools and Township facilities.
F. Quasi public buildings, including places of worship.
G. Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational and open space uses.
H. Housing for senior citizens (elderly). Housing for senior citizen
occupants through the use of a state or federal housing subsidy
program shall be a permitted use in this zone. Such housing shall meet
all the area and yard requirements as set forth under Chapter 132,
Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
[Added 4-9-79 by Ord. No. 79-129]
A. All uses not specifically listed above as permitted uses are hereby
prohibited.
B. The following uses shall also be prohibited: [Added 6-25-79 by Ord.
No. 79-146; amended 8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by
Ord. No. 81-352; 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-82]
(1) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities.
§ 228-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-133
1:993
§ 228-134. Height limitations. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Height limits shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned unit
residential development.
§ 228-135. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Area and yard requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned
unit residential development.
§ 228-136. Off street parking. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Off street parking requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1,
planned unit residential development.
(2) All accessory structures except in accordance with standards
established at time of P.U.R.D. preliminary approval pursuant to
§ 228-118.7.
(3) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
(4) Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No.
84-560]
(5) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(6) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
§ 228-133 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-136
1:994
ARTICLE XIV
Regulations for Town Green
[Added 5-9-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-MMM; Amended 11-28-16 by Ord.
16-20]
§ 228-137. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses in Town Green.
§ 228-138. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26]
Permitted uses shall be:
A. Single-family detached residential structures.
B. Single-family attached residential structures, including and
encouraging a variety of housing types and styles such as single family
attached, patio houses, atrium houses, townhouses and other dwelling
unit types.
C. Apartments and multiple dwelling units. [Added 3-6-17 by Ord. No.
17-13]
D. Any retail shopping facility, service establishment or mixed use
development which supplies commodities or performs a service
primarily for residents of the surrounding neighborhood, such as
grocery store, delicatessen, meat market, drugstore, confectionery
store, restaurant (including outdoor eating areas), bakery, barbershop,
beauty parlor, clothes cleaning and laundry pickup establishments,
bank, real estate office, business or professional offices and any other
uses that are determined by the Planning Board to be of the same
character as the above permitted uses, but in no event shall any one
retail establishment be larger than 20,000 square feet in area, subject
to the standards set forth in the P.U.R.D. regulations. [Amended
9-14-87 by Ord. No. 87-863; 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26]
E. Accessory uses and structures customarily auxiliary thereto and as
further restricted by the prohibited uses in this zone. [Amended
8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-352]
F. Public buildings, including public schools and Township facilities.
G. Quasi public buildings, including medical centers and places of
worship.
H. Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational and open space uses.
I. Fast-food restaurants as part of a mixed use development or retail
shopping facility [Added 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29; amended
10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26]
J. Housing for senior citizens (elderly). Housing for senior citizen
occupants through the use of a state or federal housing subsidy
§ 228-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-138
1:995
§ 228-138.1. Deleted. [10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-26]
§ 228-139. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 228-140. Height limitations. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord. No.
89-82]
Height limits shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned unit
residential development.
§ 228-141. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 12-11-89 by Ord.
No. 89-82]
Area and yard requirements shall be as provided for in § 228-118.1, planned
unit residential development.
§ 228-142. Buffers. [Added 12-12-16 by Ord. 16-25]
A Landscape/vegetative buffer shall be established of 150 feet along the
rear and side property lines where the property lines abut an existing
residence or residential development. The buffer shall be established within
a dedicated conservation easement. Where the property lines abut a nonprogram
shall be permitted uses in this zone. Such housing shall meet
all the area and yard requirements as set forth under Chapter 132,
Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
[Added 4-9-79 by Ord. No. 79-129]
A. All uses not specifically listed above as permitted are hereby prohibited.
B. The following uses shall also be prohibited: [Added 6-25-79 by Ord.
No. 79-146; amended 8-11-80 by Ord. No. 80-275; 5-26-81 by
Ord. No. 81-352; 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 81-82].
1. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities.
2. All accessory structures except in accordance with standards
established at time of P.U.R.D. preliminary approval pursuant to
§ 228-118.7.
3. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
4. Newspaper Vending Machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord. No.
84-560]
5. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
6. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
§ 228-138 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-142
1:996
residential use the buffer shall be a minimum of 50' along rear and side
property lines.
§ 228-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-142
1:997

ARTICLE XV
Regulations for the OP-2 Office Professional District
[Added 7-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-OOO]
§ 228-143. Permitted uses.
Uses permitted shall be:
§ 228-144. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses permitted shall be any accessory building and use that is
permitted in the C-1 District.
§ 228-145. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. All uses and buildings permitted in the R-3 District, subject to the
restrictions and procedures set forth in § 228-26.
B. Professional occupations, including the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, veterinarian, minister, architect, engineer, attorney or other
member of a recognized profession.
C. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
D. The studio of a photographer.
E. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant, travel
agent or bookkeeper.
F. Undertaking establishment.
G. Any other use similar to those listed above, provided that the Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board, as the case may be, shall review such
request and determine whether it is similar to any use listed above.
H. Residential dwellings. Where a single-family dwelling existed on a lot in
a residential zone at the time this section was adopted (July 25, 1977),
the residential use may be thereafter continued and the structure may
be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as the proposed alteration
conforms to the minimum requirements for height, area, yard and offstreet
parking as they existed prior to July 25, 1977. If the proposed
alteration does not conform to the prior bulk regulations, an application
for a bulk variance shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[Added 8-27-79 by Ord. No. 79-159]
A. All uses not specifically listed above as permitted are hereby prohibited
and specifically the following: [Amended 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29]
(1) Fast food restaurants.
(2) Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement
facilities. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
§ 228-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-145
1:999
§ 228-146. Height limitations.
No building or structure in an OP-2 District shall be erected or enlarged to
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, measured at the average grade around
the structure, or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories.
§ 228-147. Area and yard requirements.
(3) Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
(4) Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
(5) Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles
associated with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot size for undertaking establishments shall be 1.5 acres.
Minimum lot size for all other permitted uses shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet. [Amended 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-400]
B. Maximum coverage for buildings and structures shall be thirty percent
(30%) of the total lot area. Total lot coverage, including buildings,
structures, parking, loading drives, walkways and other paved surfaces
shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the total lot area.
C. Every lot used for buildings and uses permitted in the OP-2 District, as
listed under § 228-143, shall have a minimum width of one hundred
twenty (120) feet at the street line, except that one side of a corner lot
shall have a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) feet at the street line.
D. Front yards of business lots shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet from
the street line if off street parking space is to be provided at the side or
rear of the building and a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet from the
street line if off street parking space is to be provided in front of the
building. In any location where the land on the opposite side of the
street is in a residence district, the twenty foot strip of front yard
adjacent to the street line shall be improved with a landscaped buffer,
installed with a mixture of deciduous and coniferous plant materials at
a minimum height of four feet and maintained at a height of a minimum
of six (6) feet, excluding areas necessary for adequate sight distance,
and this area shall not be used for off-street parking purposes or for the
display of merchandise. An earth berm of a minimum of three feet may
be installed in such a twenty-foot landscaped buffer area, in which case
the height of the plant materials may be revised as approved by the
Planning Board at the time of site plan approval.
E. Side yards of business lots shall have a minimum width of 20 feet each
from the side lot lines.
F. Rear yards of business lots shall have a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet
from the rear lot line. In any location where the land on the opposite
§ 228-145 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-147
1:1000
§ 228-148. Off street parking. [Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No.
93-72]
Parking shall be provided at the rate of spaces to be approved by the
Planning Board, as provided for in § 228-15.1.
§ 228-149. Deleted. [12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
§ 228-150. Deleted. [4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
side of the street of a rear property line is in a residential district,
there shall be a twenty foot strip of the rear yard adjacent to the street
line improved with a landscaped buffer, installed with a mixture of
deciduous and coniferous plant materials at a minimum height of four
feet and maintained at a height of a minimum of six (6) feet, excluding
areas necessary for adequate sight distance, and this area shall not be
used for off street parking purposes or for the display of merchandise.
An earth berm of a minimum of three feet may be installed in such
a twenty foot landscaped buffer area, in which case the height of the
plant materials may be revised as approved by the Planning Board at
the time of the site plan approval. [Amended 11-28-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-UUU]
G. An attached group of businesses and offices may be considered as one
building in applying the above yard space requirements.
H. In any OP-2 Zone where the zone line is immediately contiguous or
adjacent to any residential zone, a fifty foot landscaped buffer shall be
installed of deciduous and coniferous plant materials at a minimum
height of five (5) feet and maintained at a minimum height of not less
than fifteen (15) feet. An earth berm of a minimum height of five (5) feet
may be constructed, in which case the Planning Board may lessen the
requirements for plant materials. The Planning Board may waive the
requirements for buffering if equivalent screening is provided by parks
or by topography or other natural conditions. Such a buffer area is
required to shield adjacent residential areas from parking lot
illumination, headlights and fumes and to diminish the visual
encroachment of residential privacy and residential neighborhood
characteristics.
I. All buildings within two hundred (200) feet of residential zones shall be
designed in a residential character emulating the architectural style of
residential areas in scale, height of buildings, facade materials and
general structural treatment.
§ 228-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-150
1:1001

ARTICLE XVI
Multiple Dwelling/Apartment (MDA) District
[Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20; Amended 3-6-17 by Ord. 17-13]
§ 228-151. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all MDA Districts.
§ 228-152. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-153. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-154. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-155. Density, area and yard requirements. [Amended 3-6-17
by Ord. No. 17-13]
A. Multiple dwellings, multifamily residential structures, apartments,
including and encouraging a variety of housing types and styles.
A. Active recreational facilities, pools, trails, etc.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-152 and 228-153 above.
B. Professional occupations.
C. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
D. Limousine or livery service.
A. Minimum Tract Size: forty (40) acres.
B. Permitted Number of Units: 275 family rental units including 55- one,
two and three bedroom affordable unit as provided at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3
interspersed throughout the development as provided for in §
228-118.4B(2).
C. Maximum Building Height: four stories of living space up to a maximum
building height of fifty (50') feet.
D. Percentage of Affordable Units: twenty (20%) percent
E. Setback to Tract Boundary: fifty (50) feet
F. Minimum Setback to Interior Streets: thirty (30) feet
§ 228-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-155
1:1003
§ 228-156. (Reserved)
G. Minimum Setback to Parking: 10 feet
H. Maximum Building Coverage: twenty-five percent (25%)
I. Maximum Impervious Coverage forty percent (40%)
J. Required Open Space, Recreation land and facilities twenty-five
percent (25%)
K. Minimum distance between Buildings thirty (30) feet
L. Landscape buffer fifty (50) feet along tract boundaries.
Stormwater Management structures may be constructed within the
required landscape buffer areas but may be no closer than twenty-five
(25) feet to tract boundary.
§ 228-155 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-156
1:1004
ARTICLE XVII
Modular Manufactured Houses and Mobile Manufactured Houses
[Deleted 10/10/16 by Ord. 16-18]
§ 228-156.1. through § 228-156.13. (Reserved)
§ 228-156.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-156.1
1:1005

ARTICLE XVII-A
Regulations for the C-1 Professional and Office District
§ 228-157. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this section, the following regulations shall
apply to all C-1 Districts.
§ 228-158. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-159. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. All uses and buildings permitted in the R-3 District, subject to the
restrictions and procedures set forth in § 228-26.
B. Professional occupations, including the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, minister, architect, engineer, attorney or other member of a
recognized profession.
C. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
D. The studio of a photographer.
E. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant or
bookkeeper.
F. Undertaking establishment.
G. Any other use similar to those listed above, provided that the Board of
Adjustment shall review such request and determine whether it is
similar to any use listed above.
A. Home occupations as defined in § 228-3A of this chapter.
B. Private garages shall be permitted and regulated as follows:
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed space
for six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial
vehicles of not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) tons each in
gross weight.
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an accessory
building within the required rear yard space, not to exceed six (6)
automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial vehicles as
defined in § 228-224C. [Amended 3-10-80 by Ord. No. 80-222]
§ 228-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-160
1:1007
§ 228-160. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be any use not listed in § 228-158 and
228-159 above and specifically including the following:
§ 228-161. Height limitations.
Height limits shall be the same as required in the R-1 District.
§ 228-162. Area and yard requirements.
A. Uses primarily engaged in the sale of merchandise from the premises
B. Beauty parlors, barbershops, shoe repair shops and television and
appliance repair shops.
C. Outdoor overnight parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles;
provided, however, that where no garage facilities exist, one such
vehicle as defined in § 228-224C. [Amended 3-10-80 by Ord. No.
80-222]
D. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices and for the storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
[Added 2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-N]
E. Fast-food restaurants. [Added 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29]
F. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
G. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
H. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
I. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot size for undertaking establishments shall be 1.5 acres.
Minimum lot size for new buildings shall be fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet and shall have a minimum width of one hundred (100') feet.
[Amended 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-400]
B. Front yards.
(1) No principal or accessory building shall be closer than thirty-five
(35) feet to any street line, including both streets on a corner lot.
(2) All front yards and side yards on the street sides of a corner lot
shall be provided with a landscaped surface over the whole yard
§ 228-160 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-162
1:1008
§ 228-163. Minimum habitable floor area for residential buildings.
Minimum floor area of residential buildings shall be the same as required
for the least restricted residence district immediately adjacent to the C-1
District.
§ 228-164. Off street parking. [Amended 9-12-66 by Ord. No.
66-8-F]
Off street parking requirements shall be:
§ 228-165. Deleted. [4-20-09 By Ord. No. 09-11]
space, except that one twenty four foot or two twelve foot paved
driveways may be permitted to cross this required yard space.
C. Side yards.
(1) Each principal building shall be provided with two side yards, one
of a minimum width of 10 feet and one of a minimum width of
fifteen (15) feet. Within the fifteen foot side yard a driveway may be
constructed, provided that it does not come closer than five (5) feet
to the side lot line.
(2) Private garages and paved off street parking areas are permitted
within a side yard, except that they shall not be closer than five (5)
feet to a side lot line.
(3) The side yard requirements for the side street side of a corner lot
are specified under Subsection B above.
D. Rear yards.
(1) No principal building shall be closer than 20 feet to the rear lot
line, except that where there is to be a private garage or paved off
street parking area located within the rear yard, no principal
building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to the rear lot line.
(2) Private garages and paved off street parking space may be
permitted within this rear yard space, provided that no private
garage or paved off street parking space shall be closer than 10
feet to the rear lot line.
(3) No other accessory uses shall be permitted within the rear yard
space.
A. Two (2) spaces for each single family dwelling.
B. All other uses to be approved by the Planning Board as provided for in
§ 228-165.
§ 228-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-165
1:1009

ARTICLE XVIII
Regulations for the C-2 Neighborhood Business District
[Amended 6-13-61; 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
§ 228-166. Permitted uses.
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. A single freestanding retail or service establishment which supplies
commodities or performs a service primarily for residents of the
surrounding neighborhood, such as grocery store, delicatessen, meat
market, drugstore, confectionery store, bakery store, barbershop,
beauty parlor, clothes cleaning and laundry pickup establishments (no
cleaning to be done on the premises), and bank.
B. Professional occupations, including the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, minister, architect, engineer, attorney or other member of a
recognized profession.
C. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
D. The studio of a photographer.
E. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant, travel
agent or bookkeeper.
F. Churches and other places of worship and Sunday school buildings and
parish houses.
G. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
H. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
I. Public libraries and museums.
J. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
K. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
L. Residential dwellings. Where a single family dwelling existing on a lot
as of January 1, 1988, the residential use may be thereafter continued
and the structure may be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as
the proposed alteration conforms to the minimum requirements for
height, area, yard and off street parking as they existed prior to January
1, 1988. If the proposed alteration does not conform to the prior bulk
regulations, an application for a bulk variance shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 228-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-166.1
1:1011
§ 228-166.1. Conditional uses. [Added 4-11-83 by Ord. No. 83-501;
2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-2]
A. A shopping center of multiple retail and service establishments,
provided the following conditions are met:
1. a. The minimum distance between all buildings, side to side, shall
be ten (10') feet.
b. The minimum distance between all buildings, front to front,
shall be fifty (50') feet.
c. The minimum distance between all buildings, rear to rear, shall
be twenty (20') feet.
d. When the development proposes buildings to be situated side
to front, or rear to side, or front to rear, the aggregate setback
between structures shall be thirty (30') feet.
2. a. The total maximum lot coverage for buildings, structures,
parking areas and loading areas, drives, walkways and other
impervious surfaces shall not exceed sixty-five (65%) percent
of the total lot area.
b. No less than thirty-five (35%) percent of the site shall be
designated to usable open space for the purposes of
landscaped courtyards, walkways, sitting areas, planted
buffers, ornamental gardens and special water features and
other site amenities.
3. The applicant shall present a design proposal which sets forth all
styles, sizes and locations, material for any signs to be installed on
the site subject to the approval of the Planning Board. The plans
shall address typical details for the entrance marker signs, internal
directory signs and individual establishment signs, all of which are
to be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
4. The shopping center described herein shall be of a village cluster
type layout not a linear strip center, and shall consist of multiple
buildings and maximize the use of uniform and/or integrated
architectural design and styles, unique building materials,
including but not limited to ornamental lighting, architectural
planters, brick and other special paving materials, water features,
landscaped internal pedestrian courtyards, sitting areas, alleyways
and other site amenities. All facades shall have uniform
architectural treatment. All materials and design concepts are
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board.
5. Minimum lot size shall be one acre.
6. Floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be .20 for one story buildings and .25
for two story buildings.
§ 228-166.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-166.1
1:1012
B. Parks and playgrounds.
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the following
conditions are met:
1. Minimum lot size: two acres.
2. Minimum lot width: two hundred (200) feet.
3. Adequate parking facilities are provided.
4. Ingress and egress are adequate to prevent traffic hazard,
congestion or excessive interference with normal traffic movement
on adjacent public streets and thoroughfares.
5. Buildings and uses are appropriately located and designed and will
meet a community need.
C. Nursery schools.
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the following
conditions are met:
1. Adequate lot area and yard spaces are provided.
2. Buildings and uses are appropriately located and designed.
3. The building and use meet a community need without adversely
affecting the neighborhood.
D. Billboards subject to the following standards: [Added 2-14-00 by Ord.
No. 00-2]
1. No part of the billboard may extend more than one hundred (100)
feet from the New Jersey Turnpike right-of-way.
2. The minimum setback from the New Jersey Turnpike right-of-way
shall be 10 feet. The minimum setback from the front property line
shall be fifty (50) feet. The minimum setback from all other lot lines
shall be fifteen (15) feet.
3. Maximum billboard height shall be forty (40) feet as measured from
an elevation of the finished grade at the base of the structure to the
top of the billboard. The Planning Board may permit any billboard
allowed under this section to be increased to no greater than
seventy-five (75) feet in height to minimize the adjustment,
alteration or removal of natural landscaping or to provide an
unobstructed, legible view of the advertising surfaces of the
billboard.
4. Minimum distance between any two billboards shall be 1000 feet
along the same side of the New Jersey Turnpike.
§ 228-166.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-166.1
1:1013
§ 228-167. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
5. The maximum permitted advertising area showing in one direction
shall not exceed 672 square feet with copy extensions beyond the
basic billboard not to exceed 10% of the basic billboard area.
6. Billboards shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet to
a residential zone or municipal boundary.
7. Billboards shall be designed and constructed for the advertising
surface to be viewed primarily by motorists from the New Jersey
Turnpike.
8. Lighting for any billboard shall be designed to restrict any glare
and spillover to the immediate area of the sign. Blinking or flashing
lights shall be prohibited.
9. Billboards shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following morning.
10. Visual impact, particularly on surrounding properties shall be
minimized through the use of landscaping, berming and, grading.
All season landscaping shall be installed to achieve a positive
aesthetic impression of the general sign area. This will include the
solid screening of the rear of the sign as deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
11. The applicant shall comply with the Roadside Sign Control and
Outdoor Advertising Act as contained in N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq. as
well as any other applicable statutes, laws and regulations related
to billboards.
12. Site plan approval shall be obtained from the Planning Board. The
items to be reviewed as part of such an application shall include
traffic safety, lighting, visual impact, drainage, and other pertinent
elements of site plan reviews. As part of its review the Board shall
consider the impact of the proposal on surrounding properties and
the New Jersey Turnpike itself.
13. No more than a total of four billboards shall be permitted to be
erected in East Brunswick along the New Jersey Turnpike.
14. Billboards shall not contain pornographic or obscene material or
advertise alcohol or tobacco products.
A. Home occupations.
B. Private residential garages; provided, however, that the garage shall be
for not more than three private cars or two private cars and one
commercial vehicle.
§ 228-166.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-167
1:1014
§ 228-168. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
The following are specifically prohibited in C-2 Districts:
C. Garages to house commercial vehicles normally associated with the
type of businesses above shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed space
for six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial
vehicles.
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an accessory
building within the required rear yard space, not to exceed six (6)
automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial vehicles.
A. Outside storage uses of any kind. Such storage shall consist of the
storing or accumulation of goods, wares, supplies or merchandise of
any kind on the outside of a building or structure.
B. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices and for the storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
C. Fast food restaurants.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
F. Department stores and all uses normally associated with department
stores, including the sale and installation of auto accessories in the
main building or in a separate building.
G. Hotels, motels and small animal hospitals.
H. Contractors' and builders' offices.
I. Storage warehouses.
J. Automobile service stations and repair and gasoline sales.
K. Recreational and amusement facilities operated for profit, including
bowling alleys, dance halls, skating rinks and indoor theaters.
L. Drive in restaurants.
M. New car showrooms and used car lots.
N. Car washes.
O. Lumber and building material sales.
§ 228-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-168
1:1015
§ 228-169. Area and bulk requirements.
P. Retail sale of alcoholic beverages and packaged goods. [Added
4-10-89 by Ord. No. 89-7]
Q. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
R. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot size: forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: two hundred (200) feet.
C. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
D. Side yard setback for principal building: one side: 20 feet; two sides: 50
feet.
E. Rear yard setback for principal building: 30 feet.
F. Maximum Height: 2 stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
G. Maximum lot coverage: sixty-five (65%) percent.
H. Landscape buffer: fifteen (15') feet wide along lot frontage and includes
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping.
I. Parking area and driveway setback: 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
J. Landscape buffer between residential zone and C-2 zone: fifteen (15%)
percent of lot depth with a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet required.
§ 228-168 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-169
1:1016
ARTICLE XIX
Regulations for the C-3 General Commercial District
[Amended 6-13-61; 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
§ 228-170. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509]
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Department stores and all uses normally associated with department
stores, including the sale and installation of auto accessories in the
main building or in a separate building, but nothing herein contained is
intended to permit the sale of gasoline, lubrication of motor vehicles or
the performance of any other auto repairs, painting or body work.
[Amended 12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-U]
B. Retail stores and sales. [Amended 2-27-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-H]
C. Services and service agencies, including hotels, motels, small-animal
hospitals, garages and automotive repair shops (provided that no
inoperative vehicles other than those awaiting repair are parked or
stored on the premises), radio, television and electrical repair shops,
restaurants, taverns and nightclubs. [Amended 2-27-67 by Ord. No.
67-8-H]
D. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
E. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
F. Public libraries and museums.
G. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
H. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
I. Professional occupations and general offices.
J. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
K. The studio of a photographer.
L. Undertaking establishment.
M. Clubs, lodges and association buildings, meeting rooms and halls.
N. Public automobile parking areas.
O. Public utility structures and facilities other than those of an industrial
character, such as repair and maintenance shops, storage facilities,
§ 228-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-170
1:1017
§ 228-170.1. Conditional uses. [Added 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509;
amended 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12; 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19;
repealed 8-26-02 by Ord. No. 02-21]
§ 228-170.2. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-171. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-27-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-H;
5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509; 11-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-543; 10-27-98
by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall include all uses not listed above under
permitted uses, as well as the following:
freight stations and freight yards. [Added 10-28-68 by Ord. No.
68-8-S; amended 11-25-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-T]
P. Fast food restaurants where the exclusive means of entry to the
premises is through an interior mall, corridor or passageway shared as
the common access to premises in the shopping center occupied by
other tenants.
Q. Three or fewer mechanical or electrical amusement devices.
R. Residential dwellings. Where a single-family dwelling existing on a lot
as of January 1, 1988, the residential use may be thereafter continued
and the structure may be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as
the proposed alteration conforms to the minimum requirements for
height, area, yard and off street parking as they existed prior to January
1, 1988. If the proposed alteration does not conform to the prior bulk
regulations, an application for a bulk variance shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Outside storage uses normally associated with the above businesses,
provided that these areas are fenced and screened from adjacent
businesses and residences by a dense evergreen hedge, masonry wall
or a suitable tight woven fence, not less than six (6) feet in height.
B. Garages to house commercial vehicles normally associated with the
type of businesses listed above shall be regulated as follows:.
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed space
for six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial
vehicles.
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an accessory
building within the required rear yard space, not to exceed six (6)
automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial vehicles.
§ 228-170 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-171
1:1018
§ 228-172. Area and bulk requirements. [Amended 5-9-83 by Ord.
No. 83-509]
A. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices or for the storage of materials
and supplies on a job site during the period of construction, or for the
collection of aluminum to be re-cycled. [Added 2-26-68 by Ord. No.
68-8-N]
B. Drive-in restaurants. [Added 1-24-77 by Ord. No 76-8-JJJ]
C. Used car lots.
D. Car washes.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
F. All uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-170, 228-170.1 and
228-170.2.
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot size: 2 acres.
B. Minimum lot width: three hundred fifty (350) feet.
C. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
D. Side yard setback for principal and accessory structures: one side: 20
feet; two sides: 50 feet.
E. Rear yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
F. An attached group of stores may be considered as one building in
applying the above yard space requirements.
G. Maximum height: 35 feet.
H. Maximum lot coverage: sixty-five (65%) percent.
I. Landscape Buffer: twenty (20') feet along lot frontage and includes
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping.
J. Parking area and driveway setback: 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
§ 228-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-172
1:1019

ARTICLE XIX-A1
Regulations for the HC-1 Neighborhood Highway Commercial
District
[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
§ 228-173. Permitted uses.
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. A retail or service establishment which supplies commodities or
performs a service primarily for residents of the surrounding
neighborhood, such as grocery store, delicatessen, meat market, drug
store, confectionery store, bakery store, barbershop, beauty parlor,
clothes cleaning and laundry pickup establishments (no cleaning to be
done on the premises), and bank.
B. Professional occupations, including the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, minister, architect, engineer, attorney or other member of a
recognized profession.
C. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
D. The studio of a photographer.
E. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant, travel
agent or bookkeeper.
F. Churches and other places of worship and Sunday school buildings and
parish houses.
G. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
H. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
I. Public libraries and museums.
J. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses of storage yards.
K. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial character.
L. Residential dwellings. Where a single family dwelling existing on a lot
as of January 1, 1988, the residential use may be thereafter continued
and the structure may be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as
the proposed alteration conforms to the minimum requirements for
height, area, yard and off street parking as they existed prior to January
1, 1988. If the proposed alteration does not conform to the prior bulk
§ 228-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-173
1:1021
§ 228-174. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
The following are specifically prohibited in HC-1 Districts:
regulations, an application for a bulk variance shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Home occupations.
B. Private residential garages; provided, however, that the garage
shall be for not more than three private cars or two private cars
and one commercial vehicle.
C. Garages to house commercial vehicles normally associated with
the type of businesses above shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed
space for six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three
automobiles and three commercial vehicles.
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an
accessory building within the required rear yard space, not to
exceed six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three
commercial vehicles.
A. Outside storage uses of any kind. Such storage shall consist of the
storing or accumulation of goods, wares, supplies or merchandise of
any kind on the outside of a building or structure.
B. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices and for the storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
C. Fast food restaurants.
D. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
E. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
F. Department stores and all uses normally associated with department
stores, including the sale and installation of auto accessories in the
main building or in a separate building.
G. Hotels, motels and small animal hospitals.
H. Contractors' and builders' offices.
I. Storage warehouses.
J. Automobile service stations and repair and gasoline sales.
§ 228-173 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-174
1:1022
§ 228-175. Area and bulk requirements.
K. Recreational and amusement facilities operated for profit, including
bowling alleys, dance halls, skating rinks and indoor theaters.
L. Drive in restaurants.
M. New car showrooms and used car lots.
N. Car washes.
O. Lumber and building material sales.
P. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
Q. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Where as of
January 1, 1988 a commercial building existed on a lot with an area less
than 20,000 square feet, the commercial use may be thereafter
continued and the structure may be thereafter enlarged by no more
than 150 square feet without a lot size variance provided Township
parking standards are met for the enlarged structure.
B. Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet.
C. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
D. Side yard setback for principal and accessory structures: one side: 20
feet; two sides: 50 feet.
E. Rear yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 30 feet.
F. Maximum Height: 2 stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
G. Maximum lot coverage: seventy-five (75%) percent.
H. Landscape buffer: fifteen (15') feet wide along lot frontage and includes
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping.
I. Parking area and driveway setback: 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
J. Landscape buffer between residential zone and HC 1 zone: twenty-five
(25) feet.
§ 228-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-175
1:1023

ARTICLE XIX-A2
Regulations for the HC-2 General Highway Commercial District
[Added 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
§ 228-176. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23;
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22; 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
A. Department stores and all uses normally associated with department
stores, including the sale and installation of auto accessories in the
main building or in a separate building, but nothing herein contained is
intended to permit the sale of gasoline, lubrication of motor vehicles or
the performance of any other auto repairs, painting or body work.
B. Retail stores and sales.
C. Services and service agencies, including hotels, motels, small animal
hospitals, garages and minor automobile repair shops with incidental
storage yard for vehicles awaiting repair, radio, television and electrical
repair shops, restaurants. [Amended 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23;
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
D. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
E. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
F. Public libraries and museums.
G. Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes, but not including
workshops, warehouses or storage yards.
H. Private, non profit recreational and community buildings, clubs,
swimming pools and activities of a quasi public, social, fraternal or
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs, camps, veteran or
fraternal organizations which are not of a commercial
I. Professional occupations and general offices.
J. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
K. The studio of a photographer.
L. Undertaking establishment.
M. Clubs, lodges and association buildings, meeting rooms and halls.
N. Public automobile parking areas.
O. Public utility structures and facilities other than those of an industrial
character, such as repair and maintenance shops, storage facilities,
freight stations and freight yards.
§ 228-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-176
1:1025
§ 228-176.1. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-9-90 by Ord. No.
90-21A; 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12; 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19;
7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23; 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25; 7-26-04 by
Ord. No. 04-08; 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
P. Fast food restaurants where the exclusive means of entry to the
premises is through an interior mall, corridor or passageway shared as
the common access to premises in the shopping center occupied by
other tenants.
Q. Three or fewer mechanical or electrical amusement devices.
R. Residential dwellings. Where a single family dwelling existing on a lot
as of January 1, 1988, the residential use may be thereafter continued
and the structure may be thereafter enlarged or expanded as long as
the proposed alteration conforms to the minimum requirements for
height, area, yard and off street parking as they existed prior to January
1, 1988. If the proposed alteration does not conform to the prior bulk
regulations, an application for a bulk variance shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
S. Banks and Financial Institutions. [Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
T. Health Clubs. [Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
A. Gas stations, on the basis of the following standards [Amended
8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]:
(1) Where a gas station abuts a residence or residential zone, an all
season landscape buffer of twenty-five feet in width shall be
established at a minimum of six (6) feet in height. In addition, a six
(6) foot solid masonry wall shall be installed on the gas station side
of the buffer. The Board may adjust the location of the buffer and
wall. [Amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
(2) [Deleted 8-11-03 by Ord No. 03-25]
(3) [Deleted 8-11-03 by Ord No. 03-25]
(4) The use of the premises for body work, painting, storage of
wrecked or junked motor vehicles, major motor vehicle repairs,
parking of motor vehicles or the sale or rental of any new or used
motor vehicles, trucks, motorcycles or trailers is hereby specifically
prohibited. [Amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
(5) Gasoline pumps shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20') feet
from the front property line.
(6) Canopies over gasoline pumps shall be setback from the front
property line a minimum of 10 feet. [Added 8-11-03 by Ord. No.
03-25]
§ 228-176 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-176.1
1:1026
(7) Lights underneath the canopy shall be completely recessed.
[Added 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
(8) For areas designated by the Township Council by adopted
Resolution as "areas in need of redevelopment", gas stations shall
neither be a permitted nor a conditionally permitted use. [Added
5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
B. Gas stations minimarts; on the basis of the following standards [Added
8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25 and 7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-08]:
(1) Parking shall be provided for the retail use at 1 space per 200
square feet of retail space; pump locations are not counted as
parking spaces.
(2) The site shall be designed to minimize the potential for turning
movement conflicts and to facilitate safe and efficient on-site
circulation. Parking and pump cueing spaces shall be provided and
located in such a manner as to facilitate safe and convenient
vehicle and pedestrian access to all uses on the site. The curb to
curb distance between pump islands shall be thirty (30) feet.
(3) All buildings shall have the same architectural features and design
on all sides of the buildings.
(4) On-site video games shall not be installed or operated on the
premises.
(5) ATM's shall be located within the retail building.
(6) One loading space is required for the minimart.
(7) No outside display or storage of merchandise other than
automobile maintenance supplies.
(8) Fuel delivery shall not block access to customer parking spaces.
(9) For areas designated by the Township Council by adopted
Resolution as "areas in need of redevelopment", gas stations with
minimarts or convenience stores shall neither be a permitted nor a
conditionally permitted use. [Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
C. Attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants based upon the
following standards: [Added 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12; amended
7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-08]
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) Building coverage shall be no greater than 10% of the lot area for
freestanding restaurants.
(3) Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1 space for every two seats
plus 10 additional spaces for employees.
§ 228-176.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-176.1
1:1027
(4) Indoor seating for patrons shall be provided. Indoor public seating
areas shall be a minimum of one-third of the building area.
(5) No other tenants shall be permitted in the freestanding building.
(6) The side and rear yards shall be screened with a solid masonry wall
or board-on-board fence at the Board's discretion, a minimum of six
(6) feet in height.
(7) All season planted buffer strips ten feet in width shall be provided
along the side and rear property lines. Where the property abuts a
residence or residential zone these buffers shall be increased to
twenty-five (25) feet in width. In areas with existing space
constraints, the board may reduce the width of the buffer if
additional plantings, berms, plants of greater height or other
mitigating factors are required instead.
(8) The applicant shall submit traffic and circulation studies to
establish the nature and extent of the anticipated customer volume
and that such volume can be accommodated at the location without
substantial adverse impact.
D. Recreational and amusement facilities operated for profit, including
bowling alleys, skating rinks and indoor theaters, mechanical or
electrical amusement devices or mechanical or electrical facilities as
described in Chapter 135 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick, where there are four or more such mechanical or electrical
devices, subject to the following standards: [Amended 7-10-95 by
Ord. No. 95-23 amended 7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-08]
1. No such place of amusement, recreation or assembly shall be
located within five hundred (500) feet of a residence or a
residential zone, regardless of whether or not such zone is actually
developed for residences, which distance shall be measured along
a straight line from the nearest boundary line of the lot on which
the proposed use is to be located and the nearest point of the
residence or residential zone.
2. No such place of amusement, recreation or assembly shall be
permitted as an accessory use to a permitted use unless the
Planning Board shall first have issued a conditional use permit as
required by this Chapter.
E. Drive-thru facilities at attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants
subject to the following standards: [Added 4-14-93 by Ord. No.
93-12; amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19; 7-26-04 by Ord. No.
04-08]
1. A separate delineated drive-thru lane shall be provided.
2. Queue storage that minimizes interference with pedestrian and
vehicular movements.
§ 228-176.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-176.1
1:1028
3. The proposed drive-thru facility shall be implemented without
posing a safety hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
4. Reserve parking spaces shall be provided between the drive-thru
area and the facilities exit. Such parking spaces are intended for
use by any drive-thru vehicles awaiting delivery of a delayed order.
5. Drive-thru facilities shall operate only when the dining room is
open to the public.
6. The drive-thru facility shall be designed for and utilized by
motorized vehicles only.
7. A bail-out lane shall be provided so that cars in queue can leave the
queue safely.
8. A canopy or cover shall be provided over the window.
9. No loudspeaker shall be permitted at properties that abut a
residential zone or residential property line.
10. Drive-thru windows proposed to be located within 150 feet of a
residential building shall be closed at 11:00 p.m., subject to the
following: [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
(a) After the fast food restaurant is open and the drive-thru
window is in full operation, the applicant may seek
modification of site plan approval by returning to the Board
which granted site plan approval. Such modification may
include a later closing time of the drive-thru window(s). The
applicant for such modification shall conduct noise meter tests
between 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. for seven (7) consecutive
nights and shall submit the test results to the appropriate
board. The board shall conduct a public hearing and will
determine whether the noise meter results comply with
Township noise standards and whether such later closing time
of the drive-thru window(s) is consistent with the health, safety
and welfare of the adjacent residents.
F. Taverns and nightclubs, subject to the following: [Added 7-10-95 by
Ord. No. 95-23; amended 7-26-04 by Ord. No. 04-08]
1. No tavern or nightclub shall be located within five hundred (500)
feet of a residence or a residential zone, regardless of whether or
not such zone is actually developed for residences, which distance
shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest boundary
line on the lot on which the proposed use is to be located and the
nearest point of the residence or residential zone.
2. A fifty (50) foot wide landscape buffer shall be required where such
tavern or nightclub use or residential zone. The width of the
landscape buffer shall be measured at right angles from the
abutting property line. The landscape buffer shall be planted and
§ 228-176.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-176.1
1:1029
§ 228-177. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22; 1-5-98 by Ord. No. 97-35]
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
maintained with a dense screen of trees, shrubs and evergreens of
such a type and nature as to provide a solid "all season" screen.
Trees and evergreens shall be at least six (6) feet in height upon
planting.
3. The occupancy load of the structure shall be calculated by the
applicant/developer in accordance with BOCA National Building
Code requirements and shall be identified on the floor plan(s)
submitted to the Planning Board as part of the application process.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in § 228-15.1 of this Chapter
to the contrary, required on-site parking spaces shall be calculated
on the basis of one space for every four occupants as calculated in
accordance with § 228-176.1E3 above, plus ten percent (10%) of
the required spaces.
5. No wall-mounted lights shall be permitted on the exterior structure
of such tavern or nightclub.
6. The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
7. A noise impact study shall be submitted by the applicant/developer
to the Planning Board as part of the application process assuring
compliance with Chapter 147 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick, known as the "Noise Control Ordinance".
8. No such tavern or nightclub shall be permitted as an accessory use
to a permitted use unless the Planning Board shall first have issued
a conditional use permit as required by this Chapter.
A. Outside storage uses normally associated with the above businesses,
provided that these areas are fenced and screened from adjacent
businesses and residences by a dense evergreen hedge, masonry wall
or a suitable tight woven fence, not less than six (6) feet in height.
B. Garages to house commercial vehicles normally associated with the
type of businesses listed above shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Any new structure which provides garage space shall have the
garage attached as a part of the main building, not to exceed space
for six (6) automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial
vehicles.
(2) Any existing structure may provide garage space in an accessory
building within the required rear yard space, not to exceed six (6)
automobiles or three automobiles and three commercial vehicles.
§ 228-176.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-177
1:1030
§ 228-178. Prohibited uses. [Amended 7-10-95 by Ord. No. 95-23;
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22; 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall include:
§ 228-179. Area and bulk requirements.
C. Storage yard for vehicles with a registered gross vehicle weight of
10,000 pounds or less and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation as an accessory use to an automobile service
station or minor automobile repair shops. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord.
No. 97-22; amended 1-5-98 by Ord. No. 97-35]
A. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices or for the storage of materials
and supplies on a job site during the period of construction, or for the
collection of aluminum to be recycled.
B. Drive in restaurants.
C. Used car lots.
D. Car washes.
E. Sex clubs, massage parlors and adult cabarets. [Amended 7-10-95 by
Ord. No. 95-23]
F. All uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-176, 228-176.1 and 228-177.
G. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
H. Major automobile repair facilities. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No.
97-22]
I. For areas designated by the Township Council by adopted Resolution as
"areas in need of redevelopment", the following uses shall be
prohibited: [Added 5-8-17 by Ord. No. 17-22]
(1) Gas stations as well as gas stations with minimarts or convenience
stores.
(2) Freestanding convenience stores.
(3) Freestanding fast food restaurants.
A. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. Where as of January 1, 1988 a
commercial building existed on a lot with an area of less than 40,000
square feet, the commercial use may be thereafter continued and the
structure may be thereafter enlarged by no more than 150 square feet
without a lot size variance, provided Township parking standards are
met for the enlarged structure.
§ 228-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-179
1:1031
§ 228-180. through § 228-183. (Reserved)
B. Minimum lot width: two hundred (200) feet.
C. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
D. Side yard setback for principal and accessory structures: one side: 20
feet; two sides: 50 feet.
E. Rear yard setback for principal and accessory structures: 60 feet.
F. An attached group of stores may be considered as one building in
applying the above yard space requirements.
G. Maximum height: 35 feet.
H. Maximum lot coverage: seventy-five (75%) percent.
I. Landscape Buffer: twenty (20') feet along lot frontage and includes
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping.
J. Parking area and driveway setback: 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
K. Parking area landscaping: one canopy tree for every five (5) parking
spaces shall be planted within the parking area.
§ 228-179 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-180
1:1032
ARTICLE XX
Regulations for the C-4 Highway Commercial District
[Deleted 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-180
1:1033

ARTICLE XX-A
Regulations for the H-1 (Hotel - Convention Center) Option Zone
[Added 8-14-84 by Ord. No. 84-598]
§ 228-184. Applicability of provisions of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to the H-1 (Hotel Convention Center)
district.
§ 228-185. Permitted uses.
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be office, conference,
hotel with retail and services as ancillary uses only subject to the following
conditions:
A. An additional turning lane from Route 18 into Naricon Place must be
provided to accommodate a right hand turning movement or alternative
improvements to traffic flow in order to avoid a negative impact on
Route 18.
B. Widening of Naricon Place by one lane on the north side to provide (1) a
right hand turn lane and (2) a left hand turn and/or straight movement.
C. Provision for maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of .85 and a minimum
Open Space Ratio (OSR) of .75. Up to 65% of the open space can be
used for on-site parking, and other accessory structure, and site
improvements. [Amended 9-24-84 by Ord. No. 84-604]
D. Off tract improvements shall include buffering plantings on residential
property or in the public right-of-way as deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
E. Submission of a study of sub surface geology for structural capability.
F. Submission of traffic impact analysis to assure that all traffic
improvements necessitated by the development, including those off
tract, will be identified by the developer who will be required to pay for
a fair share of the costs of those improvements.
G. Noise impact study assuring compliance with Chapter 147 of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick known as the "Noise Control
Ordinance".
H. A conservation easement must be provided adjacent to all stream
corridors, which shall be at least the width of any designated flood plain
and shall include steep wooded areas identified in the Environmental
Impact Statement which the Planning Board may designate as
environmentally sensitive in accordance with T.C. 132-30.1.
I. Off-tract improvements for pedestrian access shall be provided to
connect the site with all transportation and parking areas and adjacent
uses. [Amended 9-24-84 by Ord. No. 84-604]
§ 228-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-185
1:1035
§ 228-186. Permitted accessory uses.
Those retail and service uses which are accessory to office buildings and
hotel convention centers.
§ 228-187. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be as set forth in § 228-178, C-3, General
Commercial District and as follows:
§ 228-188. Height limitations. [Amended 10-9-84 by Ord. No.
84-610]
No buildings or structures in a H-l District shall be erected or enlarged to
exceed twelve (12) stories plus a parking deck limited to five (5) stories,
subject to the following:
§ 228-189. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 10 9 84 by Ord.
No. 84-610]
J. The facade of all parking structures shall be architecturally integrated
and compatible with the architectural design of the (hotel convention
center) buildings to be constructed on the site. [Amended 9-24-84 by
Ord. No. 84-604]
A. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. If the setback line from the centerline of Route 18 is less than 250 feet,
then the height restrictions for the underlying zones shall govern.
B. For each 3,000 square feet of open space above the required open
space ratio, to a maximum of 12,000 square feet, an additional story
may be permitted by the Planning Board.
C. The maximum height limitation for structures located a minimum of 60
feet from any side yard or front yard setback shall be 60 ft. in height.
D. No structure shall exceed 200 ft. in height unless the side yard setback
is a minimum of 200 ft. Shadow pattern analysis shall be provided
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board to insure that
adjacent lots shall not be adversely affected.
E. Proposed structures may increase in height between the required 60 ft.
and 200 ft. side yard setback subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Board.
A. The minimum project size for a hotel convention center is 10 acres.
B. All setbacks and bulk standards shall be the same as § 228-180
regulating area and yard requirements in the C-3 Commercial District,
except as noted in T.C. § 228-188.
§ 228-185 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-189
1:1036
§ 228-190. Off Street parking and loading.
Off street parking and loading requirements shall be as set forth in the Site
Plan Ordinance, § 228-15.
§ 228-191. Deleted. [4-20-09 By Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-192. (Reserved)
C. A 60 ft. side yard setback shall be provided in the H-l Zone which must
remain in its natural state or be planted with supplemental landscaping
and in which the construction of any structure or pavement shall be
specifically prohibited.
§ 228-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-192
1:1037

ARTICLE XXI
Regulations for the HC-3 Highway Commercial Shopping Center
District
[Added 7-14-64; Amended 3-23-81 by Ord. No. 81-338; 4-11-88 by
Ord. No. 88-918]
§ 228-193. Application.
Unless specifically excluded in this section, the following regulations shall
apply to all HC-3 Districts.
§ 228-194. (Reserved)
§ 228-195. Permitted uses.
§ 228-195.1. Permitted accessory uses.
A. Food and food service establishments, including supermarkets,
bakeries, candy and nut shops, specialty foods, restaurants, sandwich
shops and snack bars.
B. Clothing and apparel establishments, including department stores,
junior department stores, variety stores, ladies' wear, hosiery millinery,
children's wear, shoe stores, fur stores and men's wear.
C. Furniture and home furnishings, including establishments selling
furniture, lamps, appliances, floor coverings, china and glassware,
paint and wallpaper, garden shops and hardware.
D. Offices, including banks, savings and loan, finance companies,
insurance, brokerage, medical and dental, legal, accounting,
architectural, engineering, insurance and general.
E. Personal service and other retail establishments, including beauty
shops, barbershops, watch repair, dry cleaning, travel agents, music
and record shops, book and stationery stores, wine stores, card and gift
shops, camera shops and similar types of stores.
F. Fast food restaurants where the exclusive means of entry to the
premises is through an interior mall, corridor or passageway shared as
the common access to premises in the shopping center occupied by
other tenants.
G. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities
as described in Chapter 135 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick provided there are no more than three in number in any one
establishment.
H. Notwithstanding the subparagraphs of this section setting forth
permitted uses in this zone, permitted uses are subject to the
conditional use permit requirements of § 288-176, where applicable.
§ 228-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-195.1
1:1039
§ 228-195.2. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12;
amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
A. Outside storage uses normally associated with the business of any
tenant or the shopping center, provided that these areas are fenced and
screened from adjacent business and residence districts by a dense
evergreen hedge, masonry wall or a suitable tight woven fence, not less
than six (6') feet in height.
B. The parking of tractor trailers in shopping center parking lots for the
collection of aluminum to be recycled. [Added 11-14-83 by Ord. No.
83-543]
A. Attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants based upon the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) Building coverage shall be no greater than 10% of the lot area for
freestanding restaurants.
(3) Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1 space for every two seats
plus 10 additional spaces for employees.
(4) Indoor seating for patrons shall be provided. Indoor public seating
areas shall be a minimum of one-third of the building area.
(5) No other tenants shall be permitted in the freestanding building.
(6) The side and rear yards shall be screened with a solid masonry wall
or board-on-board fence at the Board's discretion, a minimum of six
(6) feet in height.
(7) All season planted buffer strips ten feet in width shall be provided
along the side and rear property lines. Where the property abuts a
residence or residential zone these buffers shall be increased to
twenty-five (25) feet in width. In areas with existing space
constraints, the board may reduce the width of the buffer if
additional plantings, berms, plants of greater height or other
mitigating factors are required instead.
(8) The applicant shall submit traffic and circulation studies to
establish the nature and extent of the anticipated customer volume
and that such volume can be accommodated at the location without
substantial adverse impact.
B. Mechanical or electrical amusement devices as an accessory use and
mechanical or electrical amusement facilities as described in Chapter
135 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick, where there are
four or more such mechanical or electrical amusement devices upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit based upon the following
standards: [Added 5-10-82 by Ord. No. 82-457]
§ 228-195.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-195.2
1:1040
1. No place shall be located within 500 feet of a residence or
residential zone, regardless of whether or not such zone is actually
developed for residences, which distance shall be measured along
a straight line from the nearest boundary line of the lot on which
the proposed use is to be located and the nearest point of the
residence or residential zone.
2. The proposed area shall be sufficient for the intended purpose; that
adequate parking facilities are provided; that the means of ingress
and egress are adequate to prevent traffic hazard, congestion or
excessive interference with normal traffic movement on adjacent
public streets and thoroughfares; that the buildings and use are
appropriately located with regard to fire protection; that the
buildings and use will meet a community need and will not
adversely affect neighboring properties and property values.
C. Drive-thru facilities at attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants
subject to the following standards: [Added 4-14-93 by Ord. No.
93-12; amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
1. A separate delineated drive-thru lane shall be provided.
2. Queue storage that minimizes interference with pedestrian and
vehicular movements.
3. The proposed drive-thru facility shall be implemented without
posing a safety hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
4. Reserve parking spaces shall be provided between the drive-thru
area and the facilities exit. Such parking spaces are intended for
use by any drive-thru vehicles awaiting delivery of a delayed order.
5. Drive-thru facilities shall operate only when the dining room is
open to the public.
6. The drive-thru facility shall be designed for and utilized by
motorized vehicles only.
7. A bail-out lane shall be provided so that cars in queue can leave the
queue safely.
8. A canopy or cover shall be provided over the window.
9. No loudspeaker shall be permitted at properties that abut a
residential zone or residential property line.
10. Drive-thru windows proposed to be located within 150 feet of a
residential building shall be closed at 11:00 p.m., subject to the
following: [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
(a) After the fast food restaurant is open and the drive-thru
window is in full operation, the applicant may seek
modification of site plan approval by returning to the Board
§ 228-195.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-195.2
1:1041
§ 228-196. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 228-197. Standards. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
which granted site plan approval. Such modification may
include a later closing time of the drive-thru window(s). The
applicant for such modification shall conduct noise meter tests
between 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. for seven (7) consecutive
nights and shall submit the test results to the appropriate
board. The board shall conduct a public hearing and will
determine whether the noise meter results comply with
Township noise standards and whether such later closing time
of the drive-thru window(s) is consistent with the health, safety
and welfare of the adjacent residents.
A. All uses not listed in §§ 228-195, 228-195.1, and 228-195.2.
B. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
C. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
D. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy-five (75%) percent.
B. No building shall be located within 100 feet of any property line or
within 100 feet of the right-of-way of any street or road.
C. Minimum lot area: five (5) acres.
D. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35') feet in height or 2 1/2 stories.
E. Minimum lot width: 500 feet.
F. All buildings shall have a unified architectural treatment whether
constructed as new or as an additional structure physically and
aesthetically integrated with the existing structure. The Planning Board
shall consider in its architectural review items such as materials,
colors, building setbacks, facade treatments and building height and
shall encourage the revitalization of existing structures to insure
compatibility with proposed building additions.
G. The front facades of at least forty (40%) percent but no greater than
sixty (60%) percent of a structure having a single linear plane shall be
set back not less than twenty (20') feet behind the facades of the
remaining units in such structure.
H. To promote a desirable visual environment and to insure good civic
design the Planning Board in its review shall consider, but not be
limited in its consideration of, visual impacts of the proposed
development, including views and view interference, shadow effects
§ 228-195.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-197
1:1042
and solar orientation and design compatibility with surrounding land
uses.
I. On site parking shall be provided at a rate of 5.5 spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross leasable floor area.
J. Parking areas shall be designed to minimize pedestrian and moving
vehicle conflicts. Pedestrian walkways, parking lot islands, signage and
pavement texture differentiation shall be required by the Planning
Board where appropriate to ensure the safe movement of pedestrians.
K. No parking area or off street loading space shall be located closer than
thirty (30') feet to any lot line. A thirty (30') foot landscaped buffer shall
be required to shield adjacent roadways and properties from parking lot
illumination, headlight glare and fumes. Where the lot line of any lot in
the C 5 district is boundary line of a residential zone the parking
setbacks shall be increased by an additional twenty-five (25') feet which
shall contain a planted buffer area of massed evergreens of a species
approved by the Planning Board.
L. Impervious parking surface coverage shall be limited, to the extent
possible, by the use of parking in or under buildings, the elimination of
excess paving and the use of permeable surfaces for paving where
appropriate.
M. One off street loading space shall be provided or maintained for each
50,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area, unless waived by the Board
because of special reasons shown by the applicant. All off street loading
areas shall be separate from shopper vehicular and pedestrian traffic
and shall be screened to the satisfaction of the Planning Board from the
view of shoppers, those traveling on adjacent roadways, and
surrounding property owners.
N. Refuse collection areas shall be provided and shall be located for the
convenience of the occupants. Also, the areas shall be screened with an
enclosed masonry structure of a compatible style with the proposed
principal structure of at least six (6') feet in height on three sides with a
solid gate enclosing the fourth side. Exterior and interior refuse
receptacles, aesthetically designed, shall be provided for shopper
convenience.
O. All land not covered by buildings, storage areas, parking, driveways and
loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping
plan approved by the Planning Board.
P. Shopping centers shall provide weather protection for its customers
either by enclosed shopping area, canopies or other means.
Q. Lighting.
1. All outdoor lighting shall be high pressure sodium or mercury
vapor fixtures or other similar energy savings fixtures. Sharp cut
§ 228-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-197
1:1043
§ 228-198. Additional Planning Board requirements. [Amended
4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
off luminaries shall be utilized where appropriate to reduce glare
and direct lighting where intended.
2. Mounting heights of fixtures shall not exceed the height of the
building or thirty (30') feet whichever is less.
3. All lighting shall be designed to provide a minimum of .25
footcandles and an average of .75 footcandles throughout all
parking areas and access driveways.
4. All lighting shall be stanchion mounted and serviced underground.
R. All buildings, structures and paved surfaces shall be set back a
minimum of fifty (50') feet from any stream course or natural
drainageway unless floodplain information indicates that a greater
setback is appropriate. Natural surface drainage structures shall be
utilized wherever possible. Nonpoint source pollutants shall be handled
by use of drainage swales in combination with retention facilities, in an
attempt to reduce the amount of potential pollutants entering into the
aquifer. Such swales shall be seeded with appropriate vegetative
materials that are satisfactory to the Planning Board to filter silt and
other potential pollutants to the surface and underground water supply
systems.
S. All existing trees over six (6") inches in caliper shall be shown on the
development plan and shall be preserved, whenever possible, by
methods approved by the Planning Board.
T. Buildings shall be oriented, to the extent feasible, in order to maximize
the potential for the use of solar energy for heating, cooling and energy
conservation.
U. The layout of the shopping center shall consider access from all stores
to all other stores in the same center for a maximum pedestrian
distance of 700 feet. The location of store entrances and orientation of
buildings shall minimize distances for pedestrians to walk from one
store to another.
V. Signs. [Deleted 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
A. The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a market
analysis showing the need for the center. The market analysis shall
include the following items unless waived by the Planning Board:
1. Delineation of the trade area of the proposed center.
2. The existing and projected population of the trade area.
3. Determination of effective buying power in the trade area.
§ 228-197 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-198
1:1044
§ 228-199. (Reserved)
4. The amount and percentage of buying power in the trade area
allocated to the proposed shopping center.
5. The amount and percentage of buying power in the proposed trade
area which will be expended in existing commercial area.
B. The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a time
schedule indicating when the various stages of construction will be
initiated after final approval.
C. The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a traffic study
prepared by a qualified professional indicating the impact which the
center will have on surrounding roads. It shall include the following
elements:
1. Estimated peak hourly traffic to be generated by the center.
2. Assignment of estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage and
volume to surrounding roads.
3. Determination of unused capacity of surrounding roads during
peak hours.
4. Recommendations for necessary road improvements such as
acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic control devices
recommended for public roads or highways surrounding the site.
§ 228-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-199
1:1045

ARTICLE XXII
Regulations for the P-I Planned Industrial Park District
§ 228-200. Definitions applicable to Article.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a building permit in the P-I District.
DEVELOPER — Any person commencing proceeding under this chapter to
effect the development of land in the P-I District.
§ 228-201. Procedures and standards. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord.
No. 10-22]
The regulations applying to the P-I District shall be as follows:
A. The development of any area designated as P-I shall be in accordance
with the procedures established by Articles II, III, IV and V of Chapter
192, Subdivision of Land, of this Code and shall be in accordance with
general plans and specifications which shall have been submitted to
and approved by the Planning Board prior to the issuance of a building
permit. The plans and specifications shall be governed by the sections
hereinafter contained and shall generally provide for the orderly
establishment and development of areas to be known as "planned
industrial parks", including but not limited to such items as street
layouts, grades, drainage, sewerage, water and other utilities, proposed
lot subdivisions, traffic patterns, aesthetics and appearance and uses.
[Amended 3-9-65 by Ord. No. 65-8]
B. The Building Inspector shall not accept an application for a building
permit to which the provisions set forth herein are applicable unless all
of the required site plans and specifications have been approved by the
Planning Board and so noted on all plans and applications submitted to
the Building Inspector.
C. All construction and improvements are to be in accordance with the
current zoning and building codes, except where specified differently
herein.
D. All public ways within the park, except access driveways to individual
lots, or on which the park may front shall be not less than fifty (50) feet
in width, including the sidewalks area. The paved portion of such public
ways shall not be less than thirty-six (36) feet in width. The pavements,
curbs, gutters and sidewalks of the public ways shall be installed and
constructed in accordance with the specifications set forth in the Land
Subdivision Chapter of this Code, and the design therefor shall be
approved by the Planning Board and the Municipal Engineer.
Pedestrian sidewalks shall not be required along interior roadways in
the P-I District
Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Design Guidelines and Standards.
§ 228-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-201
1:1047
§ 228-202. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 3-9-65 by Ord.
No. 65-8]
E. All water, sanitary sewers and storm sewer lines shall be installed and
constructed in accordance with the specifications set forth in the Land
Subdivision Chapter of this Code, and the design therefor shall be
approved by the Planning Board, upon recommendation of the
Municipal Engineer with regard to water and storm sewer lines.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Design Guidelines and Standards.
[Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
A. Each principal building shall be situated on a lot which shall have an
area of not less than two acres.
B. No more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area shall be occupied
by principal and accessory buildings and structures. [Amended
9-12-66 by Ord. 66-8-F]
C. The minimum frontage requirements for each lot in the P-I District shall
be in accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Frontage
Lot Sizes
(acres)
Requirements
(feet)
2-3 200
3-4 250
4-5 300
5-10 350
10 or more 400
D. Yard spaces for all lots in the P-I District shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) The distance from the sides of any building or outside storage area
to each side yard line shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) The distance from the rear of any building or outside storage area
to a rear yard line shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet.
(3) The distance from the front of any building to a front yard line shall
be a minimum of sixty-five (65) feet.
(4) Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, where a
lot within the P-I District fronts on a street or road which is the
boundary line of a residential zone, the front yard requirement for
the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet.
§ 228-201 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-202
1:1048
§ 228-203. Design of buildings. [Amended 3-9-65 by Ord. No. 65-8;
4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
All buildings in any one park area shall be of a harmonious architectural
design. All buildings are to be of masonry construction or its equivalent
or better. Buildings constructed of light weight aggregate, cinder block or
plain concrete block shall be finished on the front with face brick, limestone
or their equivalent or better if they face on a residential area or a street.
§ 228-204. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-20]
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
(5) Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, where the
side or rear lot line of any lot in the P-I District is the boundary of a
residential zone, the side or rear yard requirement for the lot shall
be increased by an additional twenty-five (25) feet which shall
contain a planted buffer area of massed evergreens and shrubbery
of a species approved by the Planning Board.
(6) All land not covered by buildings, storage areas, parking,
driveways and loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with a landscaping plan approved by the Planning Board.
(7) There shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet from rear and side lot
lines to parking areas and access driveways.
(8) An access road, signs and landscaping shall be the only permitted
use within the front yard area, except that if the front of any
building shall be more than one hundred seventy-five (175) feet
from the front property line, the Planning Board may permit
automobile parking in the front yard area within that area bounded
by a line one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the street and the
front of the building, provided that the area between the parking
lot and the front yard property line is landscaped with material to
provide a screen, and, when deemed necessary by the Planning
Board, a berm may be required. The height of the berm shall be no
less than five (5) feet. [Amended 10-10-72 by Ord. No.
72-8-HH]
A. Industrial plants of a type which have no nuisance problems and which
carry on processes within completely enclosed buildings, including the
manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles of
merchandise from the following previously prepared or refined
materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, film, felt, fur,
glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, pervious or semipervious
metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, wax, wire, wood (except
planning mills) and yarns.
B. Manufacture of toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps and other
molded rubber of plastic products.
§ 228-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-204
1:1049
§ 228-205. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses and building permitted shall be:
C. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, etc.
D. Experimental, research or testing laboratories, provided that no
operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would create
hazardous, noxious or offensive conditions or noise beyond the
boundaries of the property involved.
E. Administrative and general offices where no manufacturing or research
is performed, including:
(1) Electronic computer and accounting and clerical service
organizations.
(2) Engineering and contractor offices.
(3) General office, etc.
F. Motels, including meeting rooms and dining facilities in connection
therewith; provided, however, that such motels may be erected only
upon a minimum of one hundred (100) acres of common ownership, and
construction may not begin until a minimum of one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of industrial building space is completed on the
tract. Initial construction based on this minimum may not include more
than fifty (50) room units; thereafter, one additional unit may be added
for each acre of industrial area developed in the tract, to a maximum
total of two hundred (200) units in any one motel.
G. Heliports, provided that they shall be in conformity with Federal
Aviation Agency regulations, and there shall be not more than one
heliport within a single P I District.
H. Public utility structures and facilities other than those of an industrial
character, such as repair and maintenance shops, storage facilities,
freight stations and freight yards. [Added 10-28-68 by Ord. No.
68-8-S; amended 11-25-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-T]
A. Storage uses and building for materials, liquids, chemicals and similar
items not permitted within the main building under Fire Underwriters
standards, provided that outdoor storage uses shall be at the rear of the
building and so arranged as to be minimally visible from a street or
highway. Storage shall preferably be in a separate building of masonry
construction, but outdoor storage shall be permitted in an area
screened on three sides by a dense evergreen hedge and/or continuous
masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height. No other outside
storage shall be permitted. The open side of the storage enclosure
should face the rear of the buildings and should not be visible from the
fronting road.
§ 228-204 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-205.1
1:1050
§ 228-205.1. Conditional uses. [Added 2-11-91 by Ord. No. 91-20;
Amended 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-2; 8-28-06 by Ord. No. 06-28]
A. Warehouses and Distribution Centers. No conditional use permit shall
be issued unless the following conditions are met:
1. Where the side or rear lot line is the boundary of a residential zone
or an existing residential use, the side or rear yard requirement for
the lot shall be increased to fifty (50) feet which shall contain a
planted buffer area of massed evergreens and shrubs of a design
and species approved by the Planning Board.
2. For new construction, truck loading areas, truck maneuvering
areas and truck storage areas shall not be located between the
building and an adjoining residential zone or existing residential
use.
3. For existing buildings which have truck loading areas, truck
maneuvering areas or truck storage areas located between the
building and an adjoining residential zone or existing residential
use, any modification in the site plan requiring approval by the
Planning Board shall include provision of buffers which shall be
specifically designed to minimize noise and visual nuisance factors
to adjoining residential properties. The buffers may include
constructed noise barriers, earthen berms and other techniques
which may assist in diminishing adverse effects on adjoining
residences.
4. Tractor-trailer ingress and egress from local residential streets
shall not be permitted. [Added 8-28-06 by Ord. No. 06-28]
B. Billboards subject to the following standards: [Added 2-14-00 by Ord.
No. 00-2]
1. No part of the billboard may extend more than one hundred (100)
feet from the New Jersey Turnpike right-of-way.
2. The minimum setback from the New Jersey Turnpike right-of-way
shall be 10 feet. The minimum setback from the front property line
shall be fifty (50) feet. The minimum setback from all other lot lines
shall be fifteen (15) feet.
3. Maximum billboard height shall be forty (40) feet as measured from
the mean elevation of the finished grade at the base of the
structure to the top of the billboard. The Planning Board may
permit any billboard allowed under this section to be increased to
no greater than seventy-five (75) feet in height to minimize the
adjustment, alteration or removal of natural landscaping or to
provide an unobstructed, legible view of the advertising surfaces of
the billboard.
§ 228-205.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-205.1
1:1051
§ 228-206. Landscaping.
Attractive landscaping shall be provided according to area requirements
and plans to be approved by the Planning Board. Landscaping shall include
but not be limited to the following:
4. Minimum distance between any two billboards shall be 1000 feet
along the same side of the New Jersey Turnpike.
5. The maximum permitted advertising area showing in one direction
shall not exceed 672 square feet with copy extensions beyond the
basic billboard not to exceed 10% of the basic billboard area.
6. Billboards shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet to
a residential zone or municipal boundary.
7. Billboards shall be designed and constructed for the advertising
surface to be viewed primarily by motorists from the New Jersey
Turnpike.
8. Lighting for any billboard shall be designed to restrict any glare
and spillover to the immediate area of the sign. Blinking or flashing
lights shall be prohibited.
9. Billboards shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following morning.
10. Visual impact, particularly on surrounding properties shall be
minimized through the use of landscaping, berming, and grading.
All season landscaping shall be installed to achieve a positive
aesthetic impression of the general sign area. This will include the
solid screening of the rear of the sign as deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
11. The applicant shall comply with the Roadside Sign Control and
Outdoor Advertising Act as contained in N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq. as
well as any other applicable statutes, laws and regulations related
to billboards.
12. Site plan approval shall be obtained from the Planning Board. The
items to be reviewed as part of such an application shall include
traffic safety, lighting, visual impact, drainage, and other pertinent
elements of site plan reviews. As part of its review the Board shall
consider the impact of the proposal on surrounding properties and
the New Jersey Turnpike itself.
13. No more than a total of four billboards shall be permitted to be
erected in East Brunswick along the New Jersey Turnpike.
14. Billboards shall not contain pornographic or obscene material or
advertise alcohol or tobacco products.
§ 228-205.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-206
1:1052
§ 228-207. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22;
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
Prohibited uses and building shall be:
A. Lawn covering entire landscaped area with the exception of planting
beds or wooded areas.
B. Appropriate foundation planting in the front of the building. All
landscaped area shall be properly maintained in a sightly, attractive and
well kept condition. If such conditions are not maintained, the Chief
Construction Official shall cause the required maintenance by the
municipality or its agents, and the owner of each lot so maintained by
order of the Chief Construction Official shall be liable for all reasonable
costs incurred. Wooded areas shall be preserved wherever possible
without causing interference with the general plans, specifications and
other requirements of the lot. [Amended 10-23-78 by Ord. No.
78-89]
A. Residences and all other R-I uses, except parks and hospitals. [Added
3-9-65 by Ord. No. 65-8; amended 9-27-65 by Ord. No. 65-8-C]
B. Prohibited uses listed in the C-1 District.
C. All permitted uses listed in the C-2 and C-3 Districts. [Amended
5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509; 4-11-88 by Ord. No. 88-918]
D. All uses listed in § 228-210BB.
E. Other prohibited uses listed in the P-I and I/M Districts.
F. All trucking businesses, terminals and repair shops, other than
administrative and general offices.
G. Uses which produce as part of their primary business effluents other
than domestic sewage. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
H. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices and for the storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
[Added 2-26-68 by Ord. No. 68-8N]
I. Fast-food restaurants. [Added 5-22-78 by Ord. No. 78-29]
J. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities.
[Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
K. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
L. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
§ 228-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-207
1:1053
§ 228-208. Height limitations.
No buildings or structures shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height,
subject to exceptions mentioned in § 228-235 of this chapter.
M. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 228-207 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-208
1:1054
ARTICLE XXIII
Regulations for the M-1 Research and Limited Manufacturing
District
[Deleted 3-8-82 by Ord. No. 82-443]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-208
1:1055

ARTICLE XXIV
Regulations for the I/M, Industrial Manufacturing District
[Amended 3-8-82 by Ord. No. 82-443]
§ 228-209. Conditional uses. [Added 12-23-96 by Ord. No. 96-41]
A. Recycling Centers:
1. Recycling centers shall be a conditional use in the I/M zone.
2. No conditional use permit shall be issued for a recycling center
unless the applicant satisfies the following conditions:
a. The center/facility shall be located greater than 1,500 feet
from a residential property line or residential zone line, which
distance shall be measured along a straight line from the
nearest property line of the lot on which the proposed center is
to be located and the nearest point of the residential property
line or residential zone line.
b. The center/facility shall be located on property which is
greater than two acreage in size.
c. Submittal of a certification that the center/facility complies
with all local, county and state laws, codes, regulations,
approvals and other requirements of any agency or public body
having jurisdiction over these types of facilities.
d. The center/facility shall only operate between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
e. The center/facility shall locate all operations in an enclosed
structure, including but not limited to all tipping and
processing of materials. Truck weighing will be permitted
outside the enclosed structure.
f. An analysis of all on-site fixed and transient noise sources to
develop methods to control impacts from the center's/facility's
operation in complying with the noise standards codified under
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
g. Submittal of an environmental impact study in accordance with
§ 132-31 and § 132-30 of the Township Code to determine the
effects of the center's/facility's operation on the surrounding
area measuring impacts on noise, congestion on roads, safety
and air quality.
h. All areas and facilities used for recycling collection, storage,
and recycling operations shall be suitably buffered and
screened to minimize impacts of noise, odors, and views.
Minimum buffering shall be as follows: There shall be a
minimum thirty-five (35') foot wide all-season landscape buffer
§ 228-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-209
1:1057
around the entire perimeter of the center/facility. Included in
this buffer area shall be a minimum of eight (8') foot high
fencing surrounding all sides of the center/facility which shall
be either masonry or solid wooden fencing with gates, doors,
and ramps to permit adequate access to the buildings. All
landscaping shall be a minimum of eight - ten (8' - 10') feet
high at time of planting and planted eight - ten (8' - 10') feet on
center.
i. Submittal of copies of any approvals issued by any
governmental entity relating to the center/facility.
j. Submittal of a traffic study in accordance with § 132-30 of the
Township Code prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
k. The developer shall be responsible for contribution of its pro
rata share in accordance with § 132-55 of the Township Code of
all infrastructure improvements made necessary by the
proposed center/facility as determined by the Township
Engineer.
B. Solid Waste Facilities:
1. Solid Waste facilities shall be a conditional use in the I/M Zone.
2. No conditional use permit shall be issued for a solid waste facility
unless the applicant satisfies the conditions of Subsection A(2)
above.
3. In addition to meeting the conditions of this chapter, an applicant
for a permit for a solid waste facility must demonstrate that
disposal operations shall be suitably buffered and screened to
minimize impacts of noise odors and views.
C. Alternative treatment center. [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-39]
1. No such place designated an alternative treatment center shall be
located within 500 feet of a residence or residential zone, which
distance shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest
property line of the lot on which the proposed use is to be located
and the nearest property line of the residence or residential zone.
2. No such place designated an alternative treatment center shall be
located within 1,000 feet of a public school, which distance shall be
measured along a straight line from the nearest property line of the
lot on which the proposed use is to be located and the nearest
property line of the public school.
D. Retail electronic smoking device establishment/electronic smoking
devices. [Added 2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
1. No such place designated as a retail electronic smoking device
establishment and no such place that sells electronic smoking
§ 228-209 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-209
1:1058
§ 228-210. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-509;
10-26-87 by Ord. No. 87-871; 2-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-1]
Types of principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
devices shall be located within 500 feet of a residence or residential
zone, which distance shall be measured along a straight line from
the nearest property line of the lot on which the proposed use is
to be located and the nearest property line of the residence or
residential zone.
2. No such place designated as a retail electronic smoking device
establishment and no such place that sells electronic smoking
devices shall be located within 1,000 feet of a public school, which
distance shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest
property line of the lot on which the proposed use is to be located
and the nearest property line of the public school.
A. Any use permitted in the P-I District under § 228-204.
B. Any use permitted in the C-3 District under § 228-176.
C. Construction establishments wherein construction activities are
generally managed from a fixed place of business and where actual
construction work is performed at dispersed sites.
D. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to
industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business
users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying
merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
E. Establishments which manufacture or process food for human
consumption and kindred products, including canned foods, grain
products, bakery products, sugar and confectionery products, fats and
oils, and beverages, and specifically excluding establishments which
slaughter live animals.
F. The manufacturer of textile mill products.
G. Establishments which produce clothing and fabricated products by
cutting and sewing purchased woven or knot textile fabrics and related
materials, such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and furs.
H. Establishments engaged in manufacturing finished articles made
entirely or mainly of wood or wood substitutes.
I. Manufacturing of furniture and fixtures.
J. Establishments which engage in the manufacture of paper and
paperboard into converted products, such as boxes and envelopes.
§ 228-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-210
1:1059
K. Establishments engaged in printing and publishing and those
establishments which perform services for the printing trade, such as
bookbinding, typesetting and engraving.
L. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of finished leather and
leather products, specifically excluding tanning, currying, and finishing
hides and skins.
M. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of stone, clay, glass and
concrete products.
N. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of fabricated metal
products.
O. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of machinery, equipment,
electrical machinery and supplies, and household appliances.
P. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of equipment for
transportation of passengers and cargo by land, air and water.
Q. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of instruments for
measuring, testing, analyzing and controlling and their associated
sensors and accessories; photographic, medical and optical goods;
watches and clocks.
R. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of jewelry, silverware and
plated ware.
S. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of musical instruments.
T. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of toys and amusements,
sporting and athletic goods.
U. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of pens, pencils and other
office, and artists' materials.
V. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of costume jewelry,
novelties, buttons, and miscellaneous notions.
W. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of electronic components
and accessories.
X. Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger
transportation.
Y. Motor freight transportation and warehousing.
Z. Transportation services.
AA. Quarrying or stone crushing, including sand and gravel mining and the
stripping of topsoil, only as a continuous extension of an operation
existing as of November 25, 1958, and subject to the following
limitations and restrictions.
§ 228-210 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-210
1:1060
§ 228-211. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 10-26-87 by Ord.
No. 87-871; 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-212. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be all uses and buildings not listed in
§§ 228-210 and 228-211.
§ 228-213. Height limitations. [Amended 5-9-83 by Ord. No. 83-507]
No building or structure shall exceed a height of fifty (50') feet, measured
from grade.
(1) Such operation shall not continue beyond the boundary lines of the
property owned or leased as of November 25, 1958.
(2) The operation shall actually be conducted as of November 25,
1958.
(3) The operation shall not be permitted to be resumed after it has
been discontinued or abandoned. The operations shall be
considered abandoned when the intent of the owner or operator to
discontinue the operation is apparent or when the characteristic
equipment and furnishing have been removed from the premises
and have not been replaced by similar equipment within such
period of time as, in the judgment of the Planning Board, shall
evidence an intent not to resume the operation.
(4) In no event shall the right to continue the operation be greater in
scope, extent of duration than that which existed as of November
25, 1958.
A. Storage uses and buildings for materials, liquids, chemicals and similar
items not permitted within the main building under Fire Underwriters
standards, provided that outside storage uses shall be within an area
fenced and enclosed on all sides by a dense evergreen hedge, solid
masonry wall or uniformly painted board fence not less than eight (8')
feet in height.
B. Storage yard for wreckers or heavy wreckers and damaged or disabled
vehicles associated with a wrecker operation as an accessory use to an
automobile service station or minor automobile repair shops. [Added
10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
§ 228-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-214
1:1061
§ 228-214. Area and bulk requirements. [Amended 10-26-87 by Ord.
No. 87-871]
Area and yard requirements shall be:
A. Minimum lot size: two acres.
B. Maximum building coverage: principal and accessory buildings and
structures: forty (40%) percent.
C. Maximum lot coverage: seventy-five (75%) percent.
D. The minimum frontage requirements for each lot shall be in accordance
with the following schedule:
Minimum Frontage
Lot Sizes
(acres)
Requirements
(feet)
2-3 200
3-4 250
4-5 300
5-10 350
10 or more 400
E. 1. Front yard setback for principal buildings: sixty-five (65') feet.
2. Front yard setback for principal buildings which front on a street or
road which is the boundary line of a residential zone: one hundred
(100') feet.
F. Side yard setback for any building or outside storage area thirty-five
(35') feet, provided, however, that when an outside storage area is
enclosed on four sides and the storage does not exceed the height of the
enclosure, there shall be no side setbacks.
G. Rear yard setback for any building or outside storage area: forty (40')
feet provided, however, that when an outside storage area is enclosed
on four sides and the storage does not exceed the height of the
enclosure, there shall be no rear setback.
H. Side and rear yard setback where the side or rear lot line of any lot is
the boundary of a residential zone shall be increased by an additional
twenty-five (25') feet which shall contain a landscape buffer area of
massed evergreens and shrubbery of a species approved by the
Planning Board.
I. All land not covered by buildings, storage areas, parking, driveways and
loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping
plan approved by the Planning Board.
§ 228-214 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-214
1:1062
§ 228-215. Off street parking and loading. [Amended 10-26-87 by
Ord. No. 87-871]
Off street parking and loading requirements shall be approved as provided
for in § 228-15D.
§ 228-216. Site plan approval. [Amended 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
The applicant shall submit evidence and certify compliance with all
performance standards.
Performance Standards.
J. Parking areas and access driveways setback: ten (10') feet from rear
and side lot lines.
K. 1. In any location where the lot faces a residence, residential
development or residential district an access road, signs and
landscaping shall be the only permitted use within the front yard
area, except that if the front of any building shall be more than one
hundred seventy-five (175') feet from the front property line,
automobile parking in the front yard area within that area bounded
by a line one hundred twenty-five (125') feet from the street and the
front of the building may be permitted, provided that area between
the parking lot and the front yard property line is landscaped with
plant material and berms to provide a screen. The height of the
berms shall be no less than five (5') feet.
2. In all other locations parking is permitted in the front yard,
provided, however, that there shall be a twenty (20') foot strip of
front yard adjacent to the street line which shall be improved with a
landscaped buffer, consisting of a mixture of deciduous and
coniferous plant materials at a minimum height of four (4') feet and
maintained at a height of no less than six (6') feet, excluding areas
necessary for adequate site distance. An earth berm of a minimum
of three (3') feet may be installed in such a twenty (20') foot
landscaped buffer area, in which case the height of the plant
materials may be revised as approved at the time of site plan
approval.
A. General Regulations.
1. As a condition of approval and the occupancy of any structure and
operation of any process or equipment, the applicant shall submit
evidence and certify compliance with all applicable performance
standards. As evidence of compliance, the Board may require
certification of tests by appropriate government agencies or by
recognized testing laboratories, any costs to be borne by applicant.
The Board may require that specific operation procedures or
methods be followed if the government agencies or testing
laboratories examining the proposed operation shall determine
§ 228-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-216
1:1063
that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment,
devices, procedures or methods are required in order to assure
compliance with the applicable performance standards.
2. For all applications for conditional uses and use variances which
must meet the performance standards of this article, the Board
shall not grant approval for any use, structure, process or
equipment until it receives certification from the applicant
regarding compliance with the performance standards established
herein.
B. Regulation of Nuisance Elements.
1. The determination of the existence of nuisance elements shall be
made at the following locations:
Nuisance Characteristics Location of Test
Liquid waste property line
Solid waste property line
Radiation vent or smokestack
Vibration property line
Glare property line
Temperature change:
gas vent or smokestack
liquid or solid property line
Electricity property line
2. Continued compliance with the performance standards stated
herein shall be a requirement for the continued occupancy of any
structure or the operation of any process or equipment.
C. Standards to be Enforced.
1. Air Pollution - The applicant shall submit proof of compliance with
T.C. Chapter 42, Air Pollution Control by obtaining the required
permit.
2. Wastes -
a. Liquid wastes - No liquid waste shall be discharged into any
watercourse in the Township. If the applicant proposes to
construct facilities for the treatment of waste, he shall supply:
i. A statement by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection that such proposed facilities are
in compliance with applicable state laws
ii. Approval by the appropriate officials of the installation of
such facilities. No liquid waste shall be discharged into the
§ 228-216 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-216
1:1064
public sewage collection and disposal system unless the
appropriate Township or Middlesex County Utility
Authority shall have first investigated the character and
volume of such waste and shall have certified that it will
accept the discharge of such waste material into the
system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements
of said officials, including the pretreating of such wastes,
the installation of processing methods, separation or
screening of wastes, control of pH and other methods of
improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition
of approval of such facilities.
b. Solid waste - Each property owner shall be responsible for:
i. Adequate and regular collection and removal of all refuse
except where the Township assumes such responsibility.
ii. Compliance with all applicable provisions of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
iii. Compliance with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code,
Chapter 8, "Refuse Disposal", Public Health Council of the
State Department of Environmental Protection.
3. Radiation - All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or
may be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls,
standards, and requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, as well as the Radiation Protection Act, Chapter 116, P.L.
1958, as amended, and any subsequent acts whichever shall be
most stringent.
4. Vibration - No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted
through the ground and is discernible without the aid of
instruments.
5. Glare - Glare is defined as the sensation of brightness within the
visual field which causes annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual
performance or visibility.
a. From structures. Light from enclosed structures shall be
shielded or directed in such a way that glare is not visible at
any point on any boundary line or beyond any point on any
property line or street line.
b. Area lighting. Area lighting, including that used for production
activities and protective purposes, driveways, loading and
unloading and parking, shall be located so that glare will not
become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining districts
or to any adjoining public right-of-way. All permitted lighting
shall be arranged so as to be directed upon the property from
which the light originates so as to not objectionably illuminate
any contiguous property without the express consent of the
§ 228-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-216
1:1065
owners of such property and without the consent of the
appropriate municipal board.
c. Illumination of production activities shall be buffered so that
glare will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties.
d. Advertising lighting. The intent of this subsection is to ensure
lighting decoration done in a tasteful manner which will not
detract from peaceful enjoyment of surrounding areas.
Advertising lighting, including all lighting which is used for
directing attention, shall be permitted where the source of
illumination shines directly toward the sign without producing
glare or shines directly toward a building, cluster of shrubs,
fountain or other point of interest, not toward any point off the
property. No lighting of intermittent intensity or flashing lights
will be permitted.
6. Temperature Change - Any use or process shall not produce a
temperature change discernible at the measuring point which shall
produce a temperature change of greater than five (5) degrees
Fahrenheit measured at the horizontal distance of 10 feet from the
point of discharge.
7. Fire and Explosive Hazards - If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a
fire or explosion hazard, the Board may require the applicant to
supply proof of:
a. Approval of the use, structure, process, or resulting product or
material from the State Department of Labor and Industry
indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion
have been taken or installed.
b. Approval from the Township of East Brunswick Division of Fire
Inspection that the applicant has complied with all applicable
Township fire prevention regulations.
8. Electricity - Electrical/electronic equipment shall be shielded in/or
filtered to the maximum extent possible consistent with the rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission to
minimize any interference with radios or TV reception beyond the
operator's property.
9. Noise - The applicant shall submit proof of compliance with T.C.
Chapter 147, Noise.
§ 228-216 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-216
1:1066
ARTICLE XXV
Regulations for the M-3 Heavy Industrial District
[Amended 4-12-65 by Ord. No. 65-8-A; deleted 2-8-82 by Ord. No.
81-426]
§ 228-217. (Reserved)
§ 228-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217
1:1067

ARTICLE XXV-A
Regulations for the MXD Mixed Use District
[Added 4-3-78 by Ord. No. 78-4]
§ 228-217.1. Authority, intent and definition.
A. Authority. This Article is adopted pursuant to N.J.R.S. 40:55D 39 et seq.
B. Purpose and intent. In order for the Township of East Brunswick to
encourage innovation in design and reflect changes in land
development technology and to provide for necessary commercial
facilities and services; to ensure compatibility among land uses; to
conserve the value of land; to encourage more efficient use of land and
of public services; to encourage better transportation of people; to
prevent strip commercial development; and to preserve the residential
integrity of adjacent areas, the Township Council of the Township of
East Brunswick hereby declares it to be in the general interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of East
Brunswick and in harmony with the objectives of this article and the
Township's adopted Master Plan to permit greater flexibility in design,
layout and construction in housing development and commercial
development than heretofore.
C. Definition of MXD.
(1) An area of minimum contiguous size of 20 acres as specified by this
article to be planned, developed and managed as a single entity
containing one or more structures with appurtenant common area
to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any
residential or other uses.
(2) In a single development operation or a definitely programmed
series of development operations, including all lands and buildings.
(3) For principal and accessory uses and structures substantially
related to the character and purposes of the district.
(4) According to comprehensive and detail plans that include not only
street, utilities, services or building sites and the like but also site
plans and floor plans for all buildings as intended to be located,
constructed, used and related to each other and detailed plans for
the uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings.
(5) With a program for provision, operation and maintenance of such
areas, facilities and improvements as will be for common use by
some or all of the occupants of or visitors to the district but will not
be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense.
(6) An option or overlay zone in which mixed use development is
permitted, subject to the requirements set forth in this article.
§ 228-217.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.2
1:1069
§ 228-217.2. Land included.
The MXD Option Zone includes the land described in Schedules A and B.
Editor's Note: See § 228-282.
§ 228-217.3. Minimum required area; required facilities;
subdivision approval.
§ 228-217.4. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12]
The specific mix of uses is subject to approval of the Planning Board.
Permitted uses shall be:
A. Standards for development. No mixed use development under this
article shall take place except upon tracts of land having a minimum of
20 contiguous acres having sufficient access to existing improved
streets; MXD Districts shall be located with available sanitary sewers,
water lines, storm and surface drainage systems and other utility
systems and installations in such a way that neither extension nor
enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form,
character, location, degree, scale or timing resulting in higher net
public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than would development
in the forms generally permitted under current zoning for the area.
B. Mixed use development may be approved only where an applicant
agrees to provide at his cost either private facilities, utilities and/or
services required by any appropriate public agencies having
jurisdiction or any such facilities, utilities and/or services that are not
available from the Township of East Brunswick, or otherwise service the
particular development. An applicant shall make provisions to assure
the satisfactory continuing operation of such facilities, utilities and/or
services, permanently or until the same are available from public
sources. An applicant shall also make provisions for, or shall make
appropriate contributions for, any off site or off tract development as
may be required by the mixed use development.
C. In the event that any subdivisions are required of properties in the
Mixed Use Zone, applicants may apply for such subdivisions
simultaneously with its application for development for the MXD
property.
A. Food and food service establishments, including supermarkets,
bakeries, candy and nut shops, restaurants, cafeterias, sandwich shops
and snack bars.
B. Clothing and apparel establishments, including department stores,
junior department stores, variety stores, ladies' wear, hosiery, millinery,
children's wear, shoe stores, fur stores and men's and boys' wear.
§ 228-217.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.4
1:1070
C. Furniture and home furnishings, including garden shops and
establishments selling lamps, appliances, floor coverings, china and
glassware, paint and wallpaper and hardware.
D. General offices, including but not limited to:
(1) Finance, insurance and real estate services. These include banking
services, bank related functions and savings and loan associations;
actuarial business and personal credit services, security brokers,
dealers and flotation services; commodity contracts, brokers and
dealers services; security and commodity exchanges; security and
commodity allied services; insurance carriers; insurance agents,
brokers and services; real estate operators, except developers and
resources; real estate agents, brokers and management services;
title abstracting services; real estate subdividing and development
services; real estate operative builders; combination of real estate,
insurance, loan and law services; other real estate and related
services; holding and investment services; and other finance,
insurance, travel and real estate services.
(2) Personal services; photographic services; beauty services; and
barber services.
(3) Business services; advertising services; outdoor advertising
services; other advertising services; consumer and mercantile
credit reporting services; adjustment and collection services; direct
mail advertising services, blueprinting and photocopying services;
stenographic services and other duplicating mail services; news
syndicate services and informant services.
(4) Research, development and testing services; business and
management consulting services; and detective and protective
services.
(5) Professional services; physician services; chiropractic services;
psychologist and psychiatric services; dental services; medical
laboratory services; dental laboratory services; legal services;
engineering and architectural services; educational and scientific
research services; accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;
urban planning services; data processing services; and other
professional services.
(6) Governmental services; executive, legislative and judicial
functions; and postal services.
(7) Miscellaneous services; business associations; professional
membership organizations; labor unions and similar labor
organizations; and civic, social and fraternal associations.
E. Personal service and other retail establishments, including beauty
shops, barbershops, watch repair, dry cleaning, travel agents, music
and record shops, book and stationery stores, wine stores, card and gift
§ 228-217.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.4
1:1071
§ 228-217.4.1. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No.
97-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-217.4.2. Conditional uses. [Added 4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12;
amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
shops, camera shops and similar types of stores compatible with a
community type shopping center.
F. Multifamily residential structures and townhouses, including and
encouraging a variety of housing types and styles. Total residential use
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total allowable land coverage
in an entire MXD development lot.
G. Motels and hotels, including meeting rooms and dining facilities in
connection therewith.
H. Automobile parking area, lots or structures; public utility structures
and facilities, other than those of an industrial character, such as repair
and maintenance shops, storage facilities and bus terminals.
I. Professional schools and training institutes, postal facilities, etc.
J. Warehouse and distribution facilities.
K. Public and quasi public buildings.
L. Recreational facilities.
M. Deleted. [4-14-93 by Ord. No. 93-12]
N. Mechanical amusement devices and mechanical amusement facilities
as described in Chapter 135 of the Code of the Township of East
Brunswick. [Added 6-25-79 by Ord. No. 79-146]
A. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
B. Limousine or livery service. [Added 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51]
C. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A. Attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants based upon the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) Building coverage shall be no greater than 10% of the lot area for
freestanding restaurants.
§ 228-217.4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.4.2
1:1072
(3) Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1 space for every two seats
plus 10 additional spaces for employees.
(4) Indoor seating for patrons shall be provided. Indoor public seating
areas shall be a minimum of one-third of the building area.
(5) No other tenants shall be permitted in the freestanding building.
(6) The side and rear yards shall be screened with a solid masonry wall
or board-on-board fence at the Board's discretion, a minimum of six
(6) feet in height.
(7) All season planted buffer strips ten feet in width shall be provided
along the side and rear property lines. Where the property abuts a
residence or residential zone these buffers shall be increased to
twenty-five (25) feet in width. In areas with existing space
constraints, the board may reduce the width of the buffer if
additional plantings, berms, plants of greater height or other
mitigating factors are required instead.
(8) The applicant shall submit traffic and circulation studies to
establish the nature and extent of the anticipated customer volume
and that such volume can be accommodated at the location without
substantial adverse impact.
B. Drive-thru facilities at attached and freestanding fast-food restaurants
subject to the following standards: [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No.
93-19]
1. A separate delineated drive-thru lane shall be provided.
2. Queue storage that minimizes interference with pedestrian and
vehicular movements.
3. The proposed drive-thru facility shall be implemented without
posing a safety hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
4. Reserve parking spaces shall be provided between the drive-thru
area and the facilities exit. Such parking spaces are intended for
use by any drive-thru vehicles awaiting delivery of a delayed order.
5. Drive-thru facilities shall operate only when the dining room is
open to the public.
6. The drive-thru facility shall be designed for and utilized by
motorized vehicles only.
7. A bail-out lane shall be provided so that cars in queue can leave the
queue safely.
8. A canopy or cover shall be provided over the window.
9. No loudspeaker shall be permitted at properties that abut a
residential zone or residential property lines.
§ 228-217.4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.4.2
1:1073
§ 228-217.5. Standards. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
In evaluation, the preliminary site plan and accompanying and supporting
information shall meet the following standards:
10. Drive-thru windows proposed to be located within 150 feet of a
residential building shall be closed at 11:00 p.m., subject to the
following: [Amended 5-10-93 by Ord. No. 93-19]
(a) After the fast food restaurant is open and the drive-thru
window is in full operation, the applicant may seek
modification of site plan approval by returning to the Board
which granted site plan approval. Such modification may
include a later closing time of the drive-thru window(s). The
applicant for such modification shall conduct noise meter tests
between 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. for seven (7) consecutive
nights and shall submit the test results to the appropriate
board. The board shall conduct a public hearing and will
determine whether the noise meter results comply with
Township noise standards and whether such later closing time
of the drive-thru window(s) is consistent with the health, safety
and welfare of the adjacent residents.
A. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area of the MXD
development shall be covered by buildings or structures.
B. No building shall exceed three stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height,
whichever is less.
C. No aboveground structure shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any
MXD site boundary line or within seventy-five (75) feet of the right-ofway
line of any existing street or road, except for a major highway
where the setback shall be one hundred (100) feet.
D. No parking area shall be located closer than 20 feet to an MXD site
boundary line.
E. Where required, one off street loading space shall be provided for each
twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor space of
building in the MXD development. Each such space shall be at least fifty
(50) feet in depth and twelve (12) feet in width, exclusive of access
platform or maneuvering area, to be utilized exclusively for the loading
and unloading of merchandise.
F. Where any MXD development of a nonresidential use occurs at the
boundary lines of the MXD zone line, a fifty foot landscaped buffer of
deciduous and coniferous plant materials shall be installed at a
minimum height of five (5) feet and maintained at a minimum height of
not less than fifteen (15) feet to separate any contiguous residential
zone or residential development. An earth berm of a minimum height of
three feet may be constructed in which case the Planning Board may
lessen its requirements for plant materials. The Planning Board may
§ 228-217.4.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.5
1:1074
waive the requirements for buffering if equivalent screening is provided
by parks or by topography or other natural conditions. Such a buffer
area is required to shield adjacent residential areas from parking lot
illumination, headlights and fumes and to diminish the visual
encroachment of residential privacy and residential neighborhood
characteristics. Buildings within two hundred (200) feet of residential
zones shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and shall be
appropriately faced with materials that will be compatible with the
surrounding residential area.
G. Any part of the MXD development not used for structures, loading
access ways, parking or pedestrian walks shall be landscaped with
grass, trees and shrubs.
H. Off street parking. Parking shall be provided at the rate of spaces to be
approved by the Planning Board as provided for in § 228-15 et seq.;
except, however, that those standards may be modified by the Planning
Board for office uses upon appropriate demonstration by the applicant
that such standards would not be necessary. In no case, however, shall
the Planning Board allow a modification to fewer than one space per six
hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area.
I. Deleted. [12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
J. Lot and setback requirements.
(1) Minimum frontage on a major highway shall be three hundred
(300) feet.
(2) An attached group of buildings may be considered as one building
in applying any standards contained in this article.
(3) No parking shall be permitted in the open space between the
property line and the setback lines in the front, rear or sides of
property.
(4) Any standards in this article may be modified by the Planning
Board as follows:
(a) Coverage of buildings and structures may be increased to forty
percent (40%) of the MXD development lot area if the
additional parking and loading areas are placed underground
or under buildings to accommodate the increase in coverage or
floor area.
(b) Building height may be increased not to exceed sixty (60) feet
or seven (7) stories, whichever is less, if the additional parking
or loading areas are placed underground or under buildings to
accommodate the increase in coverage or floor area.
(c) Front yard setbacks may be lessened by twenty percent (20%)
if the front yard area remaining is heavily planted with
deciduous and evergreen trees for a minimum width of twenty-
§ 228-217.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.5
1:1075
five (25) feet on six (6) feet to eight (8) feet centers and
planted at a minimum of five (5) feet in height at time of
planting for evergreen and a minimum of twelve (12) feet for
deciduous plants, and other appropriate plantings satisfactory
to the Planning Board.
K. Townhouses.
(1) The architectural character of each dwelling unit shall be
compatible in style, size, color and materials with proposed
dwelling units in the same MXD development.
(2) Height shall be limited to three stories or thirty-five (35) feet,
whichever is less.
(3) Minimum number of townhouse dwelling units shall be one
hundred (100).
(4) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private, or from any common parking area shall be 10 feet from the
right-of-way. Minimum setback for all structures from any major
thoroughfare or collectors, as defined elsewhere in this chapter,
shall be fifty (50) feet.
(5) Parking requirements shall be two and twenty-five hundredths
(2.25) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
which may be reduced by the Planning Board to not less than five
tenths (0.5) space per unit.
(6) Units shall be attached in such a manner as to provide maximum
safety and privacy for adjoining units.
(7) Not more than twelve (12) dwelling units in any single townhouse
structure shall be constructed in a manner so as to form one linear
plane. No more than 20 such units may be included in a structure
having units constructed on more than one linear plane.
(8) Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed
a length of three hundred (300) feet.
(9) The front facades of at least forty percent (40%) of the number of
units which are attached in a structure having a single linear plane
shall be set back not less than 10 feet behind the facades of the
remaining units in such structure.
(10) The rooflines of at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of units
which are attached in a structure having a single linear plane shall
be staggered in height by not less than five percent (5%) of the
height of the rooflines of the remaining units in such structure.
(11)No townhouse structure shall be closer than 20 feet from any other
such structure, to allow for fire access.
§ 228-217.5 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.5
1:1076
§ 228-217.6. Density limitations for residential uses.
Density limitations for mixed unit developments shall be as follows:
§ 228-217.7. Exceptions.
(12) Where an outdoor living space is included for each or any
particular unit, it shall be provided with adequate visual screening
from all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living spaces,
parking areas and roadways. Screening may be accomplished with
plant materials, masonry structures or wood fencing. Architectural
elements, such as masonry walls and fences, shall be compatible in
both style and materials with the dwelling unit.
L. Apartments (multifamily units).
(1) Height shall be limited to three stories or thirty-five (35) feet,
whichever is less.
(2) Minimum tract size shall be four acres.
(3) Minimum setback for all structures from any street, public or
private, or any common parking area shall be 10 feet. Minimum
setback for all structures from any collector or arterial street, as
defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall be fifty (50) feet.
(4) Parking requirements shall be one and seventy-five hundredths
(1.75) spaces per dwelling unit, except for senior citizen housing
for which parking requirements may be reduced by the Planning
Board to not less than five tenths (0.5) space per unit.
M. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit multiple uses in single
structure.
A. Townhouses: twelve (12) dwelling units per acre net density for
structures three stories or less.
B. Apartments (multifamily units): sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre net
density for structures three stories or less.
A. Density for housing may be increased, provided that all new parking
generated as a result of such new density is placed underground
beneath the residential structures.
B. An equal amount of parking generated as a result of such new density is
placed underground beneath the nonresidential structures (underneath
the nonresidential structures).
C. If such density is increased, the height of residential structures of
residential/nonresidential structures may be increased to sixty (60) feet
of seven (7) stories, whichever is less.
§ 228-217.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.8
1:1077
§ 228-217.8. Required public facilities and improvements.
[Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
A. Parcel size and location of public facilities shall be substantially in
accordance with guidelines established in the Township Comprehensive
Master Plan; provided, however, that upon due cause shown the
Planning Board may vary the location of same from the location shown
in the Master Plan.
B. All public utilities shall be installed in accordance with the Township
development regulations; all MXD development shall be tied into
approved and adequate public sanitary sewerage, water systems and
storm water drainage systems. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No.
10-22]
(1) All water systems shall be looped, of a size and type as approved by
the Township Engineer.
(2) All sewerage systems shall be approved by the East Brunswick
Sewer Utility. [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
C. Streets, roads, sidewalks and bikeways shall comply with the design
standards set forth in the East Brunswick Subdivision Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Design Guidelines & Standards.
(1) Road configurations and proposed alignments described in the
Master Plan shall apply.
(2) Roadway widths shall conform to the standards set forth in the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick or standards promulgated
by Middlesex County, whichever is applicable.
(3) All streets and roads shall intersect at right angles with other
roadways.
(4) No street or road shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of
any existing intersection.
D. Refuse and refuse collection areas shall be provided and shall be
located for the occupants' convenience. All such areas shall be screened
either with an enclosed masonry structure of at least six (6) feet in
height on three sides or with evergreens on at least two sides of the
refuse and pickup area, planted at a height of at least four feet, with a
maximum growth of at least six (6) feet in height. All plants shall be
approved in accordance with the Landscape Ordinance of East
Brunswick Township.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Design Guidelines & Standards.
E. The site plan shall be accompanied by a traffic study prepared by a
licensed professional engineer indicating the impact which the center
will have on surrounding roads. It shall include the following elements:
§ 228-217.8 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.8
1:1078
§ 228-217.9. Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles.
(1) Estimated peak hourly traffic to be generated by the center.
(2) Assignment of estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage and
volume to surrounding roads.
(3) Determination of unused capacity of surrounding roads during
peak hours.
(4) Recommendations for necessary road improvements such as
acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic control devices
recommended for public roads or highways surrounding the site.
F. The site plan shall be accompanied by a statement detailing economic,
social and physical studies of the proposed development. The following
should be included in such statement:
(1) Tax impact, a cost/revenue analysis taking into consideration any
added capital debt service and extraordinary operating costs
expected to be incurred in servicing the development by the
Township, with all projected costs and revenues discounted to the
present. Sales tax and revenues are to be included in the revenue.
(2) Public sector service demands of the development, including
expected levels of service required for roads and road
maintenance, police, fire, public health, library and recreation.
(3) Private sector service analysis, including but not limited to
expected new members of the labor force versus employment
opportunities in the region, health care needs of residents of the
MXD development and an estimate of commercial demand for
services.
(4) Market analysis and feasibility of the project for any proposed
commercial development, including definition and delineation of
the trade areas for the types of proposed stores, services and
operations to be located in the MXD development, based on
empirical studies of similar ventures; population estimates and
projections of effective buying income for that population;
estimates of the proportion of those effective buying incomes
available for retail sales; evaluation of impact of existing and
anticipated competition; and a statement of threshold gross
receipts needed to sustain business versus anticipated share of
market receipts.
A. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided in such locations, including
entrances and exits, where normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Where
appropriate, bikeways may be provided instead of sidewalks. Provision
of bikeways along streets shall be made upon determination and
requirement by the Planning Board and the Master Plan, where
applicable.
§ 228-217.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.9
1:1079
§ 228-217.10. Environmental considerations.
§ 228-217.11. Timing for development.
B. Access to off street parking areas shall not be through entrances
directly abutting streets but shall be connected to streets by means of
access driveways situated between the parking areas and adjacent
streets, not less than fifteen (15) feet long.
C. Bike racks shall be provided outside public and commercial buildings.
A. All development shall be in conformity with the Master Plan and shall
account for all relevant environmental factors as outlined in the East
Brunswick Natural Resources Inventory. Any proposal for development
must be supported by appropriate soils documents, engineering
information and other environmental data.
B. Building and other surface coverages shall be limited, to the extent
possible, to the incorporation of increased building height up to the
maximum permitted, the use of parking in or under buildings, reduction
of excess pavement for roadways, the use of permeable surfaces for
paving wherever possible and the utilization of open space areas for
aquifer recharge. Nonpoint source pollutants shall be handled by use of
drainage swales in combination with retention facilities, in an attempt
to reduce the amount of potential pollutants entering into the aquifer.
Such swales shall be seeded with appropriate vegetative materials
satisfactory to the Planning Board to filter silt and other potential
pollutants to the surface and underground water supply systems.
Natural surface drainage structures shall be utilized wherever possible.
All applications must be submitted to the Soil Conservation Service for
review and recommendations. All such structures should be set back at
least fifty (50) feet from any stream course or natural drainageway
unless floodplain information indicates that there shall be a further
setback. Swamp areas should not be developed but shall be included as
open space areas. All trees over six (6) inches in caliper shall be shown
on the development plans by methods approved by the Planning Board.
C. Visual impacts, including views and view interference, shadow effect
and design compatibility with surrounding area.
A. The number of dwelling units and square footage of nonresidential uses
which may be constructed by the developer during any year may be
regulated by the Planning Board at a rate which would not create
excessive demands on any municipal facility or services available to
serve the area proposed for development. Such development as may be
allowed pursuant hereto shall be controlled by means of the issuance of
building permits at an annual rate fixed by the Planning Board at the
time of preliminary approval, based upon the projected development.
B. The timing for development, including the type and number of
residential uses, number and type of nonresidential uses, public and
§ 228-217.9 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.11
1:1080
§ 228-217.12. Approval procedure.
semipublic facilities and required utilities and services, shall be
established by the developer subject to Planning Board approval at the
time when preliminary approval is granted.
A. Application for preliminary approval. Application for approval for
development in an MXD Zone shall be made by submitting the required
number of copies for an application for development on the form
provided by the Township, together with all of the supporting
documents set forth below, which shall be considered an application for
preliminary approval.
B. Application requirements. The application shall set forth the following:
(1) Name and address and legal status of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner, if different from the applicant.
(3) Name and address of all principals of the applicant and owner if a
partnership or corporation.
(4) The location of the land proposed to be developed, including tax lot
and block numbers.
(5) The nature of the applicant's interest in the land and the manner by
which the applicant has acquired such interest.
(6) The density of land use to be allocated to various parts of the site.
(7) The location, type, standards and size of recreational and
community facilities of all open space.
(8) The form or organization proposed to own and maintain common
open space.
(9) The use, approximate height, bulk and location of buildings or
other structures.
(10) The proposed provision for disposition of storm and sanitary water.
(11) The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any
covenants proposed to be imposed upon the land or buildings,
including easements for public utilities, to the extent known.
(12) The proposed provisions for parking.
(13) Locations and widths of proposed streets and rights-of-way.
(14) The projected schedule for development and the approximate times
when final approvals would be requested.
(15) A statement of why the public interest would be served by the
proposed development, such statement to be supported by a
§ 228-217.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.12
1:1081
detailed economic, social and physical study as set forth in
Subsection F.
(16) The proposed number of bedrooms for all dwelling units.
(17) Delineation of pedestrian walkways, nature paths and bicycle
paths, which must be in conformance to any adopted master plan
for bicycle paths.
(18) Delineation of natural features which will be preserved, such as
ponds, natural drainage, trees, etc.
(19) Lighting plan.
(20) Landscaping plan.
(21) Building elevations.
(22) And such other plans that may be required by the Planning Board.
C. Submission of application. Any landowner(s) shall file twenty-five (25)
copies of the maps of the proposed development plan with the
Secretary of the Planning Board.
D. Public hearing. Public hearing and consideration by the Planning Board
shall be in accordance with Article VIII of the East Brunswick Land Use
Procedures.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Art. VIII.
E. Conduct of hearing. At the public hearing, the applicant shall present
evidence as to its general character and substance; objectives and
purposes to be served; adequacy and completeness of standards;
satisfactory application of standards in specific details of design and
organization of elements and plans; scale and scope; economic
feasibility; time factors and sequential development potentials;
conformity to comprehensive plans for Township development; traffic
and circulation impact and provisions; an impact on the school system
in terms of projected number of students and grade levels; a listing of
amenities; and an analysis of the impact on the environment; and, to
this end, factual evidence and expert opinion shall be submitted by the
applicant in the form of such necessary maps, charts, reports, models
and other tangible materials and in the form of sworn testimony, by
experts such as landscape architects, architects, professional planners,
engineers, economists and realtors, as will clearly state for the record
the full nature and extent of the proposal.
F. Preliminary approval. Following the public hearing and within ninety
five (95) days and based on the foregoing evidence, the Planning Board
shall grant preliminary approval of the plan as submitted or grant
preliminary approval subject to specific conditions not included in the
plan as submitted or modified or deny preliminary approval to the plan,
giving its reasons therefor.
§ 228-217.12 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.12
1:1082
G. Conclusions and granting or denial of plan. The granting or denial of
preliminary approval shall be by written resolution, including but not
limited to findings of fact and conclusions which may set forth in what
respects the plan would or would not be in the public interest; in what
respect the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of objectives
of a mixed use development; the purpose, location and amount of the
common open space in the mixed use development; the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space; the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the
common open space, as related to the proposed density and type of
development; the physical design of the plan and manner in which the
design does or does not make adequate provision for public services,
provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and further amenities of
light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment; and the relationship,
beneficial or adverse, of the proposed mixed use development to the
neighborhood in which it is proposed.
H. Implementation in sections or stages. As a condition to preliminary
approval of the mixed use development plan, the Planning Board may
require or permit the implementation of the plan in whole or in sections
or stages under the sequence of actions determined as part of the
Mixed Use Development District plan. Such sections or stages shall be
substantially functionally self contained and self sustaining with regard
to access, parking, utilities, open spaces and similar physical features
and shall be capable of substantial occupancy, operation and
maintenance upon completion of the construction and development;
shall be properly related to other services of the community as a whole
and to those facilities and services yet to be provided in the full
execution and implementation of the mixed use development district;
and shall be provided with such temporary or permanent transitional
features, buffers or protective areas as the Planning Board may require
under conditions of ownership and maintenance and as will prevent
damage or detriment to any completed section or stage to other
sections or stages and to adjoining properties not in the mixed use
development plan. Plans and specifications of such sections or stages
are to be filed with the Planning Board and are to be of sufficient detail
and at such a scale as to fully demonstrate the following:
(1) Arrangement and site locations of all structures, primary and
accessory land uses, parking, landscaping, public and private
utilities and service facilities and land ownership conditions.
(2) Estimates of the economic base of the section or stage and its one
or more sections or stages as supported by such evidence as the
estimated cost and market values of structures and land
improvement; increase of taxable values; cost of maintenance and
services to be borne by public and private agencies; potential
rental scales; and cost of utility installations.
(3) Estimates of its social characteristics, such as the size and
composition of future population in terms of probable family size as
§ 228-217.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.12
1:1083
occupants of the several unit dwelling types; the need for public
services and protection, for recreational facilities and for
commercial and professional services; and anticipated rental
scales.
(4) Such further evidence as shall demonstrate conformity to and
support of principles and objectives of the Township Master Plan
and the enhancement of the living standards of the community with
conformity to the balance of residential, commercial and public
land utilization and the economic base, as established in the mixed
use development district plans.
I. Issuance of permits. Upon finding that the plans and specifications for
the proposed development of the section or stage conform to the above
conditions, the Planning Board shall so inform the administrative
officers as are charged with the issuance of permits for the construction
of utilities or structures that, upon presentation of requisite working
drawings and specifications, covenants, performance bonds and other
required guaranties and instruments, such permits may be issued.
Upon substantial completion of any section or stage, and before
proceeding with the review and approval of additional sections or
stages, the Planning Board may require a report and review of the
status, character and conditions of it and other previously completed
sections or stages with regard to their compliance with the plans,
specifications and estimates which formed the basis for their approval.
Upon finding that such compliance has occurred, the applicant shall
initiate proceedings for the review of the new section or stage.
J. Modifications or adjustments. As a further condition for approval of
later sections or stages, the Board may require or permit adjustments
or modifications in the conditions established in the approved Mixed
Use Development District plan to compensate for differences between
the estimates of record on previously approved and completed sections
or stages, as required under Subsection H above, and the actual
conditions prevailing on their completion. In this regard, consideration
may be given to the balance of land uses established, consistency with
the conditions of the Mixed Use Development District plan, extent of
variance from the social and economic estimates on which previous
approval may have been based, overall maximum and minimum
requirements established elsewhere in this chapter and the effects of
unforeseen changes, extreme conditions or unexpected advantages
which may have resulted during the time of construction and
development. On determining that such adjustments or modifications
are reasonable, the Planning Board shall follow in full the procedure
and conditions herein required for original submittal and review.
K. Application for final approval. Application for final approval may be for
all the land included in a plan or, to the extent set forth in the
preliminary approval, for a section thereof. The application shall
include such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements,
conditions and form of performance bond as set forth by written
§ 228-217.12 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.12
1:1084
resolution of the municipal authority at the time of preliminary
approval. A public hearing on an application for final approval of the
plan, or part thereof, shall not be required, provided that the plan,
or part thereof, submitted for final approval is in compliance with
the plan theretofore given preliminary approval. A plan submitted for
final approval shall be deemed to be in compliance with the plan
previously given preliminary approval, provided that any modification
by the landowner of the plan as preliminarily approved does not vary
the proposed net residential density or intensity of use by more than
five percent (5%), while still remaining within the number of units
permitted under the maximum gross density; does not substantially
relocate the common open space area; does not increase by more than
ten percent (10%) the floor area proposed for nonresidential use; does
not increase by more than five percent (5%) the total ground areas
covered by buildings; nor involve a substantial change in the height of
buildings. A public hearing shall not be held to consider modifications
in the location and design of streets or facilities for water and for
disposal of storm water and sanitary sewage. A public hearing shall not
be held on an application for final approval of a plan when the plan, as
submitted for final approval, is in substantial compliance with the plan
as approval, is in substantial compliance with the plan as preliminarily
approved. The burden shall, nevertheless, be on the landowner to show
the Planning Board good cause for any variation between the plan as
preliminarily approved and the plan as submitted for final approval. The
Planning Board may permit the minimal deviations referred to above
with regard to conditions of preliminary approval only if the applicant
satisfies the Planning Board that such deviations were necessitated by
a change of conditions beyond the control of the applicant since the
date of preliminary approval. If such demonstration cannot be made by
the applicant, he shall be required to submit another application for
preliminary approval.
L. Final approval. Final approval shall be granted or denied within fortyfive
(45) days after submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be consented
to be the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute final approval in accordance with
N.J.R.S. 40:55D 50b.
M. Validity of final approval. A plan, or any part thereof, which has been
given final approval by the Planning Board shall be so certified without
delay by the Planning Board Chairman or Vice Chairman and shall be
filed of record forthwith in the office of the County Clerk by the
developer before any development shall take place in accordance
therewith. Pending completion within five (5) years of the planned unit
residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that
has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of the plan
or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made nor shall it be
impaired, except with the consent of the landowner and the Planning
Board.
§ 228-217.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.12
1:1085
N. Petition for review. Following approval of development plans, the
issuance of permits and substantial progress in the completion of
twenty-five (25) of the controlled density units thereof, measured as a
percentage of the acreage of anticipated population, whichever shall be
the greater, the developer may petition for review in detail of the
previously approved plans or units awaiting development or
completion, stating his reasons therefor. Reasons may be based on such
considerations as changing social or economic conditions, potential
improvements in layout or design features, unforeseen difficulties or
advantage mutually affecting the interests of the Township and the
developer, such as technical causes, site conditions, state or federal
projects and installations and statutory revisions. The Planning Board,
on finding such reasons and petitions to be reasonable and valid, may
consider the redesign, in whole or in part, of any Mixed Use
Development District and shall follow in full the procedure and
conditions herein required for original submittal and review.
§ 228-217.12 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.12
1:1086
ARTICLE XXV-B
Regulations for the O/I Office/Industrial Planned Development
Option District
[Added 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-452]
§ 228-217.13. Authority, purpose and intent. [Amended 8-13-2008
by Ord. No. 07-22]
§ 228-217.14. Land included.
The O/I Planned Development Option Zone includes the land described in
Schedule A annexed hereto.
§ 228-217.15. Standards for O/I Planned Developments.
No Planned Industrial/Office Development under this chapter shall take
place except upon tracts of land having a minimum of 10 contiguous acres
having sufficient access to an existing improved street.
§ 228-217.16. Permitted uses. [Amended 8-13-07 by Ord. No. 07-22]
Principal uses and buildings permitted shall be:
A. Authority. This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D.39 et seq.
B. Purpose and Intent. In order for the Township of East Brunswick to
meet its responsibility to protect and defend its natural resources,
ecological systems, open spaces, natural beauty and the value of the
property within the Township; and the Township, having studied and
analyzed its environmental and natural resources in anticipation of
future development and having undertaken such studies as major steps
in creating long range plans directed towards the accommodation of
industrial and office development, while avoiding environmental
degradation and its attendant threats to public health and safety; as
well as while providing appropriate land use transitions between
existing single family residential areas and non-residential
development, the Township Council of the Township of East Brunswick
hereby declares it to be in the general interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of East Brunswick and in
harmony with the objectives of this chapter and the district which shall
permit greater flexibility and design, layout and concentration in
industrial and office development so as to encourage retention and
preservation of, woodlands, surface water, poorly drained soils, flood
plains and other open space land for aesthetic and scenic beauty,
rejuvenation of resources and preservation of the ecological systems of
the Township. [Amended 8-13-07 by Ord. No. 07-22]
A. General offices, including but not limited to:
1. Finance insurance and real estate services. These include banking
services, bank related functions, savings and loan associations;
§ 228-217.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.16
1:1087
actuarial business and personal credit services, security brokers,
dealers and flotation services; commodity contracts, brokers and
dealers services; security and commodity exchanges; security and
commodity allied services; insurance carriers; insurance agents,
brokers and services; real estate operators; real estate agents,
brokers and management services; title abstracting services; real
estate subdividing and development services; real estate operative
builders; combination of real estate, insurance, loan and law
services; other real estate and related services; holding and
investment services; and other finance, insurance, travel and real
estate services.
2. Personal services; photographic services; beauty services; and
barber services.
3. Business services; advertising services; outdoor advertising
services; consumer and mercantile credit reporting services;
adjustment and collection services; direct mail advertising
services; blueprinting and photocopying services; stenographic
services and other duplicating and mailing services; news
syndicate services and informant services.
4. Research, development and testing services; business and
management consulting services; and detective and protective
services.
5. Professional services; physician services; chiropractic services;
psychologist and psychiatric services; dental services; medical
laboratory services; dental laboratory services; educational and
scientific research services; accounting, auditing and bookkeeping
services; urban planning services; data processing services; and
other professional services.
6. Government services: executive, legislative and judicial functions;
and postal services.
7. Miscellaneous services: business associations; professional
membership organizations; labor unions and similar labor
organizations; and civic, social and fraternal associations.
B. Industrial and manufacturing establishments herein listed [Amended
8-13-07 by Ord. No. 07-22]:
1. Any use permitted in the P-I District under § 228-204.
2. Storage Warehouses.
3. Construction establishments wherein construction activities are
generally managed from a fixed place of business and where actual
construction work is performed at dispersed sites.
4. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to
industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business
§ 228-217.16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.16
1:1088
users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in
buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies.
5. Establishments which manufacture or process food for human
consumption and kindred products, including canned foods, grain
products, bakery products, sugar and confectionery products, fats
and oils, beverages, and specifically excluding establishments
which slaughter live animals.
6. The manufacturer of textile mill products.
7. Establishments which produce clothing and fabricated products by
cutting and sewing purchased woven or knot textile fabrics and
related materials, such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and
furs.
8. Establishments engaged in manufacturing finished articles made
entirely or mainly of wood or wood substitutes.
9. Manufacturing of furniture and fixtures.
10. Establishments which engage in the manufacture of paper and
paperboard into converted products, such as boxes and envelopes.
11. Establishments engaged in printing and publishing and those
establishments which perform services for the printing trade, such
as bookbinding, typesetting and engraving.
12. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of finished leather and
leather products, specifically excluding tanning, currying, and
finishing hides and skins.
13. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of stone, clay, glass
and concrete products.
14. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of fabricated metal
products.
15. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of machinery,
equipment, electrical machinery and supplies, and household
appliances.
16. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of equipment for
transportation of passengers and cargo by land, air and water.
17. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of instruments for
measuring, testing, analyzing and controlling and their associated
sensors and accessories; photographic, medical and optical goods;
watches and clocks.
18. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of jewelry, silverware
and plated ware.
§ 228-217.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.16
1:1089
§ 228-217.17. Conditional uses. [Deleted 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20]
§ 228-217.18. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 8-13-07 by Ord.
No. 07-22]
Accessory uses permitted shall be:
§ 228-217.19. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-27-97 by Ord. No.
97-22; 8-13-07 by Ord. No. 07-22]
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be all uses and buildings not listed in
§ 228-217.16 and 228-217.17.
§ 228-217.20. Height limitations. [Amended 8-13-07 by Ord. No.
07-22]
19. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of musical
instruments.
20. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of toys and
amusements, sporting and athletic goods.
21. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of pens, pencils and
other office, and artists' materials.
22. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of costume jewelry,
novelties, buttons, and miscellaneous notions.
23. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of electronic products,
equipment, components and accessories.
C. Parks and playgrounds
A. Storage uses and buildings provided that outdoor storage uses shall be
at the rear of the building and so arranged as to be minimally visible
from a street or highway. Storage shall preferably be in a separate
building of masonry construction, but outdoor storage shall be
permitted in an area screened on all sides by a dense evergreen hedge
and/or continuous solid masonry wall or uniformly painted board fence
not less than eight (8) feet in height. No other outside storage shall be
permitted.
B. Personal services, retail sale of sundries, convenience store use when
located within a Planned Senior Citizen residence development
residential structure or clubhouse structure. [Added 8-13-07 by Ord.
No. 07-22]
A. Sex clubs and massage parlors. [Added 12-13-82 by Ord. No.
82-480]
B. Storage yard for wreckers and damaged or disabled vehicles associated
with a wrecker operation. [Added 10-27-97 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 228-217.16 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.20
1:1090
§ 228-217.21. Open space requirements. [Amended 8-13-07 by Ord.
No. 07-22]
A. No structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, provided, however,
that if the applicant demonstrates that the structure will nevertheless
be accessible by Township fire apparatus, or that the structure will
contain an adequate fire protection system acceptable to the Chief Fire
Inspector, the Planning Board may allow the structure, or any side or
sides of the structure, where otherwise appropriate to the environment
in which the structure is situated, to exceed forty (40) feet in height, but
not to exceed sixty (60) feet.
A. Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total land area of any O/I
Planned Development shall be designated for permanent open space or
as an area of natural preservation. Such open space or natural
preservation area shall not include yard areas of lots in private
individual ownership or land area within the right-of-way of public or
private streets. Such areas shall be dedicated to a landowner's
association pursuant to a declaration of covenants which shall be
subject to Planning Board approval, or may be deeded to the Township,
upon approval by the Planning Board and acceptance by the Township
Council. Open space areas to be retained by a landowner's association
shall not be developed or disturbed from their natural state. Areas so
designated shall contain deed restrictions or similar encumbrances
acceptable to the Planning Board which shall ensure the perpetual
preservation of these areas. Nothing contained herein is intended to
prohibit the use of open space areas for storm water detention basins,
other drainage structures, or required utility structures approved by
the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Board in reviewing the proposed open space areas
designated for preservation shall prior to approving the plan assure
that those areas of the tract possessing the greatest degree of
environmental sensitivity be designated as open space. The Board may
request of the applicant, who shall upon request, supply all data found
to be relevant by the Planning Board in order to evaluate the proposed
plan's adequacy in protecting the natural resources, ecological systems,
open spaces and natural beauty of the subject tract. The Board should
consider, but not be limited in its consideration to the following items in
its evaluation of the proposed open space plan:
1. Retention of woodlands and preservation of all specimen
vegetation.
2. Treatment of surface water and control of surface runoff.
3. Preservation of steeply sloped lands.
4. Protection of stream corridors.
§ 228-217.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.22
1:1091
§ 228-217.22. Allowable building floor area. [Amended 8-13-07 by
Ord. No. 07-22]
§ 228-217.23. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 8-13-07 by
Ord. No. 07-22]
A. The maximum allowable aggregate floor area of all buildings within any
planned development tract shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%)
of the total tract area including designated open space.
B. The applicant shall allocate and indicate on the plans submitted for final
subdivision approval a portion of the total allowable building floor area
for the entire tract to each lot receiving final approval. Development of
each lot shall be restricted to the total floor area as indicated in the final
subdivision approval. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the
development of an individual site in excess of 25% of the site area,
provided that lot has been allocated a floor area in excess of 25% at the
time of final subdivision approval.
A. Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 sq. ft.
B. Minimum lot frontage shall be 150 ft., except where the lot fronts on the
circular turn around at the end of a cul-de-sac in which case the
minimum frontage requirement shall be 100 ft.
C. All structures shall have a height/setback ratio of not less than 1:1 from
every lot line.
D. All buildings shall be setback not less than 20 feet from all front lot
lines.
E. The development of any lot with impervious surfaces shall not exceed
seventy five percent (75%) of the total lot area.
F. There shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet from rear and side lot
lines to parking areas, outdoor storage and refuse collection areas, and
access driveways, provided, however, that the board may waive this
requirement to permit shared parking and/or shared access between
adjacent lots, subject to appropriate cross access easements and
agreements which shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
G. All land not developed by buildings and structures shall be landscaped
or preserved in its natural state in accordance with a landscape plan
approved by the board.
H. Minimum distance between buildings: thirty (30) feet. [Added 8-13-07
by Ord. No. 07-22]
I. Landscape Buffer: 20 feet along frontage, all other property lines and
along public/private roadways. The landscape buffer shall include
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping. [Added 8-13-07 by Ord.
No. 07-22]
§ 228-217.22 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.24
1:1092
§ 228-217.24. Off Street parking. [Amended 12-13-93 by Ord. No.
93-72; 8-13-07 by Ord. No. 07-22]
On site parking shall be provided upon each lot at the rate as provided for
in § 228-15.1.
§ 228-217.25. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be the same as required in the R-1 District,
however, the applicant shall submit evidence and certify compliance with all
performance standards.
Performance Standards. In accordance with § 228-216A regulating I/M
(Industrial/Manufacturing Districts).
§ 228-217.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.25
1:1093

ARTICLE XXV-C
Regulations for the MXD/R (Mixed Use Development/Residential)
District
[Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-585]
§ 228-217.26. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the Township of East Brunswick to enable the use of
more than fifty (50%) percent of the land in an MXD/R Zone for multi
family residential structures and townhouses, including and encouraging
a variety of housing types and styles in order to satisfy the obligations of
the Township arising out of the Mount Laurel II litigation and in order to
achieve affordable housing in the MXD/R Zone in accordance with Mount
Laurel standards. It is the intent of the Township of East Brunswick to
incorporate in the MXD/R Zone the density bonus provisions currently
found in the density limitations for planned unit residential developments in
Village Green II and IIA and Village Green III and IIIA and Town Green in
§ 132-41 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick.
§ 228-217.27. Definition of MXD/R.
An MXD/R Zone is in accordance with the existing MXD Ordinance,
§ 228-217.1(c) and incorporates by reference § 228-217.3.
§ 228-217.28. Permitted uses.
§ 228-217.29. Prohibited uses.
See § 228-217.4.1.
§ 228-217.30. Standards.
The standards set forth in § 228-217.5 for an MXD Zone are incorporated by
reference.
§ 228-217.31. Density limitations for residential uses.
Density limitations for mixed use developments/residential shall be as
follows:
A. Permitted uses in the MXD/R Zone are more particularly set forth in
§ 228-217.4, Subsections A through E and G through N but only to the
extent that such uses have direct access from Route 18.
B. Multi family residential structures and townhouses including and
encouraging a variety of housing types and styles are permitted on the
balance of the tract in an MXD/R Zone. The total residential use may
take place throughout the MXD/R Zone.
A. Townhouses: Twelve (12) dwelling units per acre net density for
structures three stories or less.
§ 228-217.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.31
1:1095
§ 228-217.32. Required public facilities and improvements.
§ 228-217.33. Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles.
§ 228-217.34. Environmental considerations.
§ 228-217.35. Timing for development.
§ 228-217.36. Approval procedure.
§ 228-217.37. through § 228-217.39. (Reserved)
B. Apartments (Multi Family Units). Sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre
net density for structures three stories or less.
C. The density bonus provisions provided in § 132-41 are hereby
incorporated in this section by increasing the gross density set forth
above one additional unit of conventional housing per acre for each unit
of low or moderate income housing per acre provided by the developer
and an additional one (l) unit per acre of conventional housing where
the developer constructs low or moderate income units in a scatter site
fashion throughout the development as more particularly set forth in
§ 132-41C of the Code.
A. As is set forth in § 228-217.8.
A. As is set forth in § 228-217.9.
A. As is set forth in § 228-217.10.
A. As is set forth in § 228-217.11.
A. As is set forth in § 228-217.12.
§ 228-217.31 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.37
1:1096
ARTICLE XXV-D
Regulations for the SCMXD Senior Citizen Mixed Use Planned
Development District
[Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
§ 228-217.40. Purpose and intent.
The Township of East Brunswick recognizes the current population trend
of citizens living longer and in better health. In order for the Township
of East Brunswick to encourage innovation in design and to accommodate
these population trends and changes in land development technology and to
provide for necessary senior citizen housing, related services and auxiliary
facilities; to ensure compatibility among land uses; to conserve the value
of land; to encourage more efficient use of land and of public services; to
encourage better transportation of people; and to preserve the residential
integrity of adjacent areas, the Council of the Township of East Brunswick
hereby declares it is in the general interest of the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Township of East Brunswick and is consistent with
the objectives of this article and the Township's adopted Master Plan to
permit greater flexibility in design, layout and construction in senior citizen
housing development and related services and auxiliary commercial
facilities.
§ 228-217.41. Permitted uses.
§ 228-217.42. Accessory uses.
§ 228-217.43. Prohibited uses.
A. Planned senior citizen residence development, including a variety of
housing types and styles.
B. Offices.
C. Personal services, provided no one establishment is greater than eleven
thousand (11,000) square feet.
D. Studio of a photographer, teacher of music, dance, art, martial arts, etc.
E. Medical facilities, such as physician offices.
F. Banks.
A. Recreational and social facilities primarily for residents of this
development.
A. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purpose, except that nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices or for the storage of materials
and supplies on a job site during the period of construction.
§ 228-217.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.43
1:1097
§ 228-217.44. Area and bulk requirements for overall development.
§ 228-217.45. Area and bulk requirements for single-family
dwelling units.
§ 228-217.46. Area and bulk requirements for multiple dwelling
units and all other non-single-family residential uses.
B. Limousine and livery service.
C. Sex clubs and massage parlors.
D. All uses and buildings not listed as permitted.
A. Gross residential density: 5 units per acre.
B. Minimum tract size: thirty (30) contiguous acres.
C. Maximum impervious tract coverage: fifty (50%) percent.
D. Open space: fifty (50%) percent.
E. Parking area and driveway setback: 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
F. Landscape buffer: 20 feet along tract frontage which abuts a major
collector, as designated in the Township Master Plan, and includes
shade trees, earth berms and landscaping.
A. Minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
B. All units are to be single-family detached and/or attached, not to exceed
twenty-five (25) feet in height. Loft bedrooms are permissible.
C. Front setback: fifty (50) feet from major collector roads, as defined in
the Township Master Plan; 20 feet from all other roads.
D. Side setbacks: 10 feet.
E. Rear setback: 20 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage: forty (40%) percent.
G. Accessory structure setback: two feet.
A. Front yard setback for principal and accessory structures: fifty (50) feet
from major collector roads, as designated in the Township Master Plan;
thirty (30) feet from interior roads.
B. Side setback for principal structures: thirty (30) feet.
C. Rear setback for principal structures: thirty (30) feet.
D. Side and rear setback for accessory structures: 10 feet.
E. Maximum height: thirty-five (35) feet.
§ 228-217.43 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.47
1:1098
§ 228-217.47. General standards.
In order to fulfill the purpose of this ordinance the following standards shall
apply:
A. Any nonresidential development shall be integrated into the overall
mixed use development plan. Such integration shall include a
consistent design vocabulary, pedestrian access, site amenities and
solidly screened loading areas.
B. The required open space shall be improved with recreation amenities
appropriate for use by the senior citizen community. Improvements
shall include sitting and walking areas as well as suitable landscaping.
Improved open space areas shall encompass a minimum of five (5%)
percent of the required open space area.
C. Affordable units shall be provided as follows:
Twenty (20%) percent of multi-family units;
Ten (10%) percent of single-family units.
Fifty (50%) percent of affordable units shall be affordable to low income
households and fifty (50%) percent of affordable units shall be
affordable to moderate income households.
D. Any part of the development not used for structures, parking, access, or
walkways, except for natural areas, shall be landscaped with grass,
trees and shrubs.
E. A phasing plan shall be approved by the Planning Board. Any such
phasing plan shall not require a phasing in of different types of dwelling
units permitted except that affordable units and market units shall be
phased according to the following table:
No. of Units Completed as % of
Total No. of Approved Units
(not more than)
No. of Affordable Units
Completed as % of Total #
Approved Affordable Units
(at least)
25% 25%
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 100%
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling unit in a
development subject to this section unless the phasing requirement of
this table shall have been satisfied.
Nonresidential uses in new buildings beyond the first 11,000 square
feet shall be phases in equal proportions to residential uses, i.e., 50%
§ 228-217.47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.47
1:1099
of nonresidential square footage approved can be permitted as long as
50% of residential square footage approved is built.
F. A master deed and or by-laws governing the project shall specify that no
age-restricted dwelling unit may be sub-leased to any person under the
age of fifty-five (55).
G. Applications for development approval shall follow planned unit
development procedures as set forth in Chapter 132, Land Use
Procedures.
H. Maximum number of bedrooms:
a. Units with loft: 2 bedrooms
b. Units without a loft: 3 bedrooms
§ 228-217.47 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.47
1:1100
ARTICLE XXV-E
Mixed Use Two (MXD2) District
[Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. 17-33]
§ 228-217.48. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all MXD2 Districts.
§ 228-217.49. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-217.50. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-217.51. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-217.52. Density, area and yard requirements.
A. Multiple dwellings, multifamily residential structures, apartments,
including and encouraging a variety of housing types and styles.
B. Parks and playgrounds.
C. Mixed-use buildings with non-residential uses, including restaurants,
retail, professional and personal services and offices on the first floor
and with upper floors consisting of any or all of the following:
residential apartments,
live-work units,
professional offices,
artists' lofts/studios.
A. Active and passive recreation facilities, including pools, trails, miniparks,
etc.
B. Off-street parking (surface or garage).
C. Community club house.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in § 228-217.49 and 228-217.50
above.
B. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
C. Limousine or livery service.
§ 228-217.48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.52
1:1101
A. Minimum overall tract size: thirty (30) acres.
(1) Once the overall tract has received final approval from the Planning
Board the property may be subdivided into smaller parcels for
financing purposes and/or market conditions.
B. Permitted number of dwelling units and required non-residential floor
area:
(1) Non-residential floor area minimum — 15,000 square feet.
(2) Residential units — 490 maximum family units, including affordable
units.
(3) Affordable units — affordable units meeting the criteria as defined
in Chapter 132 (see 132-72) and in the Affordable Housing
Compliance Plan and interspersed throughout the development in a
scatter site fashion throughout the development. Scatter site shall
mean that no more than two low or moderate-income units shall be
adjacent or attached to one another.
C. Maximum Building Height: six (6) stories of living space and/or
enclosed garage up to a maximum building height of eighty-five (85)
feet.
D. Percentage of affordable units: twenty (20%) percent.
E. Building Setback to Tract Boundary: fifty (50) feet.
F. Minimum Setback to Interior Streets: 10 feet.
G. Minimum Setback to Parking: 10 feet.
H. Maximum Building Coverage: twenty percent (20%).
I. Maximum Impervious Coverage: seventy percent (70%).
J. Required Open Space, Recreation land and facilities: twenty-five
percent (25%).
K. Minimum distance between Buildings: fifty (50) feet.
L. Maximum length of building: four hundred (400) feet.
M. Maximum number of units per building: one hundred and twenty (120)
units.
N. Landscape buffer: fifty (50) feet along tract boundaries. Stormwater
Management structures may be constructed within the required
landscape buffer areas but may be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet
to the tract boundary.
O. Minimum required open space areas:
§ 228-217.52 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.52
1:1102
(1) Community clubhouse minimum size: five thousand (5000) square
feet.
(2) Common green area minimum size: two-thirds (2/3) of an acre.
(3) At least three pocket parks minimum lot size: fourteen thousand
(14,000) square feet.
§ 228-217.52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.52
1:1103

ARTICLE XXV-F
Mixed Use Three (MXD3) District
[Added on 9-25-2017 by Ord. 17-33]
§ 228-217.53. Applicability of provisions of Article.
Unless specifically prohibited in this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all MXD3 Districts.
§ 228-217.54. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and buildings permitted are as follows:
§ 228-217.55. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses, structures and buildings permitted shall be:
§ 228-217.56. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses and buildings shall be:
§ 228-217.57. Density, area and yard requirements.
A. Multiple dwellings, multifamily residential structures, apartments,
including and encouraging a variety of housing types and styles.
B. Parks and playgrounds.
C. Mixed-use buildings with non-residential uses, including restaurants,
retail, professional and personal services and offices on the first floor
and with upper floors consisting of any or all of the following:
residential apartments,
live-work units,
artists' lofts/studios.
D. Existing (as of September 1, 2017) commercial buildings.
A. Active and passive recreation facilities, including pools, trails, miniparks,
etc.
B. Off-street parking (surface or garage).
C. Community club house.
A. Any uses and buildings not listed in §§ 228-217.54 and 228-217.50
above.
B. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles and trailers as restricted
in § 228-224C.
C. Limousine or livery service.
§ 228-217.53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-217.57
1:1105
A. Minimum tract size: three acres.
B. Permitted number of dwelling units:
(1) Residential units — 100 maximum family units, including affordable
units.
(2) Affordable units — affordable units meeting the criteria as defined
in Chapter 132 (see 132-72) and in the Affordable Housing
Compliance Plan and interspersed throughout the development in a
scatter site fashion throughout the development. Scatter site shall
mean that no more than two low or moderate-income units shall be
adjacent or attached to one another.
C. Maximum Building Height: six (6) stories of living space and/or
enclosed garage up to a maximum building height of eighty-five (85)
feet.
D. Percentage of affordable units: fifteen (15%) percent.
E. Minimum Setback to Lot Boundary: thirty (30) feet.
F. Minimum Setback to Interior Streets: 10 feet.
G. Minimum Setback to Parking: 10 feet.
H. Maximum Building Coverage: fifty percent (50%).
I. Maximum Impervious Coverage: seventy percent (70%).
J. Required Open Space, Recreation Land and facilities: twenty-five
percent (25%).
K. Minimum distance between Buildings: fifty (50) feet.
L. Maximum length of building: three hundred (300) feet.
M. Maximum number of units per building: one hundred (100) units.
N. Landscape buffer: twenty-five (25) feet along tract boundaries.
Stormwater Management structures may be constructed within the
required landscape buffer areas but may be no closer than fifteen (15)
feet to the tract boundary.
O. Minimum required open space areas:
(1) At least one pocket park minimum lot size: seven thousand, five
hundred (7,500) square feet.
§ 228-217.57 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-217.57
1:1106
ARTICLE XXVI
Regulations Applicable In All Districts
§ 228-218. Compliance with district regulations.
§ 228-218.1. Parking. [Added 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-72; amended
8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-24; amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25,
moved from § 228-15.1 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
A. Except as previously or hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
locate, relocate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge or structurally
alter any building or structure except in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which such building or structure is located.
B. Except as previously or hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to use
any land or building for any purpose other than that which is permitted
in the district in which such land or building is located.
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce traffic congestion, minimize
development problems with neighboring uses and to provide adequate
parking for all uses.
B. Applications.
1. For the purpose of this section, "gross floor area" shall mean the
total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions
of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy. Areas
used for storage shall be counted within the gross floor area at
50%.
2. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall
be construed to be the next highest whole number.
3. The approving Board shall determine parking requirements for any
use not listed.
4. All required parking shall be provided on-site.
5. All parking areas, in all zones, located in the Township of East
Brunswick shall be landscaped with a minimum of one canopy tree
for every five (5) parking spaces. Such trees shall be planted to
shade the parking area.
6. Mixed use facilities (except shopping centers) shall provide parking
spaces equal in sum to all the uses of the parcel.
C. Required Spaces.
Applicant shall conform to the following requirements for on-site
parking for specific uses:
§ 228-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-218.1
1:1107
For residential development these standards are superseded by
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21)
[Amended 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-24]
1. Residential, Hotels & Motels, Care Facilities.
a. Detached Single Family, Two
Family, & Three Family
2/dwelling unit
Only driveways and paved parking areas shall count as parking
spaces. Garages shall not count as parking spaces. Driveways
shall be a minimum of twenty (20') feet in length outside of the
R.O.W. For two car driveways, driveways shall be a minimum of
twenty (20') feet in width to allow two cars to park side by side.
b. Residential Developments with
Attached Housing Units
2.50/unit
Only driveways and paved parking areas shall count as parking
spaces. Garages shall not count as parking spaces. Driveways
shall be a minimum of twenty (20') feet in length outside of the
R.O.W. For two car driveways, driveways shall be a minimum of
twenty (20') feet in width.
c. Apartments & Flats 2/unit
d. Senior Citizen Housing .5/unit
e. Motel/Hotel 1/room + 1/400 sq. ft. of
public meeting area &
restaurant space
f. Nursing Home 1/6 Beds
2. Office and Service Uses.
a. Offices 1/200 sq. ft. gfa
b. Banks and Other Financial
Institutions
1/300 sq. ft. gfa
c. Personal Service 1/200 sq. ft. gfa
3. Retail. [Amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-25]
a. Convenience Store 1/150 sq. ft. gfa
b. Retail 1/200 sq. ft. gfa
c. Retail/Shopping Centers over 20,000 sq. ft.
4.5/1000 sq. ft. gfa
d. Lumber Yard 1/5000 sq. ft. of storage
area +1/250 sq. ft. of
retail gfa
e. Car Dealer 1/300 sq. ft. of showroom
& office gfa + 4/bay or
workstation
§ 228-218.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-218.1
1:1108
f. Furniture, Appliance 1/400 sq. ft. gfa
g. Gas Station (gas only) [Amended
9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
1.5/pump island
h. Auto Repair 3/service bay
i. Gas Station with mini-mart
[Added 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
1/150 sq. ft. of mini-mart
+ 1.5/pump island
4. Food Establishments.
a. Restaurant, Bar 1/4 seats + 10% of the
required spaces
b. Fast Food Restaurant 1/2 seats + 10 spaces
5. Industrial.
a. Assembly, Finishing,
Manufacturing
1/800 sq. ft. gfa
b. Research, Laboratory 1/1000 sq. ft. gfa
c. Shipping, Warehouse 1/5000 sq. ft. gfa
6. Public, Quasi-Public, Places of Assembly.
a. Place of Assembly 1/3 seats based on
maximum seating capacity
b. Library, Museum, Art Gallery 1/300 sq. ft. gfa
c. Social, Fraternal Clubs 1/300 sq. ft. gfa
d. Funeral Home 1/75 sq. ft. gfa
e. Nursery School, Day Care 1 per employee + 1 per
classroom
f. Public, Parochial & Private Schools
for Academic Instruction
1/classroom + 10% of the
required spaces
g. Business & Other Schools 1/classroom seat + 10% of
the required spaces
h. Mausoleums 1/175 crypts
7. Recreational Facilities.
a. Bowling Alley 4/alley
b. Movie Theater 1/4 seats
c. Tennis, Racquetball, Billiard, Etc. 4/court or table
d. Exercise, Health Clubs, Gyms 1/175 sq. ft.
e. Amusement, Recreation Facilities 1/250 sq. ft.
f. Instructional Studio 1/300 sq. ft.
§ 228-218.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-218.1
1:1109
D. Parking requirements - electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS).
Inclusion of electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) in parking
calculations. Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) shall be
designed and provided in compliance with the Building Code. Required
automobile parking spaces may be substituted with designated electric
vehicle charging stations, pursuant to the following: [Added 4-8-2019
by Ord. No. 19-06]
1. Electric vehicle charging equipment (EVCE) and electric vehicle
charging stations (EVCS) shall be considered permitted accessory
uses in all zoning districts.
2. The electric vehicle charging space shall comply with all standards
for parking areas pursuant to this chapter.
3. The location of electric vehicle charging stations, and associated
equipment, shall be no closer than 10 feet to a front lot line.
4. Each EVCS space shall count towards one required parking space
for the purposes of zoning compliance.
5. If the overall parking count is reduced below the required parking
stalls per the parking ordinance in § 228-218.1, a parking study
would be required to be reviewed by the Administrative Officer or
her/his designee in order to obtain administrative approval.
E. Mandatory electric vehicle charging stations. Applicants shall conform
to the following requirements for on-site electric vehicle charging
stations for new developments: [Added 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
1. Nonresidential development Level 2 charging stations.
a. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be required based upon
the number of parking stalls being provided:
[1] 0 to 50 stalls require one EVCS.
[2] 51 to 75 stalls requires two EVCS.
[3] 76 to 100 stalls requires three EVCS, one of which must be
ADA compliant.
[4] 101 to 150 stalls requires four EVCS, one of which must be
ADA compliant.
[5] 151 stalls and above requires 4% of the stalls be EVCS,
10% of which must be ADA compliant.
2. Multifamily development Level 1 charging stations.
a. Developments with 20 or more units must provide one EVCS in
the common area which must be ADA compliant and be a Level
2 EVCS and one additional EVCS for every additional 50 units.
§ 228-218.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-218.1
1:1110
§ 228-219. Previously issued building permits.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which
any building permit has been granted before November 25, 1958, provided
that construction from such plans shall have started within sixty (60) days
of November 25, 1958, and shall be diligently pursued to completion.
§ 228-220. Required open spaces may apply to only one structure.
No open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing open
space for any other building.
§ 228-220.1. Required landscaped buffer between residential uses
and industrial uses. [Added 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-85; amended
5-31-90 by Ord. No. 90-27]
§ 228-220.2. Required landscaped buffer between residential uses
and railroad right-of-way. [Added 12-11-89 by Ord. No. 89-85;
amended 5-31-90 by Ord. No. 90-27; 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
b. Three-percent of all parking stalls must provide EVCS.
A. A seventy-five (75) foot wide landscape buffer shall be required where a
proposed industrial use abuts an existing residential use or residential
zone.
B. A seventy-five (75) foot wide landscape buffer shall be required where a
proposed residential use abuts an existing industrial use or industrial
zone.
C. The width of the buffer area shall be measured at right angles from the
abutting property line.
D. All landscape buffer areas required under this section shall be planted
and maintained with a dense screen of trees, shrubs and evergreens of
such a type and nature as to provide a solid "all season" screen. Trees
and evergreens shall be at least six feet in height upon planting.
E. [Deleted 5-31-90 by Ord. No. 90-26]
F. As used in this section "industrial uses" include but are not limited to
trucking/motor freight, warehousing, construction and manufacturing
facilities.
A. A one hundred (100) foot wide landscape buffer shall be required where
a proposed residential use abuts a railroad right-of-way. The width of
the buffer area shall be measured at right angles from the property line
which abuts the railroad right-of-way.
§ 228-218.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-220.2
1:1111
§ 228-221. More than one use on the same lot. [Amended 3-14-77
by Ord. No. 77-8-FFF]
§ 228-221.1. Removed. [9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-222. Restrictions on accessory buildings, structures, and uses
for residential properties. [Amended 9-25-91 by Ord. No. 91-95;
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-18; 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-8; 4-9-12 by Ord.
No. 12-02; 8-13-18 by Ord. No. 18-18]
An accessory building, structure or use shall be subject to the following
requirements:
B. All landscape buffer areas required under this section shall be planted
and maintained with a dense screen of trees, shrubs and evergreens of
such a type and nature as to provide a solid "all season" screen. Trees
and evergreens shall be at least six feet in height upon planting.
C. In the SCMXD zone the buffer shall be fifty (50') feet wide for new
buildings. [Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-12]
A. Second dwelling prohibited. In no case shall there be more than one
residential building on each subdivision lot of record.
B. More than one building on nonresidential lots. With the exception of
Subsection A, more than one building may be located on a lot, tract or
parcel, provided that development of the lot, tract or parcel shall
otherwise comply with all applicable requirements of Township
development regulations and ordinances, and further provided that no
more than two different uses shall be permitted upon such property
unless otherwise allowed by the zoning regulations and ordinances
applicable thereto. When more than one building is proposed to be
located on any lot, the board considering the application shall ensure
that the existing and proposed uses will not overburden the lot nor be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Consideration shall
be given to the ability of the lot to handle on site parking; traffic to,
from, on and across the lots; traffic patterns on the streets abutting and
in the neighborhood of the lot; and to be compatible with existing uses
and development on nearby properties in the neighborhood.
A. Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required front yard
space. Parking areas in the front yard shall not occupy more than thirty
(30%) percent of the existing front yard. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord.
No. 99-8]
B. The accessory building or structure shall not exceed one story or fifteen
(15) feet in height. [Amended 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-8; 4-9-12 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
§ 228-220.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-222
1:1112
§ 228-223. Sight obstructions on corner lots.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
In any district on any corner, no fence, sign or other structure, planting or
other obstruction to vision, higher than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet above
the existing street grade at the center line, shall be erected or maintained
within the line connecting points on the two street lot lines at a distance of
twenty five (25) feet from the corner.
§ 228-223.1. Screening of rooftop equipment. [Added 6-12-89 by
Ord. No. 89-37]
All rooftop equipment shall be architecturally screened from the view of
adjacent properties and streets. Such architectural screening shall
complement the exterior wall finish.
§ 228-224. Additional requirements in residential zones. [Amended
9-12-66 by Ord. No. 66-8-F; 9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53; 3-10-80 by
Ord. No. 80-222; 4-27-81 by Ord. No. 81-344; 4-27-81 by Ord. No.
81-344; 9-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-384; 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-51;
C. Accessory buildings may be erected as a part of a principal building,
provided that all yard requirements of this chapter for the principal
building are complied with.
D. Storage and utility sheds of 200 square feet or less shall have a side and
rear yard setback of five feet. If the lot is less than one acre and is
undersized in terms of lot area for the zone it is located in, the side and
rear yard setback shall be two feet. Sheds located closer than five feet
to the property line shall not be greater than 10 feet in height. [Added
6-10-92 by Ord. No. 92-18; amended 8-13-18 by Ord. No. 18-18]
E. All impervious surfaces shall be set back five (5) feet from all property
lines. If the lot is less than one acre and is undersized in terms of lot
area for the zone it is located in, the side yard setback shall be two feet.
[Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-8; amended 4-9-12 by Ord. No.
12-02]
F. No person shall park any vehicle in the front yard of any lot on a
residential property except for vehicles parked on an improved
driveway or on a surfaced parking area. [Added 2-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-8]
G. Concrete and pavement around an in-ground pool shall be setback five
(5') feet from side and rear property lines. [Added 4-9-12 by Ord. No.
12-02]
H. Permanent generators shall be setback five (5') feet from side and rear
lot lines. Generators shall not be located in any front yard. [Added
9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
§ 228-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-224
1:1113
9-24-90 by Ord. No. 90-48; 12-13-93 by Ord. No. 93-76; 11-25-96 by
Ord. No. 96-39; 11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-45; 4-9-12 by Ord. No.
12-02; 9-21-15 Ord. 15-16]
The following shall constitute additional requirements in the R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, and R-5, Historic District Residential, Historic District-Residential/
Commercial, Historic District Cluster Residential, Historic Residential
Preservation Zones and Rural Preservation (RP, RP-1 and RP-3) Zones:
A. All corner lots shall have an area at least ten percent (10%) greater
than the minimum lot size requirement for the particular zone.
B. Wherever a residential subdivision or any part thereof borders on an
industrial or commercial zone, the subdivision shall be designed so that
no homes shall face the industrial or commercial zone, and each lot
bordering on such zone shall be twenty-five (25) feet deeper or twentyfive
(25) feet wider than required in the particular zone in order to
provide a buffer strip, which shall be left in its natural state or suitably
landscaped as required by the Planning Board.
C. Outdoor Parking is prohibited in all residential zones for the following,
subject to the remaining provisions of this ordinance:
1. All construction equipment, except for that which is stored on a
farm for a recognized agricultural use thereon.
2. All trucks and trailers, loaded or unloaded, buses, and other
commercial vehicles with linear measurements greater than any
one of the following: 20 feet in length, or seven (7) feet in width,
excluding rearview mirrors, or eight (8) feet in height excluding
radio antenna, and all cabs or tractors capable of pulling a trailer.
The foregoing is not applicable to privately used campers and
motorhomes. The foregoing is not applicable to vehicles in the
course of making deliveries or rendering necessary services
requested by an adjacent resident nor is it applicable to vehicles
utilized for maintenance or repair of public utilities or other
construction within the public right-of-way. Trailers intended or
used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any other residential,
commercial or industrial purposes are also prohibited except
nothing herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers
for transportation or as construction offices or for storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of
construction. In no event shall more than one commercial vehicle
be permitted to be parked outdoors and in no event shall such a
vehicle be permitted if any of its dimensions exceed those set forth
above with regard to length, width or height.
3. Auto cab and/or limousines.
D. No commercially owned or operated limousines and/or auto cabs shall
be garaged or parked over night in a residential zone.
§ 228-224 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-224
1:1114
E. In all developments the following critical areas shall be preserved as
undeveloped open space: wetlands as defined by New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, field verified by
an on-site inspection; significant trees defined as the largest known
individual trees of each species in New Jersey as listed by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE)
Bureau of Forestry and large trees which are 90% or more of the
diameter of the known largest tree; lands in the floodplain as defined in
NJDEPE in its Stream Encroachment Manual; steep slopes in excess of
twenty-five (25%) percent as measured over a 10-foot interval unless
appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion,
and resident safety are taken to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer; habitats of rare, threatened or endangered vegetation and
wildlife species as identified on federal or state lists; and historically
significant structures and sites as listed on the federal or New Jersey
Registers of Historic Places.
All site plans, subdivisions and general development plans shall comply
with the following requirements:
1. Each development plan shall identify and map on-site critical areas.
Such mapping shall depict the location of each critical area in
relation to the proposed development. Each critical area shall be
distinguished graphically and the total acreage of each critical area
within each lot shall be noted.
2. Critical areas shall be delineated as follows:
a. Tidal wetlands as defined by N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and as
delineated in the field with the delineation boundary verified in
writing by NJDEPE.
b. Freshwater wetlands as defined by N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq. and
as delineated in the field with the delineation boundary verified
by N.J.D.E.P.E. through a Letter of Interpretation, presence/
absence letter or other written communication.
c. Buffer or transition areas for tidal and freshwater wetlands as
required by N.J.D.E.P.E.
d. Location of significant trees as determined by field survey
indicating by notes the diameter at four feet and tree species.
e. Location of the 100 year floodplain boundary and floodway.
f. Areas of slope exceeding 25% as measured over a 10 foot
vertical change in grade.
g. The presence of potential habitat on the property of concern or
adjoining properties within 200 feet of rare, endangered or
threatened vegetation and wildlife based on written
communication with the New Jersey Natural Heritage
§ 228-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-224
1:1115
Program. The project site shall be indicated on USGS
topographic quadrangle map by the applicant and the map
forwarded to the Natural Heritage Program requesting
information on the potential presence of habitat for rare,
threatened or endangered vegetation and wildlife species.
3. Each development shall be designed to protect and prevent
disturbance of Critical Areas during construction and subsequent
use of the property.
The following standards shall be adhered to:
a. Where any yard of a residential development is within a
freshwater wetlands transitional area or tidal wetland buffer
area, the required yard setback shall be maintained between
the building or structures and the transition area/buffer area
boundary.(a)=b. All efforts to preserve significant trees are to
be made including, as appropriate, site redesign, use of tree
wells, and other methods as specified in the landscaping
section of this ordinance.
b. Within the 100-year floodplain only activities permitted by
N.J.D.E.P.E. shall be permitted.
c. No development, grading or other alteration or disturbance is
permitted in areas with steep slopes in excess of twenty-five
(25%) unless such action is approved by the Township
Engineer in view of appropriate engineering measures
concerning slope stability, erosion, and resident safety which
are reflected on the site plan.
d. If the presence of potential habitat for rare, threatened or
endangered vegetation and/or wildlife species has been
identified on-site or on adjoining properties by the New Jersey
Natural Heritage program, care should be taken during site
design to preserve as much of this habitat as possible and to
limit disruptions to habitat on adjoining parcels.
e. Wherever and whenever possible, registered historic
structures or sites should be preserved and incorporated into
the site design. Alterations should be kept to a minimum.
F. Any single family home on a nonconforming lot located in the RP, RP-2,
RP-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, Historic District-Residential and Historic
District-Residential/Commercial Zones which was lawfully created
before December 15, 1999 may be enlarged or expanded, provided that
the following shall apply
1. Where the existing lot area is less than 10,000 square feet the
following requirements shall apply:
Minimum Front Yard - twenty-five (25) feet
§ 228-224 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-224
1:1116
§ 228-224.1. Additional requirements in non-residential zones.
[Added 5-1-00 by Ord. No. 00-11]
Minimum Side Yard-one side: five (5) feet, two sides: 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard-20 feet
2. Where the existing lot area is at least 10,000 square feet and less
than 15,000 square feet, the following requirements shall apply:
Minimum Front Yard-twenty-five (25) feet
Minimum Side Yard-one side: 10 feet, two sides: 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard-20 feet
3. Where the existing lot area is at least 15,000 square feet and less
than one acre, the following requirements shall apply:
Minimum Front Yard-thirty-five (35) feet
Minimum Side Yard-one side: 10 feet, two sides: twenty-five (25)
feet
Minimum Rear Yard-20 feet
G. Lot Coverage
All residential properties shall not have lot coverage greater than
shown on the following chart:
Lot Size Lot Coverage With Attenuation
30,000 sq. ft. or greater 25% 30%
10,000 sq. ft. - 29,999 sq.
ft.
30% 35%
less than 10,000 sq. ft. 40% 45%
Should the impervious coverage of a residential property be greater
than the allowable lot coverage or increased by more than 25% of
the existing coverage, then on site stormwater attenuation, such as
drywells or similar device(s) must be provided and approved within the
subject property. Any attenuation will require engineering calculations.
H. Any single family dwelling, except in the Historic District Residential
Zone and Historic District-Residential/Commercial District, may
construct a front porch or deck that extends no more than eight (8') feet
from the front wall of the residential dwelling and in no event shall be
closer than fifteen (15') feet to the front property line without the need
for a variance. In the Historic District Residential Zone and in the
Historic District-Residential/Commercial District porches may extend
no more than five (5') feet.
§ 228-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-224.1
1:1117
§ 228-225. Restrictions on dangerous uses. [Added 12-8-64]
No use shall be permitted in any district, except the heavy industrial
district, which creates danger to life, limb or property or which emits any
objectionable noise, smell, smoke, dust, gas, glare or effluent.
§ 228-226. Restrictions on fences. [Added 9-12-66 by Ord. No
66-8-F; amended 1-23-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-G; 9-30-74 by Ord. No.
74-8-MM; 5-12-80 by Ord. No. 80-249; 5-26-81 by Ord. No. 81-352;
4-22-85 by Ord. No. 85-656; 2-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-8]
All fences erected in the Township of East Brunswick shall be subject to the
following requirements:
A. Adult day health care facilities shall be permitted in all non-residential
zones.
A. A fence permit shall be issued by the Building Inspection Division for all
fences, except living fences, erected in the Township.
B. No fence erected on or around a lot or parcel of land shall exceed six
(6') feet in height except for industrially zoned properties. Preconstructed
fences must be installed as close to the ground as possible.
The total height of the fence will not include any sight undulations of
the ground, provided that eighty percent (80%) of the fence does not
exceed the maximum height of six (6) feet.
C. No fence shall be erected in a front yard of any lot in a residential zone
unless the fence is less than fifty percent solid and is no greater than
four feet in height; except as provided in Town Code § 228-223, Site
Obstructions on Corner Lots. A proposed four foot fence may be more
than fifty percent solid if it is set back four feet from the front property
line and provides for a planted buffer which shall be installed in front of
the fence at the time of installation of the fence. The planted buffer shall
consist of compact juniper, forsythia, compact euonymus or approved
equal, subject to the approval of the Township Landscape Architect. The
plants are to be installed three feet on center and a minimum height of
24 inches at the time of planting.
Fences on corner lots in residential zones may have fencing in one of
the front yards up to 6 feet in height provided the fence may extend no
more than half the distance between the nearest wall of the dwelling
and the front property line nor may the fence extend beyond the nearest
corner of the residence. A planted buffer is required.
D. No fence shall be constructed with barbed wire or any other sharp
pointed materials.
E. All fences shall be constructed with the face, or finished side, away from
the property and the structural side toward the interior.
§ 228-224.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-226
1:1118
§ 228-227. Paving and screening of off street parking areas. [Added
1-23-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-G]
Except for single family dwellings, all off street parking areas shall be paved
with macadam or a material of comparable quality, lined, signed and curbed
with concrete curbs, and no vehicle shall park or be permitted to park on
any unpaved portion of the premises. All such parking lots shall be screened
from adjacent residential lots by means of an evergreen hedge, masonry
wall or tight woven fence not less than four nor more than six (6) feet in
height.
§ 228-228. Private roads, driveways and alleys. [Added 5-8-67 by
Ord. No. 67-8-J; amended 9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53; 1-11-81 by
Ord. No. 81-430]
F. Fences which are painted shall be painted in only one color, harmonious
with the surrounding area. Multicolored fences are prohibited.
G. Living fences or screening shall be planted no closer than three feet to
the property line. Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed
condition.
H. Fences shall be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of natural
drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to
create ponding.
I. Fences in the Planned Industrial Park (P-I) and Industrial/
Manufacturing (I/M) zones may be no higher than eight (8) feet in
height.
J. For fences required around a swimming pool, see § 195-12 of the Code
of the Township of East Brunswick.
K. Fences shall not be erected on the property line without the approval of
the adjacent property owner submitted in writing with the application
for a fence permit.
L. All fences in Planned Unit Residential Developments shall be prohibited
except in accordance with the standards established at the time of
P.U.R.D. preliminary approval pursuant to § 228-118.7.
A. No private road, driveway or alley shall be constructed, installed or
opened in the Township of East Brunswick without the prior approval of
the applicable municipal agency, if a development application is
pending before such agency, otherwise the Planning Board, whenever
the road, driveway or alley is designed, intended or permits:
(1) The connection of two or more public streets or rights-of-way.
(2) The passage of traffic from one or more lots or parcels of land over
another lot or parcel of land to a public street or right-of-way.
§ 228-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-228
1:1119
§ 228-228.1. Standards applicable to cemeteries and mausoleums.
[Added 7-26-93 By Ord. No. 93-20]
The following standards shall apply to all cemeteries and mausoleums in the
Township of East Brunswick:
B. Any person desiring to construct, install or open any private road,
driveway or alley of the type set forth above shall file an application
with the applicable Municipal Agency, accompanied by a filing fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.). The appropriate Municipal Administrative
Officer shall notify the applicant of the date set for the public hearing,
and the applicant shall thereafter publish notice of the hearing in the
official newspaper of the Township at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing and serve written notice of the hearing upon all property
owners within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected as
provided for in N.J.R.S. 40:55-44. In reviewing the application and
conducting the hearing, the Board shall consider, among other things,
the following items:
(1) The established traffic pattern in the area.
(2) The anticipated traffic from the private road, driveway or alley.
(3) The adequacy of the existing public roads to handle the anticipated
traffic.
(4) Any safety hazards presented by the design or configuration of the
private road, driveway or alley and the public roads or rights-ofway
with which it connects or with which it intersects.
(5) The alignment and grade of the road, driveway or alley, provisions
for storm drainage and its effect upon surrounding drainage
facilities.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40:55-44 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291,
and replaced by N.J.R.S. 40:55D-11 through 40:55D-16.
C. The Board shall grant the permit if it determines that the proposed
private road, driveway or alley would not unreasonably interfere with
the free flow of traffic, seriously overburden the existing public roads,
create a drainage problem, create a safety hazard or substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. If the
proposed private road, driveway or alley does not meet all of the
standards set forth above, the Board shall deny the application or,
where possible, grant approval on terms and conditions reasonably
calculated to remedy the deficiencies or defects.
D. Specifically excluded from the provisions of this section are any private
roads, driveways or alleys approved by the Planning Board as part of
any major subdivision or site plan approval.
§ 228-228 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-228.1
1:1120
§ 228-229. Electrical transmission lines and towers. [Added
10-27-71 by Ord. No. 71-8-DD]
All high voltage electrical transmission lines shall be underground.
Aboveground appurtenances and auxiliary facilities shall be permitted,
provided that all other requirements of this chapter are complied with. High
voltage electrical transmission towers are prohibited.
§ 228-229.1. Newspaper vending machines. [Added 2-27-84 by Ord.
No. 84-560]
§ 228-229.2. Restrictions on developments near noise generators.
[Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-817]
A. Every cemetery and mausoleum shall be required to provide an all
season planted buffer area at least six feet in height and a minimum of
twenty-five feet in width along common boundaries with any
residentially zoned or developed property. Interments, headstones, and
driveways are permitted within the buffer area.
B. No lighting shall spill onto adjacent property.
C. Driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide if one way and twentyfour
(24) feet wide if two way to allow vehicle parking.
D. Parking for mausoleums shall be provided at one space per 175 crypts.
Spaces may be provided in a parking lot or as parallel spaces along the
driveway aisles.
A. Coin operated vending machines which are placed on public sidewalks,
easements and rights-of-way shall be maintained, kept clean and
painted and shall be in good working order. They shall be subject to the
Property Maintenance Code of the Township of East Brunswick. All
such machines shall be weighted and designed so as to be freestanding.
In no event may such machines be chained, tied and/or fastened to light
poles, telephone poles, sign poles or any other fixed structure or object.
All coin operated newspaper machines shall be placed so as not to
create a pedestrian or motor vehicle hazard or impede the safe flow of
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. No newspaper vending machine
may be located within fifty (50') feet of a fire plug.
B. Violations. Any individual or entity which fails to comply with this
Ordinance shall be mailed a notice of non-compliance at the address
indicated on the business or editorial page and will be given nine (9)
days to comply with the Ordinance. In the event that the individual or
entity responsible for the machines does not comply with the Ordinance
within nine (9) days, the Township will remove the machine and contact
the publisher to reclaim it. If the machine has not been removed within
an additional nine (9) days, the Township will dispose of it as it sees fit.
[Amended 5-13-85 by Ord. No. 85-662]
§ 228-228.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-229.2
1:1121
A. No new single family residential structure (excluding substantial repair
or alteration) and no new multiple-family residence, school, hospital,
nursing home or similar structure, or substantial modification of such
existing structure requiring Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment action shall be approved for construction if the exterior
sound level anywhere on the site of the proposed structure is projected
to be in excess of 65 dBA Leq or to be in excess of 45 dBA Leq within the
structure, following the estimated completion date of the structure.
B. At the discretion of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
applicants proposing residential development within 300 feet of a noise
generator, such as the New Jersey Turnpike, Route 18 or an industrial
zone, may be required to submit a report certifying that the exterior
and future interior sound levels will meet the criteria specified in
subsection A above. Such report shall contain:
1. The results of measurements of the exterior sound levels and
simultaneous interior sound levels of any existing structure on the
property in question.
2. The existing Leq sound levels including identification of the major
sources of sound, for a representative sample of locations,
measured in accordance with guidelines set forth in this ordinance.
3. Any projected or proposed increases in sound levels which may
affect the projected future Leq at any portion of the site resulting
from site development changes, such as the removal of trees,
earthwork, etc.
4. Where applicable, plans for sound attenuation measures on the site
and/or of the structure proposed to be built and the amount of
sound attenuation anticipated as a result of these measures.
All tests shall be performed for a representative duration of twentyfour
(24) consecutive hours. All proposed lots and structures
thereon which are part of the development application shall be
subject to the aforementioned tests. This report shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer or by an independent testing
agency, either of which shall submit a resume indicating extensive
experience in the acoustical field to the appropriate agency for
approval.
In addition, the Township may conduct such inspections and
measurements as are necessary to ensure the accuracy of any
report submitted pursuant to subsection B and to ascertain
compliance with this section. These may include on-site inspections
by the Township or by a certified independent testing agency
during the course of construction and/or prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
C. If sound level reports, indicate sound levels exceeding those set forth in
Subsection A, development approval shall be withheld.
§ 228-229.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-229.2
1:1122
1. Necessary standard sound attenuation devices, such as berms,
barriers, landscape plantings, design and placement structures,
insulation, etc. may be utilized to achieve the required sound
levels. Such methods of sound attenuations must be specifically
approved by the reviewing body. In reviewing such methods, the
reviewing body shall consider environment, aesthetics, quality of
life, engineering standards, maintenance problems and
maintenance costs.
2. Cluster developments shall be encouraged in situations where a
noise generating source is within 300 feet. Only 75 percent of the
land area where Leq is in excess of 65 dBA may be counted towards
density in a cluster subdivision.
3. No residential lot lines shall encroach upon any area where Leq is
65 dBA or greater.
4. Except as provided in Subsection D, no land shall be designated or
approved for construction or use as a public or private exterior
recreational area, including, but not limited to, playgrounds,
outdoor theaters and amphitheaters, picnic grounds, tennis courts,
and swimming pools, if the exterior sound level from external
sources anywhere on the site of the proposed recreational area is
projected to be in excess of 65dBA Leq now, or as the result of
proposed construction or development on the site. Appropriate
means of sound attenuation, such as berms, barriers, or buildings,
at the perimeter of, or elsewhere on the site, may be utilized to
achieve the required sound level. Such methods of sound
attenuations must be specifically approved by the reviewing body.
In reviewing such methods, the reviewing body shall consider
environment, aesthetics, quality of life, engineering standards,
maintenance problems and maintenance costs.
D. Upon completion of the necessary remedial work, a revised sound level
report as indicated in Subsection A shall be submitted. Once the sound
levels have been reduced to the acceptable standards set forth in
Subsection A, development approval may be issued.
This section shall not prohibit the designation or approval of any green
belt or open space in any area in which the sound level exceed 65
dBA Leq regardless of whether such green belt or open space is open
to public use, provided that no recreational improvement or facility is
constructed thereon.
E. As a condition of approval, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall require the submission of future certified reports prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy to verify that the condition
in Subsection 5b has been met. These reports shall contain, at a
minimum, twenty-four (24) hours of sound testing in the bedroom to
determine that the Leq is below the levels established in Subsection 5b,
§ 228-229.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-229.2
1:1123
§ 228-229.3. Steep Slopes. [Added 59-11 by Ord. No. 11-08]
except that the permissible interior night levels shall be reduced an
additional 10 decibels.
F. Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the transfer of the
property by deed, the property owner of record shall become
responsible for the maintenance of all sound attenuation devices on
that property.
The developer shall attach to all contracts of sale a map which
designates all areas within the development where noise levels exceed
65 dBA Leq. The lot subject to sale shall be clearly delineated. Such
map shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
G. For the purposes of this section, all measurements and designations of
sound levels shall be expressed a percentile of Leq sound pressure
levels unless the Township specifically approves an alternate.
All measurements to determine if sound is within the levels set forth
herein shall be carried out utilizing a sound level meter which meets
the specifications established by ANSI.
A. Purpose. To regulate the intensity of use in areas of steeply sloping
terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive stormwater runoff,
the degradation of surface water and to maintain the natural
topography and drainage patterns of land. The requirements set forth
in this Ordinance are consistent with those found in the State of New
Jersey's Water Quality Management Planning rule (N.J.A.C. 7:15).
B. Background. Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion
processes from stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of
waterbodies with the associated degradation of water quality and loss
of aquatic life support. Related effects include soil loss, changes in
natural topography and drainage patterns, increased flooding potential,
further fragmentation of forest and habitat areas, and compromised
aesthetic values. It has become widely recognized that disturbance of
steep slopes should be restricted or prevented based on the impact
disturbance of steep slopes can have on water quality and quantity, and
the environmental integrity of landscapes.
C. Applicability. This ordinance shall be applicable to new development or
land disturbance on a steep slope within East Brunswick Township.
D. Definitions Applicable to Steep Slope Ordinance:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure
or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios,
§ 228-229.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-229.3
1:1124
elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements
on areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20 percent
as measured over any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are
determined based on contour intervals of two feet or less.
E. Designation of Areas. The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal
distance) shall be established by measurement of distance
perpendicular to the contour of the slope. The percent of slope shall be
calculated for each two foot contour interval. For example, any location
on the site where there is a one foot rise over a 10 foot horizontal run
constitutes a 10 percent slope; a 1.5 foot rise over a 10 foot horizontal
run constitutes a 15 percent slope; a two foot rise over a 10 foot
horizontal run constitutes a 20 percent slope.
F. Steep Slope Limits for steep slopes any disturbance shall be prohibited
except as provided below:
1. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
2. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or
welfare, such as necessary linear development with no feasible
alternative; to provide an environmental benefit, such as
remediation of a contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or to
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment. For example, redevelopment, within the footprint of
existing impervious cover should be allowed to support efforts to
revitalize development that has fallen into disrepair.
The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting
proposed development and topography that new disturbance is not
located in areas with a 20 percent or greater slope.
G. Conflicts and Severability.
1. Conflicts: All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance
are hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or
conflict, and the provisions of this ordinance apply.
2. Severability:
a. This section shall be so construed as not to conflict with any
provision of New Jersey or federal law.
§ 228-229.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-229.3
1:1125
§ 228-229.4. Prohibited uses. [Added 2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
The following are prohibited in all zones within the Township of East
Brunswick:
b. Notwithstanding that any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
all remaining provisions of the section shall continue to be of
full force and effect.
c. The provisions of this section shall be cumulative with, and not
in substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and
land use regulations.
H. Enforcement, violation and penalties
A prompt investigation shall be made, by the appropriate personnel
of East Brunswick Township, of any person or entity believed to be in
violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation
of this section is discovered, a civil action in the Special Civil Part
of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of
the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the right of East
Brunswick Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section
or subsection of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense independent of the violation of any other section or subsection,
or of any order issued pursuant to this section. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Violations and penalties enumerated in § 228-265 shall be applicable to
the enforcement of this section.
A. An alternative treatment center, as defined in § 228-3, other than as
provided in § 228-209C.
B. A retail electronic smoking device establishment or any establishment
that sells electronic smoking devices, as defined in § 228-3, other than
as provided in § 228-209D.
§ 228-229.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-229.4
1:1126
ARTICLE XXVII
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Statutory Authorization,
Findings of Fact Purpose and Objectives
[Amended 12-14-81 by Ord. No. 81-422; 4-15-87 by Ord. No. 87-829;
4-24-89 by Ord. No. 89-12; 5-2-10 by Ord. No. 10-13]
§ 228-230. Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
1.1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1
et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of East
Brunswick, New Jersey, Middlesex County does ordain as follows.
1.2. FINDINGS OF FACT.
1. The flood hazard areas of East Brunswick are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause
damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
1.3. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruption;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges, located in areas of special flood hazard;
§ 228-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-230
1:1127
§ 228-231. Definitions. [Amended 4-25-87 by Ord. No. 87-829;
5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-13]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Means a request for a review of the Manager of Engineering
Services's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for
a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Means a designated AO, AH, or VO Zone
on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one
percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
7. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
8. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
1.4. METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and
provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 228-230 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-231
1:1128
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Means the land in the flood plain
within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below grade level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Means a wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Means any man made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Means the official
map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Means a non basement building (i) built in the
case of a building in a Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
FLOOD or FLOODING — Means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Means the official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 228-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-231
1:1129
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Means the highest natural elevation of
the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Means any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Means a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
D.
§ 228-231 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-231
1:1130
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single
chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home,
or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
§ 228-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-231
1:1131
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this ordinance.
§ 228-232. General provisions. [Amended 5-24-10 by Ord. No.
10-13]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
A.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
B.
3.1. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES.
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of East Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, New
Jersey.
3.2. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD.
The area of special flood hazard for the Township of East Brunswick,
Community No. 340260, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(a) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Middlesex County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated July 6,
2010.
(b) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Middlesex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34023C0129F,
34023C0131F, 34023C0132F, 34023C0133F, 34023C0134F,
34023C0136F, 34023C0137F, 34023C0139F, 34023C0141F,
34023C0142F, 34023C0143F, 34023C0144F, 34023C0161F,
34023C0163F, 34023C0252F, 34023C0256F; whose effective date
is July 6, 2010
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a
part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are
on file in the Planning and Engineering Department office at 1
Jean Walling Civic Center Drive, East Brunswick, New Jersey
08816-1081.
3.3. PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
§ 228-231 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-232
1:1132
§ 228-233. Administration. [Amended 5-24-10 by Ord. No. 10-13]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions
of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of
East Brunswick from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
3.4. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easement, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
ordinance and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
3.5. INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions
shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
3.6. WARNINGS AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural
causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the area of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability
on the part of the Township of East Brunswick, any officer or employee
thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
4.1. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
§ 228-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-233
1:1133
A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in Section 3.2. Application for a Development Permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the Manager of Engineering Services and may
include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in Section 5.2 2; and,
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
4.2. DESIGNATION OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
The Manager of Engineering Services is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this ordinance by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
4.3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
Duties of the Manager of Engineering Services shall include, but not be
limited to
4.3-1. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 5.3(1) are met.
4.3-2. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 3.2, BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS
OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, the Manager of Engineering Services
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
§ 228-233 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-233
1:1134
and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in
order to administer Sections 5.2 1, SPECIFIC STANDARDS, Residential
Construction, and 5.2 2, SPECIFIC STANDARDS, Nonresidential
Construction.
4.3-3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
a. Verify, and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
b. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
4.1(3).
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
4.3-4. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
4.3-5. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries.
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in Section 4.4.
4.4. VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
4.4-1. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by the Township of East
Brunswick shall hear and decide appeals and request for variances
from the requirement of this ordinance.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
§ 228-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-233
1:1135
determination made by the Manager of Engineering Services in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, as provided in the statute.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
a. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
b. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
c. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
d. the importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
e. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
f. the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
h. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program of that area;
i. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. the costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 4.4 1(4) and the
purposes of this ordinance, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this ordinance.
§ 228-233 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-233
1:1136
§ 228-234. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. [Amended 5-24-10
by Ord. No. 10-13]
6. The Manager of Engineering Services shall maintain the records of
all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
4.4-2. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
a-k in Section 4.4 1(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. a showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c. a determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Section 4.4-1(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
5.1. GENERAL STANDARDS.
§ 228-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-234
1:1137
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required:
5.1-1. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All Manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over the top or frame ties or
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
5.1-2. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
5.1-3. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
3. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
5.1-4. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
§ 228-234 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-234
1:1138
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).
5.1-5. Enclosure Openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.
5.5-2. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
have been provided as set forth in Section 3.2, BASIS FOR
ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or in
Section 4.3-2, Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following standards
are required:
5.2-1. Residential Construction.
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation
B. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
5.2-2. Nonresidential Construction.
In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall
§ 228-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-234
1:1139
1. Be elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified). And require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
3. be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in Section 4.3-3(2).
5.2-3. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section
5.1 1(2).
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
5.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.2
are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
2. If Section 5.3(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with Section 228-234 Provisions for
Flood Hazard Reduction.
§ 228-234 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-234
1:1140
3. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
two-tenths (0.2) of a foot at any point.
§ 228-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-234
1:1141

ARTICLE XXVIII
Exceptions and Modifications
§ 228-235. Exceptions to height limitations. [Amended 2-13-96 by
Ord. No. 96-1]
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building, fire or parapet walls, skylights,
steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, or silos may be
erected above the height limits prescribed in this chapter.
§ 228-236. Exceptions to area requirements.
A single family dwelling may be constructed in a district where permitted
on any lot shown on a recorded subdivision plat or any lot of official record
as of November 25, 1958, the owner of which does not own any adjoining lot
or adjacent land, provided that in the opinion of the Board of Adjustment,
the lot area and proposed yard spaces satisfy as closely as possible the lot
and yard requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is
located. Where the owner of a substandard size lot owns adjacent lots or
parcels of land, such lots or parcels shall be considered as a single lot, and
the area and yard space provisions of this chapter shall hold.
§ 228-237. Exceptions to yard requirements. [Amended 11-22-99 by
Ord. No. 99-45]
A. Recognizing that there are trends in home planning and lot
arrangement to secure the full benefit of sunlight, prevailing winds and
other amenities which may necessitate variation in the front, side and
rear yard requirements of this chapter, such variation may be permitted
in the case of isolated homes, groups of homes or neighborhood layouts,
provided that the site plans thereof are first approved by the Planning
Board.
B. Where a lot is situated between two lots, each of which is developed
with a main building which projects beyond the established front
building line and has been so maintained since November 25, 1958, the
minimum front yard requirement of such lot may be the average of the
front yards of the existing buildings. Where a lot adjoins one lot
developed as described above and a vacant lot, the minimum front yard
requirement of such lot may be the average of the front yard of the
existing building and the established front setback line.
C. Where an existing dwelling is on a lot the width of which is less than the
minimum prescribed for the district in which such lot is situated, the
minimum side line requirements for the erection of a garage or carport
shall be five (5) feet.
D. The following features may project into a required yard [Added
11-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-45]:
§ 228-235 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-237
1:1143
1. Eaves, cornices, cantilevers, chimney or roof overhang not to
extend more than 2 feet from a single family dwelling. In no event
shall such a projection be closer than 5 feet to a property line.
2. Ramps, lifts or similar devices for handicap access.
3. Steps
4. Landings or platforms no greater than 25 square feet in area.
§ 228-237 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-237
1:1144
ARTICLE XXIX
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 228-238. Applicability of Article.
The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming buildings,
structures and uses existing as of November 25, 1958, and to all
nonconforming uses in districts established by subsequent ordinances.
§ 228-239. Nonconforming uses of land. [Amended 3-13-67 by Ord.
No. 67-8-1]
No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, nor shall
any such nonconforming use be extended, to occupy a greater area of land
than that occupied by such use as of November 25, 1958, nor shall any
such nonconforming use be moved in whole or in part to any other portion
of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such nonconforming use of land.
If any nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of ninety (90)) days
for any reason, any subsequent use of such land shall be in conformity
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located. Nonconforming mining operations of land owned or leased
by the operator thereof, as of November 25, 1958, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section, but shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 228-210BB. The period during which a seasonal use is not in operation
shall not be considered a cessation of the use so long as it is operated on a
recurrent seasonal basis.
§ 228-240. Nonconforming uses of buildings.
No existing building designed, arranged or intended for or devoted to a
use not permitted under regulations specified for the district in which such
building is located shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, structurally
altered or removed unless such use is changed to a use permitted under the
regulations specified by this chapter for such district in which the building
is located. If any nonconforming use of a building ceases for any reason for
a continuous period of one year or more or if the building in which such
use is conducted or maintained is moved beyond the limits of its present lot,
then any future use of such building or land shall be in conformity to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such building
or land is located.
§ 228-241. Restoration.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinabove set forth, nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and
continued use of any nonconforming building or structure damaged or
destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, subsequent to
November 25, 1958; provided, however, that there shall be no enlargement
of the original structure, and provided further that the work shall be
initiated within six (6) months from the occurrence of such damage or
§ 228-238 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-241
1:1145
destruction and shall be diligently pursued to completion. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and
continued use of any nonconforming building or structure, rendered
necessary by wear and tear or deterioration, provided that the cost of
such work shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of such
building or structure at the time such work is done.
§ 228-241 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-241
1:1146
ARTICLE XXX
Residences for Developmentally Disabled and Community Shelters
for Victims of Domestic Violence
Editor's Note: Former Article XXX, Plats, Permits and Certificates of
Occupancy, as amended 1-12-60, 6-13-61 and 3-12-63, was repealed 9-11-78
by Ord. No. 78-53. See Ch. 75, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 228-242. Community residences for developmentally disabled and
community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
3-23-81 by Ord. No. 81-341]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1, no community residence for the
developmentally disabled and no community shelter for victims of domestic
violence shall house more than six (6) persons, excluding resident staff,
unless a conditional use permit has been issued by the Planning Board
for the use or conversion to use of a dwelling unit to such a community
residence or shelter.
§ 228-243. Conditional use permit. [Added 3-23-81 by Ord. No.
81-341]
An applicant for a conditional use permit referred to in § 228-242 shall
file an application for development which shall be the subject of a public
hearing at the Planning Board following the required notice and service
requirements for an application for development as more particularly set
forth in § 132-61 of the Code of the Township of East Brunswick. In each
case, the decision of the Planning Board shall be reasonably related to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the zoning district in which
the proposed use is to be located. Before granting such a conditional use
permit, the Planning Board shall make specific findings of fact including,
but not limited to the following:
a. The proposed area shall be sufficient for the intended purpose.
b. Adequate parking facilities shall be provided.
c. Means of ingress and egress shall be adequate to prevent traffic hazard,
congestion or excessive interference with normal traffic movement on
adjacent public streets and thoroughfares.
d. The building and use shall be appropriately located and designed and
will meet a community need without adversely affecting the
neighborhood.
e. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, no more than fifteen (15)
persons other than resident staff shall be permitted in the residence.
f. The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Board as to the adequacy of all
items required in an application for site plan approval, including but not
§ 228-242 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-243
1:1147
limited to, drainage, illumination, sewerage, landscaping and all other
items required for site plan approval.
g. The Planning Board shall consider appropriate buffering of the
property.
§ 228-243 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-243
1:1148
ARTICLE XXXI
Signs
[Added 1-22-68 by Ord. No. 68-65-K; amended 5-29-84 by Ord. No.
84-570; 6-24-91 by Ord. No. 91-67; 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73;
11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39; 3-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-8; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18; 5-15-06 by Ord. No. 06-21; 5-9-11 by Ord. No.
11-07]
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 68-65-K also provided for the repeal of all
other provisions relating to signs which were contained within the
regulations for the individual districts.
§ 228-244. Purpose. [Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; amended
7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
The purpose of this Ordinance shall be to coordinate the type, placement,
and scale of signs within different land-use zones; to recognize the
communication requirements of all sectors of the community; to encourage
the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper
maintenance; to protect public safety; to allow for special circumstances;
and to guarantee equal treatment under the law. These shall be
accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use, and maintenance
of signs. The use of signs is regulated according to zone. The placement,
scale and aesthetics of signs are regulated to ensure compatibility with
development, the existing environment and nearby developed areas.
§ 228-245. General design standards and requirements. [Amended
12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 3-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-8; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
I. Freestanding Signs.
A. Unless otherwise provided for, no sign situated on a property shall
advertise or describe any use or activity or business except those
situated on, or conducted within the property.
B. Any signs not specifically permitted are hereby prohibited.
C. Height: No portion of the top edge of any freestanding sign shall be
greater than twenty-two (22') feet above the elevation at the
centerline of the street in front of the property on which the sign
shall be situated but will not interfere with sight triangles.
[Amended 11-13-84 by Ord. No. 84-611; 7-22-02 by Ord. No.
02-18]
D. Setback: Except where otherwise provided, no sign or any part
thereof shall be located closer than ten (10') feet to any lot line. Any
new sign shall be not less than a distance of 100 feet from any
existing adjacent freestanding sign.
§ 228-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-245
1:1149
E. Location: No freestanding sign shall block the view of any existing
signs. All signs shall be placed in a location which will allow
sufficient reaction time for drivers on the adjacent roads, and safe
driveway access to the entrance to the site of the business or
commercial use.
F. Size Calculation: Except where specifically prohibited, all signs
may be double faced, and the maximum area shall apply to each
side. The area of the sign shall include each and every part of the
sign, including moldings, frames, logos and graphics. Where the
sign is supported by a post or pylon whose surface is being used for
advertising purposes, the area of this post, pylon or other
supporting members shall be considered as part of the total
allowable sign area. Wherever the name or advertising message on
a sign is divided between a number of panels or parts, the total
area of all of the panels or parts shall be considered as one sign,
and where a sign consists of individual letters or numbers, the area
of the sign shall be considered as the total area of the smallest
rectangle or rectangles which can collectively enclose all of the
letters or numbers.
G. Shape: The face of every freestanding sign, except for political
signs regulated by § 228-252N, shall not contain characters or
graphics exceeding 3 inches in relief or projection from the sign
face. The maximum distance between the faces of the double faced
sign shall not exceed 18 inches. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No.
93-73]
H. Directory Signs: Each shopping center or multi tenanted facility
may erect no more than three directory signs on the property to
provide a listing of occupants. Each sign shall not exceed thirty-six
(36) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. All directory signs
shall be located away from major streets and highways.
I. Construction of freestanding signs: Freestanding signs shall be
supported by posts or pylons of durable materials which may
include concrete, steel, treated wood, other suitable material or
any combination of same. Supports for freestanding signs shall be
set securely in the ground or concrete so that the sign will be
capable of withstanding high winds. No other bracing or guy wire
shall be permitted.
II. Facade Signs. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 3-10-97 by
Ord. No. 97-8; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
A. Unless otherwise provided for, all signs shall relate to the premises
on which they are erected.
B. Any signs not specifically permitted are hereby prohibited.
C. Location on buildings: All signs attached to a building shall be
attached flat against the facade of the building and shall not project
§ 228-245 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-245
1:1150
or extend outward beyond the facade to which it is attached by
more than eighteen inches (18"). In no case shall any sign erected
flat against the side of a building extend above the height of a
vertical wall or cornice to which they are attached. Signs located
on a mansard facade shall be attached in the following manner
1. Flat against the facade; or
2. Attached to the base of the facade and not projecting more
than eighteen inches (18") from the facade at the top of the
sign. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
D. Construction of signs flat against buildings.
Any sign attached flat against the surface of a building shall be
constructed of durable material and attached securely to the
building with nonrusting metal hardware. When a sign is to be
installed on a masonry building, holes shall be drilled in the
masonry, and proper nonrusting hardware of the expansion type
shall be used. The use of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited. All
signs must be approved and inspected by the Office of Construction
Inspection. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
E. Where a sign consists of individual letters, symbols, graphics or
logos, the area of the sign shall be considered as the total area of
the smallest rectangle or rectangles which can collectively enclose
all of the letters, symbols, graphics or logos. [Added 12-27-93 by
Ord. No. 93-73; amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
F. In calculating the size of the facade the width is measured from the
exterior walls and the height is measured from grade to the actual
roofline of the building. False or parapet walls are not considered in
facade calculations. [Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
G. Notwithstanding anything in this ordinance to the contrary, in no
event shall a facade sign exceed four hundred (400) square feet in
area. [Added 3-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-8]
III. Awning Signs. [Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; amended
7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
A. Awning signs may be attached to buildings or structures. Any sign
on an awning will be considered part of the allowable square
footage of any facade sign as allowed in each zone with the
following projection and height limitations
1. Minimum overhead clearance shall be 8 feet. Any awning sign
may not project over a vehicular right-of-way.
2. If the structure has a fringe or valance, such fringe or valance
may hang below the ceiling line no more than 12 inches.
§ 228-245 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-245
1:1151
§ 228-246. Illumination. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73;
3-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-8; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
Unless specifically prohibited, all signs may be illuminated as provided for
below:
3. Awning signs shall be limited to single-story buildings or to the
first level only of multi-story buildings. Awning signs on the
second story of any building are prohibited.
4. Awning signs attached to buildings must adhere to the
required property setbacks.
B. Only the copy area of awning signs shall be considered in the
facade signage square footage limitations. The remaining portion
should be considered as awning area only.
A. Wiring for illuminated signs shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the electrical codes of the Township of East Brunswick
and shall be inspected by the Division of Construction Inspection of the
Township. Any fee for an electrical inspection shall be in addition to the
fee provided for in the sign permit.
B. Where illuminated signs are permitted, illumination may be provided by
floodlights, spotlights, ordinary incandescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes
or mercury vapor lamps. Regardless of the type of illumination
employed, all illuminated signs shall be properly shielded and so
located as to prevent glare or blinding effects upon motor vehicle traffic
and so as not to cause a nuisance to residents of the area. [Amended
12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
C. Decorative neon illumination is permitted. [Added 7-22-02 by Ord.
No. 02-18]
(1) Decorative neon illumination may be placed on a finished facade
only in the HC-2, HC-3 and MXD zones and may not exceed the
allowable square footage for facade signs in the particular zone.
Decorative neon illumination may not project above the roofline of
the structure it is attached to. Decorative illumination may not be
placed on any facade which faces any residence or residential zone
unless they are separated by a street or other public right-of-way.
Decorative neon may not be sequential or flashing.
(2) Permit required. In addition to any requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code for the installation of, wiring of any decorative
illumination a zoning sign permit shall be required. A zoning sign
permit shall be issued by the Director of Planning and Engineering
or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
D. Whenever it is determined that the lighting on any sign now or
hereafter erected constitutes a safety hazard to motor vehicle traffic in
the vicinity, written notice shall be served upon the property owner and
§ 228-245 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-246
1:1152
§ 228-247. Permits. [Amended 5-31-90 by Ord. No. 90-24; 12-27-93
by Ord. No. 93-73; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
owner of the sign, directing them to correct the condition within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Failure to correct
the condition or file an appeal within the time specified shall constitute
a violation of this section by both the sign owner and property owner.
[Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73]
E. Where illuminated signs are permitted, signs facing a residence or
residential zone shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M. the following morning, unless the business or uses
advertised are open to the public later than 10:00 P.M., in which event
any such establishment may keep a sign illuminated until the business
is closed to the public but not thereafter. Except where otherwise
permitted, signs installed at a height greater than fifty (50') feet shall
not be illuminated. [Amended 3-10-97 by Ord. No. 97-8; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
A. In addition to any requirements under the Uniform Construction Code
for construction permits, all signs and advertising displays, other than
those expressly provided for in Section 228-252, shall require a zoning
sign permit, to be issued by the Director of Planning and Engineering or
his/her designee.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Construction Codes, Uniform.
B. All applications for a sign permit shall be made to the Director of
Planning and Engineering on forms provided by the Department. All
applications shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the property
owner on whose premises the sign is to be erected. All applications
shall contain a sketch of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, the wording
or message, and, where the sign will not be attached to a building, a
plot plat showing the location of the proposed sign with tie-ins to the
nearest building and lot lines. All applications shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee.
C. The application fee for a zoning sign permit is $25 and is in addition to
any required construction permit fee.
D. When an applicant proposes to replace the face of a sign with no
changes to the size, shape or location of the sign, the applicant shall
submit an application to the Department of Planning and Engineering
to amend the permit. If only the wording is to be changed, there shall be
no additional fee for the amendment. The intent of this section is to
keep the sign permit file consistent with the sign which is to be
displayed.
E. All requirements, permits, inspections and fees of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, if any, are in addition to this zoning
§ 228-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-247
1:1153
§ 228-248. through § 228-249. (Reserved)
§ 228-250. Maintenance. [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
All signs and displays shall be maintained in good order and repair. In the
event that the Director of Planning and Engineering or his/her designee
determines that any sign now or hereafter erected has fallen into a state
of disrepair, has become dilapidated or constitutes a safety hazard, the
sign owner and property owner shall be given written notice to correct the
condition within 20 days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Failure
to correct the condition or file an appeal within the time provided shall
constitute a violation of this section and will result in the issuance of a
Municipal Court summons.
§ 228-251. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by any administrative official or agency shall have the right of appeal
to the East Brunswick Township Board of Adjustment as provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55-39.20 Where an appeal has been filed, failure to comply with
the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any higher court of competent
jurisdiction shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 228-252. Signs permitted without permit. [Amended 1-12-76 by
Ord. No 75-8-YY; 10-18-76 by Ord. No. 76-8-III; 8-28-89 by Ord. No.
89-53; 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39;
7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-39]
requirement and must be determined by the Division of Construction
Inspection.
A. Nonilluminated or internally illuminated directional signs identifying
parking areas, loading zones, entrances, exits and similar locations. The
number of directional signs shall not exceed the number of curb cuts on
a lot. The signs may include a business name or professional name but
shall not include any advertising message. In shopping centers and
multitenanted facilities, individual tenants shall not have their business
or professional names on the directional signs. Only the name of such
center or development is permitted on the sign. Signs shall not exceed
three square feet in area nor five feet in height.
B. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed by the
Township, county and state for the purpose of directing and regulating
the flow of traffic.
C. Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by the
Township or a public transportation utility.
20.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-39 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291, and replaced by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
§ 228-247 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-252
1:1154
D. Historic tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems which
do not exceed six square feet in area and which are installed by
government agencies or civil or religious organizations.
E. Warning and no-trespassing signs, not exceeding three square feet in
area.
F. Flags or emblems of religious, educational, civic or governmental
organizations flown from supports on the buildings or grounds occupied
by the organization and the American flag whenever and wherever
flown in accordance with the laws and rules promulgated by the federal
government.
G. Name and number plates identifying residents and affixed to a house,
apartment or mailbox, not exceeding 50 square inches in area.
H. Lawn signs identifying residents, not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in
area for each side. The signs shall not contain any advertising message
and shall be nonilluminated except by a light which is an integral part of
a lamppost if used as a support.
I. Signs posted by governmental agencies or pursuant to governmental
statute, order or regulation.
J. Signs which are an integral part of vending devices, including gasoline
pumps, as well as signage utilized for the sale of merchandise or
services being sold or rendered on the premises, provided the signs are
securely fastened to a structural face or the vending device and
provided that they do not exceed three square feet in area. The contents
of the sign may only reflect the contents of the vending device or the
item being sold on the premises. The sign must be permanent and may
not be interchangeable with other signage.
K. Nonilluminated real estate signs announcing the sale, rental or lease of
the premises on which the sign is located. The sign shall only contain
the announcement of sale, lease or rental, the name of the broker and
phone number. No other advertising material shall be permitted on the
sign. Signs shall be removed 10 days following sale, rental or lease. The
sign may be double-faced, and, except as noted below, only one sign
shall be permitted on each lot or parcel. The maximum size of the sign
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) RP, RP-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, VGI, VGII, VGIII, VGIIIA, TG,
MMHC, MXD/R, HR, HRP, HR/C and HCR Zones: three square feet.
(2) O-I, C-1, HC, OP-1 and OP-2 Zones: 10 square feet.
(3) C-2, C-3, HC-1, HC-2, HC-3, H-1, P-I, I/M, O/I, MXD Zones: one sign
on each bordering street, to be no larger than 45 square feet.
L. Window signs and interior floor displays which obstruct the window
area shall be restricted in order to assure adequate visibility from
outside the building, subject to the following:
§ 228-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-252
1:1155
(1) Restrictions shall only apply from three feet to seven feet above the
first-floor elevation.
(2) Within any five-foot measurement of horizontal window space, a
business must maintain two consecutive feet of open and
unobstructed window area.
(3) Restrictions shall not apply to open lettering printed on windows as
long as the lettering does not obstruct vision into the store.
M. Temporary signs and posts for advertising public functions or
fundraising events for charitable or religious organizations shall be
permitted for a period of 60 days prior to and during the event and shall
be removed within five days after the event. The sign shall be
nonilluminated, not larger than 24 square feet in area, not exceeding
eight feet in height and may be erected flat against the building or
freestanding.
N. Temporary political signs and posts for a period of 30 days prior to an
election, which must be removed five days after the election. Political
signs in residential zones shall not exceed six square feet, the
dimension shall not exceed 2 x 3 feet, and they shall not exceed the
height limitation for residential zones. Political signs in all other zones
shall not exceed the maximum size and height limitation for the zone in
which they are placed.
O. The street address in block numbers may be placed on the top of the
outside edge of the sign frame in a C-2, C-3, HC-1, HC-2, and HC-3
Zone. The number shall be a uniform twelve-inch height on all
freestanding signs and shall not be considered as part of the area of the
sign.
P. Relocation information signs for a period of 30 days. Relocation signs
shall be restricted to the present location of the relocating business and
the future location of the relocating business. The signs, one each at the
present and the future business sites, shall not be in excess of
standards set forth for the zone in which the business is located in.
Q. Construction signs. One sign announcing the name of architects,
engineers and/or contractors and the building enterprise shall be
permitted at a site under construction, alteration or repair, provided the
sign shall not exceed the standards set forth for the zone in which the
construction site is situated and that the sign shall be removed before a
certificate of occupancy is issued. The sign shall not exceed 45 square
feet in area and eight feet in height.
R. Menu boards not visible from the right-of-way as part of a drive-through
facility.
S. One price sign per vehicle, not to exceed one square foot in area.
§ 228-252 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-252
1:1156
§ 228-253. Prohibited signs. [Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73;
2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-2; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18; 5-15-06 by
Ord. No. 06-21]
The following signs are prohibited in all zones in the Township of East
Brunswick:
T. "Help wanted" signs. One sign announcing an available position, the
establishment (employer) and contact phone number, not to exceed six
square feet in area. The sign may be of a temporary nature but must be
securely and safely fastened to the building facade or an existing
freestanding sign on the premises of the establishment. The sign must
be removed within five days of filling the announced position.
U. Farm stands for the sale of farm produce grown on the premises may
have two freestanding signs, each not larger than 12 square feet in area
and not exceeding eight feet in height. In addition, one sign no larger
than 20 square feet in area may be erected flat against the face of the
farm stand or farm building where the produce or products are sold.
V. Signs painted on or attached to motor vehicles or trailers or other
portable devices. Signs painted on or attached to motor vehicles or
trailers or other portable devices are exempt, provided that such signs
pertain to the function of the vehicle or to the business of its owner. The
parking or storing of these motor vehicles, trailers or portable devices
is prohibited, except:
(1) Sites containing only residential uses and permitted by the zoning
designation may have one commercial motor vehicle (20 feet by
seven feet by eight feet) or less if the occupant of the residence
owns the motor vehicle.
(2) In all other sites, the parking or storing of these motor vehicles,
trailers or portable devices may be located:
a. In the side yard or rear yard as established by the zoning
designation where the subject property is located.
b. In the front yard as established by the zoning designation
where the subject property is located, if parking spaces are
approved for such uses by the East Brunswick Township
Planning Board or Zoning Board or if there are no side or rear
yard parking stalls.
(3) The storage of motor vehicles or trailers or other portable devices
shall be located on the property for which the business is
conducted.
A. Signs using red, yellow and green lights placed within 100 feet of any
traffic control signal now or hereafter erected.
§ 228-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-253
1:1157
B. Moving or revolving signs and signs using blinking, flashing, vibrating,
flickering, tracer or sequential lighting.
C. Any sign which, in the judgment of the Director of Public Safety,
unreasonably tends to distract drivers or otherwise constitutes a traffic
hazard.
D. Roof signs on buildings, structures, and vehicles.
E. Signs or advertising matter of an indecent or obscene nature.
F. Signs using words such as "stop", "look", "danger", etc., which are
placed in a manner or position which, in the judgment of the Director of
Public Safety, constitutes a traffic hazard or otherwise interferes with
the free flow of traffic.
G. Signs which attempt to imitate or otherwise cause confusion with
existing signs erected by any governmental board, body or agency.
H. Except where specifically permitted, signs advertising a product or
service not sold on the premises, signs advertising or directing
attention to another premises and any other signs unrelated to the
premises on which the sign is erected, except for billboards as a
conditional use in the P-I and C-2 zones. [Amended 2-14-00 by Ord.
No. 00-2]
I. Signs causing interference with radio or television reception.
J. Signs obstructing doors, fire escapes or stairways or keeping light or
air from windows used for living quarters.
K. Flags, banners, string of banners, pinwheels, A type signs, sandwich
type signs, sidewalk signs, curb signs and similar advertising devices,
except as provided for in § 228-256C.
L. Any sign or banner spanning a public street. [Amended 10-29-74 by
Ord. No. 74-8-OO]
M. Signs placed on trees, fences, utility poles, light poles, signs attached to
other signs and signs placed upon motor vehicles which are
continuously or repeatedly parked in a conspicuous location to serve as
a sign. [Amended 12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-U; 7-22-02 by Ord.
No. 02-18]
N. Any series of two or more signs placed along a street or highway
carrying an advertising message, part of which is contained on each
sign.
O. Signs on vacant property advertising a proposed use without prior
issuance of Township Planning or Zoning Board approval for the
proposed use. [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
P. Signs with manual or electronic changeable type or symbols except for
movie marquees and signs indicating the time and temperature only.
§ 228-253 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-253
1:1158
§ 228-254. Signs permitted in residential districts. [Amended
12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 11-25-96 by Ord. No. 96-39; 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
The following signs are permitted in the RP, RP-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
VGI, VGII, VGIII, VGIIIA, HR, HR/C, HRP and HCR Residential Districts:
[Added 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No.
02-18]
Q. Except where specifically permitted any sign which is inflatable,
airborne, floating or of a balloon type including but not limited to
search lights, balloons, dirigibles and blimps. [Added 7-22-02 by Ord.
No. 02-18; amended 5-15-06 by Ord. No. 06-21]
R. Except where specifically permitted, portable or permanent search
lights. [Added 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18; amended 5-15-06 by
Ord. No. 06-21]
A. Religious institutions, nursing homes, private schools, service
organizations and public buildings and facilities may have one
freestanding informal sign or bulletin board, not more than thirty five
(35) square feet in area, not to exceed six (6') in height, on each major
street bordering the property, together with incidental signs, not to
exceed four, necessary to provide directions or describe the use,
provided that each such sign does not exceed three square feet in area.
[Amended 6-14-76 by Ord. No. 76-8-EEE; 12-27-93 by Ord. No.
93-73; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
B. For business uses, one sign flat against the building or on a single
freestanding post, such as a lawn sign, is permitted. The sign shall not
exceed six (6) square feet in area, and a freestanding sign shall not
exceed five (5) feet in height. Where more than one use is conducted on
the premises, the area of the sign for multiple users may be a maximum
of 10 square feet. The information on the sign shall be limited to the
name of the occupant, his business or profession and house number.
[Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
C. Signs are permitted in connection with each housing or land
development, as follows [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
(1) At the main entrance to the development, two illuminated
freestanding signs which shall state the name of the development
and no other advertising material. Each sign shall not exceed
twenty five (25) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height. The
sign shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from any right-of-way or
property line. The sign may not obstruct any sight easement or
sight distance. [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
(2) At each entrance other than the main entrance, one nonilluminated
freestanding sign not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in area and
not more than eight (8) feet in height. The sign shall be setback a
§ 228-253 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-254
1:1159
§ 228-255. Signs permitted in the O-1 District. [Amended 12-27-93
by Ord. No. 93-73]
The following signs are permitted in the O-1 District:
§ 228-255.1. Signs permitted in the TG, OP-1 and OP-2 Districts.
[Amended 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73; 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
The following signs are permitted in the TG, OP-1 and OP-2 Districts:
§ 228-255.2. Signs permitted in the HC District. [Amended 1-28-02
by Ord. No. 02-01]
minimum of 10 feet from any right-of-way or property line. The sign
may not obstruct any sight easement or sight distance. [Amended
7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
(3) At the rental or sales office of the development, one freestanding
illuminated sign advertising the office, not to exceed fifteen (15)
square feet in area and not more than five (5) feet in height.
(4) Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public
to a housing or land development. A maximum of four temporary
freestanding nonilluminated signs are permitted. Each sign shall
not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in
height above ground. The sign permit shall be issued for a period of
six (6) months and shall be renewable for additional periods of six
(6) months during the period of construction. Signs may not be
located within any public right-of-way. [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord.
No. 02-18]
A. One (1) sign, either freestanding or flat against the building, not
exceeding 20 square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height above the
ground.
A. Each business use may have one sign flat against the front of the
building facade, facing the street on which the lot fronts not to exceed
five (5%) percent of the area of that side of the building to which the
sign is attached.
B. Each business use may have one double faced, freestanding, internally
illuminated sign not exceeding 10 feet in height, nor twenty four (24)
square feet in area.
C. On a corner lot an additional freestanding sign and an additional
building facade sign may be permitted for each major street on which
the lot fronts; provided, however, that no additional signage shall be
authorized on a side of such building, which side borders on a residence
or residential zone. [Amended 7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18]
A. All signs, displays or advertising devices to be erected in an area zoned
Historic District-Commercial and visible from the public right-of-way
§ 228-254 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-255.2
1:1160
shall be subject to the regulation of this ordinance. No signs, displays,
or advertising devices shall be erected which contain a brand,
trademark, slogan, symbol or other similar device unrelated to the
specific business or service provided on the premises. Each sign,
display or advertising device proposed for erection within a Historic
District Commercial Zone shall be judged on its size, color, design,
quality, placement and method of hanging according to the particular
character of the building, its neighbors and the subject sign, display
or advertising device. In general, such devices may consist of hanging
signboards or fascia boards, awnings or similar devices; provided,
however, that no such device shall be of a flashing type, although
either interior or exterior shielded illumination of such devices shall
be allowed. It is the intention of this control to encourage superior
graphic design of signs, displays or advertising devices as a means of
emphasizing the quality of the environment. [Amended 7-22-02 by
Ord. No. 02-18]
B. Each non residential use may have one sign placed flat against the front
of the building facade, facing the street or streets on which the lot
fronts, not exceeding in area five (5%) percent of the area of such
facade.
C. Each non residential use may have one double faced, freestanding,
externally or internally illuminated sign.
D. All freestanding signs shall be a maximum of six (6) square feet in area,
height not to exceed four (4') feet and a maximum of five (5') feet from
the street right-of-way and all adjacent property lines. If the
freestanding sign can be set back a minimum of ten (10') feet from the
street right-of-way and all adjacent property lines, the sign may have an
area of twenty four (24) square feet and may not exceed ten (10') feet in
height.
E. The background of all signs, whether or not illuminated, shall be of a
neutral color, buff, white or tan, and the lettering thereon shall be either
black or dark brown; provided, however, that the background of a sign
may be black or dark brown with lettering having the neutral colors of
buff, white or tan. Nothing herein shall preclude the placement of a logo
having colors other than those set forth above, provided that the color
and design have become identified by the public with a particular name.
No colored lights may be used to illuminate the signs.
F. On a corner lot an additional freestanding sign and an additional
building facade sign may be permitted for each major street on which
the lot fronts; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply
where the side of structure faces the residential zone. The size of such
freestanding sign and building facade sign shall follow items A through
E above.
§ 228-255.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-255.3
1:1161
§ 228-255.3. Signs permitted in the SCMXD district. [Added 7-8-02
by Ord. No. 02-12]
The following signs are permitted in the SCMXD District.
§ 228-256. Signs permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, H-1, HC-1, HC-2,
HC-3 and MXD Districts. [Amended 5-14-73 by Ord. No. 73-8-II;
10-23-78 by Ord. No. 78-89; 11-13-84 by Ord. No. 84-611; 4-11-88
by Ord. No. 88-918; 11-14-88 by Ord. No. 88-961; 4-24-89 by Ord.
No. 89-12; 8-28-89 by Ord. No. 89-53; 12-27-93 by Ord. No. 93-73;
7-22-02 by Ord. No. 02-18; 5-15-06 by Ord. No. 06-21]
The following signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, H-1, MXD, HC-1,
HC-2, and HC-3 Districts:
A. Each business use may have one sign flat against the front of the
building facade, not to exceed five (5%) percent of the area of that side
of the building to which the sign is attached.
B. The entire development may have no more than two freestanding
monument signs along the frontage of the property identifying the
name of the development. Signs may be no more than eight (8) feet in
height and a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet in area. The size
of the monument may be no more than 2 2 times the size of the sign.
C. The development may have no more than five (5) directory signs located
inside the property, not visible from existing public roads, a maximum
of twenty-five (25) square feet in area and no more than eight (8) feet in
height.
A. Each business or commercial use may have one or more signs flat
against the building and only permitted on a finished elevation of a
building provided, however, that the total area of all such signs shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of that side of the building to
which the sign is attached. No sign shall protrude above the building
roof line or top of any parapet. No sign shall be permitted on the side of
any building bordering on a residential zone unless the residential zone
and the building are separated by a street.
B. 1. Frontage: Each business or commercial use may erect a
freestanding sign(s) based on the following table.
The number of signs to be considered shall not exceed the number
and size of sign(s) as determined in the following table. The size of
the sign faces shall be determined by the lineal dimension of the lot
line facing the street or highway in accordance with the following
table. To take advantage of this table, nonconforming signs must be
removed or brought into conformity:
§ 228-255.3 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-256
1:1162
Frontage in Feet
Maximum Size of
Each Sign Face In
Square Feet
Maximum Number
of Signs
Up to 100 45 1
Up to 200 90 1
Up to 300 90+45 2
Up to 400 90+90 2
400 and over 90+90+90 3
Where a lot is entitled to more than one freestanding sign, such
freestanding signs shall be erected a minimum of 150 feet apart.
2. Whenever the property is bordered by more than (1) street, an
additional freestanding sign shall be permitted on each street;
provided, however, that no freestanding sign shall be erected on a
side which borders on a residential zone, unless the residential
zone and the building are separated by a street and the present
sign(s) is conforming.
C. Each business operating in a separate location may display temporary
signs in connection with bona fide special sales promotions for a
maximum of five (5) weeks each six months in weekly periods. The use
of plastic or cloth flags, banners, pennants, bunting or similar
advertising devices shall be permitted, on a finished facade of the
building actually occupied or on the freestanding sign utilized by the
business or commercial use conducting the sales promotions as defined
above. Pennants are permitted to be hung from the facade to another
nonpublic structure on the property. All temporary signs shall not cause
a sight obstruction.
Temporary signs securely fastened to a building facade may not exceed
10% of the area of the facade up to a maximum of 200 square feet in
addition to any existing facade signs for the business or commercial use
conducting the sales promotion. Temporary signs securely fastened to
an existing freestanding sign may be no greater than twenty four (24)
square feet in area, may not obstruct any other signs on the existing
pylon nor may it be erected without first obtaining consent from the
property owner/landlord.
A temporary sign permit shall be required for the maximum 10 week
period. The application shall be submitted to the Director of Planning
and Engineering or his/her designee for approval. For a new business
in the Township, an approved permanent sign permit is required before
a temporary sign permit may be issued.
The following signs are permitted along State Highway 18 along the
HC-2, HC-3 and MXD Districts
§ 228-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-256
1:1163
§ 228-257. Signs permitted in the P-I, I/M and O/I Districts.
[Amended 11-13-84 by Ord. No. 84-611]
The following signs are permitted in the P-I, I/M and O/I Districts:
For business uses, portable and/or freestanding commercial
searchlights, spotlights or floodlights may be used for advertising
purposes, subject to the following conditions:
a. Searchlights, spotlights and/or floodlights shall not be sequential or
flashing.
b. Searchlights, spotlights or floodlights may be illuminated only
between the hours of sundown to 11:00 P.M.
c. Searchlights, spotlights or floodlights shall be directed vertically
towards sky an away from establishments, highways, streets and/or
vehicles.
d. Searchlights, spotlights or floodlights shall be setback a minimum
of 10 feet from any right-of-way or property line.
e. Searchlights, spotlights or floodlights may not obstruct any sight
easement or sight distance.
f. An application for a permit shall be made by the applicant to the
Director of Planning and Engineering on forms provided by the
Department for each searchlight, spotlight or floodlight. The
application fee for a permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for a 1 day
permit and one hundred ($100) for a 2-7 day permit.
g. A permit may be issued for a period of seven (7) days. An applicant
shall be limited to one permit per year.
h. Permits shall only be issued for new business openings, new
business ownership, or other special events.
A. Signs or letters must be flat against the building and are only permitted
on a finished elevation of a building; provided, however, that the total
area of all such signs shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent of the area
of that side of the building to which the sign is attached. No sign shall
be permitted on the side of any building bordering on a residential zone
unless the residential zone and the business property are separated by
a street.
B. One (1) freestanding sign in accordance with the table set forth in
§ 228-256B. Whenever the premises is bordered by more than one
street, an additional freestanding sign shall be permitted on each street
bordering the premises, except that no sign shall be erected on a side
which borders on a residential zone unless the residential zone and the
industrial property are separated by a street. [Amended 7-8-85 by
Ord. No. 85-676]
§ 228-256 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-257
1:1164
C. In addition to the signs provided for above, a planned industrial park
may erect one (l) freestanding sign, identifying the industrial park, its
occupants and their principal products, on each major street or
highway bordering the park. The sign shall not exceed two hundred
(200) square feet in area.
D. Entrance, exit, shipping, receiving and other directional signs, each not
to exceed 10 square feet in area and not to exceed five (5) feet in height.
§ 228-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-257
1:1165

ARTICLE XXXII
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Editor's Note: For later provisions on the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, see Ch. 132, Land Use Procedures.
§ 228-258. Purposes of Board. [Repealed 9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53]
§ 228-259. Rules and regulations. [Repealed 9-11-78 by Ord. No.
78-53]
§ 228-260. Quorum; powers.
A quorum shall consist of four members. The Chairman or, in his absence,
the Acting Chairman shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and may administer
oaths. The Board shall perform all the duties and have all the powers
provided by law to be exercised by boards of adjustment and shall
determine the true location of any district boundary line and in addition
thereto, pursuant to the statutes and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, shall determine and vary the application of the provisions
herein established in harmony with their general intent and purpose to
avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in a manner to secure
the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 228-261. Handling of appeals. [Repealed 9-11-78 by Ord. No.
78-53]
Editor's Note: See §§ 132-21, 132-22, 132-23 and 132-24 of Ch. 132, Land
Use Procedures.
§ 228-262. Handling of special exceptions.
Special exceptions or special questions as provided for in this chapter shall
be considered pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:55-39b. Whenever
the Board is required to act after public notice and public hearing, the
procedure shall be in the manner set forth in § 228-261.
Editor's Note: N.J.R.S. 40:55-39b was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291, and
replaced by N.J.R.S. 40:55d-70.
§ 228-263. Actions requiring approval by both the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 10-6-75 by Ord. No.
75-8-VV; 9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53; Repealed 4-14-80 by Ord. No.
80-238]
§ 228-264. Fees. [Amended 4-8-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-0; repealed
9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53]
§ 228-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-264
1:1167

ARTICLE XXXIII
Enforcement
§ 228-265. Enforcement official designated; violations. [Amended
7-22-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-Q; 8-30-89 by Ord. No. 89-64; 4-20-09 by
Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 228-265.1. References to Planning or Zoning Board. [Added
9-11-78 by Ord. No. 78-53]
Whenever in this chapter there is a reference to the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the
agency having jurisdiction pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 132, Land Use
Procedures, and the Municipal Land Use Law.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who is empowered
to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and
examined.
The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall have been committed or shall exist, or
the lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which
such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent,
architect, building contractor or any other person who shall commit,
take part in or assist in any such violation or who shall maintain any
building or premises in which any violation of this chapter shall exist
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and a summons shall be
issued. If an appeal shall have been filed with the Board of Adjustment
within sixty five (65) days of the order, the Municipal Court action
on the summons shall be stayed in accordance with § 132-24 of the
Code of the Township of East Brunswick. [Amended 2-13-79 by Ord.
No. 78-107; 8-27-79 by Ord. No. 79-161; 11-14-88 by Ord. No.
88-961; Amended 8-30-89 by Ord. No. 89-64]
B. The violation of any determination or the terms and conditions
contained in any determination of the Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment or Township Council made under the provisions of this
chapter or otherwise provided for by law shall also be deemed a
violation of this chapter. [Amended 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-11]
C. Any failure by the applicant or any successors or assigns to construct,
operate or maintain any building, structure or use in a manner other
than that provided for in the site plan approved by the Approving
Authority shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be the
basis for the issuance of a stop notice, the filing of a complaint or any
other legal remedy available to the Township. [Added 4-20-09 by Ord.
No. 09-11]
§ 228-265 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-265.1
1:1169

ARTICLE XXXIV
Map Descriptions
[Amended 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20]
§ 228-266. Additions to the R-1 Single-Family Rural Residence
District. [Amended 6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-16]
A. The R-1 Single-Family Rural Residence District as shown and described
on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby
enlarged to include the following described land in the Township of East
Brunswick which is hereby rezoned R-1, not withstanding the fact that
the enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added
12-23-68 by Ord No. 68-8-U]
(1) C-2 to R-1. Beginning at a point in the center line of Riva Avenue at
its intersection with the center line of Lawrence Brook, the
common municipal boundary line between the Borough of Milltown
and the Township of East Brunswick, and; thence
(a) Along said center line of Riva Avenue in a general
southwesterly direction approximately 400 feet to a point;
thence
(b) At right angles to Riva Avenue and in a general northwesterly
direction approximately 400 feet to a point; thence
(c) Parallel to the first course approximately 1,090 feet to the
center line of Lawrence Brook the common municipal
boundary line between the Borough of Milltown and the
Township of East Brunswick; thence
(d) Along the aforementioned municipal boundary line a general
southeasterly direction approximately 400 feet to the center
line of Riva Avenue, the point or place of beginning.
Being and intended to be that C-2 Zone presently located north
of Riva Avenue and adjacent to the East Brunswick Milltown
boundary.
B. The P-I Zone as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the following
described land which is hereby rezoned to R-1. Beginning at the center
line intersection of Cranbury Road and Fern Road and from thence
running: [Added 3-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-2]
(1) In a southerly direction along the center line of Fern Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,150 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Old Stage Road; thence
(2) In a westerly direction along the center line of Old Stage Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 4,850 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Helmetta Boulevard; thence
§ 228-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266
1:1171
(3) In a northerly direction along the center line of Helmetta
Boulevard, the various courses thereof, a distance of 1,050 feet,
plus or minus, to the center line intersection of Cranbury Road and
Dunhams Corner Road at the municipal boundary; thence
(4) Continuing in a northerly direction along the center line of
Dunhams Corner Road, the various courses thereof, a distance of
5,925 feet, plus or minus, to the intersection of Irelands Brook;
thence
(5) In an easterly direction along the center line of Irelands Brook, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 4,800 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Fern Road; thence
(6) In a southerly direction along the center line of Fern Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,250 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Cranbury Road, the place of
beginning.
C. The M-1 Research and Limited Manufacturing District as shown on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to
delete the following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-1
Single-Family Rural Residence District. Beginning at the point of
intersection of the center line of the New Jersey Turnpike and the
municipal boundary line of the Township of East Brunswick and South
Brunswick Township; thence [Added 3-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-2]
(1) Along the center line of Irelands Brook (the municipal boundary
line) in a westerly direction along the various courses thereof a
distance of 2,365 feet, plus of minus, to the center line of Beekmans
Corner Road; thence
(2) Along the center line of Beekmans Corner Road in a northerly
direction the various courses thereof a distance of 2,270 feet, plus
or minus, to the center line intersection of Church Lane; thence
(3) In a northerly direction parallel to and distance 1,000 feet westerly
from the center line of the New Jersey Turnpike a distance of
10,060 feet, plus or minus, to the municipal boundary line of the
Borough of Milltown; thence
(4) In an easterly direction along the municipal boundary line of the
Borough of Milltown, the various courses thereof, a distance of
1,400 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of the New Jersey
Turnpike; thence
(5) In a southerly direction along the center line of the New Jersey
Turnpike a distance of 11,860 feet, plus or minus, to the center line
intersection of the municipal boundary line of East Brunswick
Township and South Brunswick Township, the point of beginning.
§ 228-266 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266
1:1172
D. Description of lands belonging to the State of New Jersey known as Lot
2 in Block 25 to be rezoned to R-1 property situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Ryders Lane, said point being
distant 676 feet measured along said centerline southerly from the
center of the bridge in Ryders Lane that crosses Weston Mill Pond
(formerly known as Lawrence Brook) and from thence running: [Added
12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-811]
1. Southerly along the centerline of Ryders Lane South 2 degrees
West 850.00 feet; thence
2. Southerly along said centerline of Ryders Lane South 2 degrees 46
minutes West 1,470.92 feet; thence
3. Westerly and along the northerly line of now or formerly Julius
Cscher North 78 degrees 26 minutes West 926 feet; thence
4. Still along the same line North 78 degrees 26 minutes West 27 feet
to a point being where the raceway and Sawmill Brook meet;
thence
5. Down the center of the Sawmill Brook the several courses to
Weston Mill Pond; thence
6. Northerly and northeasterly along the line of Weston Mill Pond,
said line being established by the Water Department of the City of
New Brunswick at elevation 19.75 feet to a point in the westerly
line of now or formerly A and F Bellizia; thence
7. Southerly along A and F Bellizia South 2 degrees West a distance of
165.2 feet; thence
8. Easterly along the southerly line of lands of A and F Bellizia North
74 degrees 42 minutes East 505.30 feet; thence
9. Still easterly along lands of A and F Bellizia South 89 degrees 03
minutes East 201 feet to the centerline of Ryders Lane, the point of
beginning.
Containing 80.01 + acres
E. Description of lands presently zoned RP known as all of Lots 5.03, 5.01,
6, 23.08, 23.09, 19.01 in Block 320 to be rezoned R-1, property situated
in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road and the
centerline of Irelands Brook and from thence running: [Added 6-28-10
by Ord. No. 10-16]
1. Easterly along the centerline of Irelands Brook, a distance of
4,481+ feet to the northeasterly corner of lot 18.08 in block 320 on
the official tax map of the Township of East Brunswick; thence
§ 228-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266
1:1173
2. Southerly along the westerly line of lots 18.06, 18.07 and 18.08 in
block 320, a distance of 618+ feet; thence
3. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 18.06 in block 320, a
distance of 273+ feet to the westerly line of Fern Road; thence
4. Southerly along the westerly line of Fern Road a distance of 42+
feet; thence
5. Westerly along the northerly line of lots 2-4 in block 320.19, a
distance of 527+ feet; thence
6. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 4 in block 320.19, the
terminus of Matthew Manor and lot 5 in block 320.20, a distance of
510+ feet; thence
7. Southerly along the easterly line of lot 20.04 in block 320, a
distance of 530.92+ feet; thence
8. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 21.09 in block 320, a
distance of 825+ feet; thence
9. Northwesterly along the easterly line of lot 4 in block 320, a
distance of 1056+ feet;
10. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 4 in block 320, a distance of
2429+ feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road; thence
11. Northerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road 2069+
feet to the centerline of Irelands Brook, the point and place of
beginning.
F. Description of lands presently zoned RP known as all of Lots 21.10 and
22.03 in Block 320 to be rezoned R-1, property situated in the Township
of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Cranbury
Road and the centerline of Fern Road and from thence running: [Added
6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-16]
1. Westerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road a distance of 307+
feet; thence
2. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 21.06 in block 320, a
distance of 405.25+ feet; thence
3. Southwesterly along the westerly line of lot 21.06 in block 320, a
distance of 375+ feet; thence
4. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 21.06 in block 320, a
distance of 405.25+ feet; thence
5. Westerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road a distance of
1884+ feet; thence
§ 228-266 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266
1:1174
§ 228-266.1. Addition to the RP Single-Family Rural Preservation
District. [Added 1-14-80 by Ord. No. 79-203; amended 4-10-89 by
Ord. No. 89-4; 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61; 8-27-01 by Ord. No.
01-30]
6. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 22.01 in block 320, a
distance of 389+ feet; thence
7. Southwesterly along the westerly line of lot 22.01 in block 320, a
distance of 282+ feet; thence
8. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 22.01 in block 320 a
distance of 389+ feet to a point in the centerline of Cranbury Road;
thence
9. Southwesterly long the centerline of Cranbury Road a distance of
938+ feet; thence
10. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 3 in block 320, a
distance of 1325+ feet; thence
11. Easterly along the southerly line of lot 4 in block 320, a distance of
1431+ feet; thence
12. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 4 in block 320, a distance of
326.8+ feet; thence
13. Easterly along the southerly line of lot 21.09 in block 320, a
distance of 642.58+ feet; thence
14. Northerly along the southerly line of lot 21.09 in block 320, a
distance of 39.3+ feet; thence
15. Easterly along the southerly line of lot 21.09 in block 320, a
distance of 188.14+ feet; thence
16. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 20.04 in block 320, a
distance of 35.6+ feet; thence
17. Easterly along the southerly line of lot 20.04 in block 320, a
distance of 834.43+ feet; thence
18. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 20.02 in block 320, a
distance of 518+ feet; thence
19. Easterly along the southerly line of lots 21.01 and 21.03 in block
320, a distance of 249+ feet; thence
20. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 21.03 in block 320, a
distance of 143+ feet; thence
21. Southerly along the centerline of Old Fern Road and Fern Road, a
distance of 878+ feet to the point of beginning.
§ 228-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.1
1:1175
A. Beginning at a point in the easterly right-of-way of Beekman Road
formerly known as Beekmans Corner Road, at its intersection with the
Irelands Brook, which is also the Municipal boundary line for East
Brunswick Township and the Township of South Brunswick; thence,
(1) Westerly along the East Brunswick South Brunswick boundary line
to the Farrington Lake to a point which is the intersection of the
municipal boundaries for the Townships of East Brunswick, South
Brunswick and North Brunswick; thence
(2) Northerly along the East Brunswick North Brunswick Municipal
Boundary to a point which is the intersection of the municipal
boundaries of the Townships of East Brunswick and North
Brunswick and the Borough of Milltown; thence
(3) Easterly along the East Brunswick Milltown Municipal Boundary to
a point which is the intersection of the East Brunswick Milltown
municipal boundaries and the centerline of the New Jersey
Turnpike; thence
(4) Southerly along the New Jersey Turnpike centerline to its point of
intersection with the Irelands Brook which is also the East
Brunswick South Brunswick Municipal Boundary; thence
(5) Along the Irelands Brook in a westerly direction to place of
beginning.
Excepting from this area the existing commercially zoned lots and
the area within the bounds of the following description:
Beginning at a point said point being the intersection of the
northerly right-of-way line of Church Lane and the westerly rightof-
way line of the New Jersey Turnpike; thence
(1) Along the westerly right-of-way line of the New Jersey
Turnpike in a northerly direction which is coincident with the
easterly property line of Tax Lot No. 26.01 in Block 315.01 as
shown on the East Brunswick tax map; thence
(2) Along the northerly property line of Lot 26.01, Block 315.01
in a westerly direction to a point which is the northwest
corner of Lot 26.01, Block 315.01 and the northeast corner
of Lot 27, Block 315.01; thence
(3) Continuing in a westerly direction along the northerly
property line of Lot 27, Block 315.01 to its intersection with
the easterly property line of Lot 28.01, Block 315.01; thence
(4) Along the easterly property line of Lot 28.01, Block 315.01 to
its northeasterly property corner; thence
(5) Along the northerly property line of Lot 28.01, Block 315.01
to its northwest property corner; thence
(6) Along the westerly property line in a southerly direction to
its intersection with the centerline of Church Lane; thence
§ 228-266.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.1
1:1176
(7) Along the centerline of Church Lane in a westerly direction
to a point which is the extension of the westerly property line
of Lot 3.08, Block 313; thence
(8) Along the westerly property line of Lot 3.08, Block 313 in a
southerly direction to the southwest corner of Lot 3.08,
Block 313; thence
(9) Along the southerly property line of Lot 3.08, Block 313 in an
easterly direction to its intersection of the centerline of
Beekman Road formerly known as Beekmans Corner Road;
thence
(10) Along the centerline of Beekman Road to a point distant
1200 feet from the centerline of Church Lane; thence
(11) Along a line parallel to and distant 1200 feet in an easterly
direction to its intersection with the westerly right-of-way
line of the New Jersey Turnpike; thence
(12) Along the westerly right-of-way line of the New Jersey
Turnpike to the point of beginning.
B. Lands presently zoned C-2 to be rezoned RP, property known as a
portion of Lots 37, 38, and 39 in Block 310, situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline intersection of Riva Avenue and
Patrick Street and from thence running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No.
90-60]
1. Southwesterly along the centerline of Riva Avenue, a distance of
300 feet; thence
2. Southeasterly and parallel to Patrick Street, a distance of 200 feet;
thence
3. Northeasterly and parallel to Riva Avenue, a distance of 300 feet;
thence
4. Northwesterly along a line parallel with the second course, a
distance of 200 feet to the centerline intersection of Riva Avenue
and Patrick Street, the point of beginning.
C. Description of lands presently zoned C-2 to be rezoned RP, property
known as a portion of Lots 7.01, 10.01, 11, 12 and 13.03 and all of Lot
13.02 in Block 309.04 situated in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point in the centerline intersection of Riva Avenue and
Patrick Street and from thence running: [Added 4-10-89 by Ord. No.
89-4]
1. Southwesterly along the centerline of Riva Avenue, a distance of
300 feet; thence
§ 228-266.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.1
1:1177
2. Northwesterly and parallel to Patrick Street, a distance of 200 feet;
thence
3. Northeasterly and parallel to Riva Avenue, a distance of 300 feet to
the centerline of Patrick Street; thence
4. Southeasterly along the centerline of Patrick Street, a distance of
200 feet to the centerline intersection of Riva Avenue, the point of
beginning.
D. Description Of Lands Presently Zoned R-I To Be Rezoned Rp, (Church
Lane), And Portion Of Lot 1.01, In Block 314.01 Situated In The
Township Of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline intersection of Church Lane and
the New Jersey Turnpike and from thence running: [Added 11-19-90
by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Northwesterly along the centerline of Church Lane a distance of
1000 + feet to the centerline intersection of Beekman Road; thence
2. Southwesterly along the centerline of Beekman Road a distance of
1367 + feet to a point opposite the division line between lots 3.15
and 5.02 of Block 313; thence
3. Southeasterly and parallel to Church Lane to the centerline of the
New Jersey Turnpike; thence
4. Northerly along the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike to the
centerline intersection of Church Lane the point of beginning.
E. The following lands on Church Lane have been rezoned from R-1 to RP
in accordance with the Master Plan adopted on 4-4-90: Block 313, lots
3.03, 3.14, 3.15, & 4 and Block 315.01, lots 26.01, 27, 28.01, 28.03,
§ 28.04. [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
F. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-3 to Be Rezoned RP, Property
Located South of New Jersey Turnpike and North of Irelands Brook in
The Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road and the
centerline of Irelands Brook and from thence running: [Added 8-27-01
by Ord. No. 01-30]
1. Easterly along the centerline of Irelands Brook, a distance of
4,775+ feet to the centerline of Fern Road; thence
2. Northerly along the centerline of Fern Road, a distance of 30+ feet;
thence
3. Westerly along the northerly line of lots 9 and 18 in block 320.16 on
the official tax map of the Township of East Brunswick, a distance
of 1,730+ feet to the easterly line of lot 5.03 in block 320; thence
§ 228-266.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.1
1:1178
4. Northerly along the easterly line of lots 5.03 and 27 in block 320, a
distance of 3,950+ feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road;
thence
5. Westerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road, a distance
of 600+ feet; thence
6. Northeasterly along the easterly line of lots 23.01 and 31 in block
315.02 a distance of 3000+ feet to the centerline of the New Jersey
Turnpike; thence
7. Southwesterly along the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike a
distance of 3800+ feet to the centerline of Church Lane; thence
8. Southeasterly along the centerline of Church Lane, a distance of
210+ feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road; thence
9. Southerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road, a distance
of 1200+ feet to the centerline of Irelands Brook, the point of
beginning.
G. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-1 To Be Rezoned RP Property
Located South of Irelands Brook, East of Dunhams Corner Road and
North of Cranbury Road in The Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road and the
centerline of Irelands Brook and from thence running: [Added 8-27-01
by Ord. No. 01-30]
1. Easterly along the centerline of Irelands Brook, a distance of
4,775+ feet to the centerline of Fern Road; thence
2. Southerly along the centerline of Fern Road, a distance of 775+
feet; thence
3. Westerly along the northerly line of lots 1-4 in block 320.19 on the
official tax map of the Township of East Brunswick, a distance of
875+ feet; thence
4. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 4 in block 320.19, the
terminous of Matthew Manor and lot 5 block 320.20, a distance of
505+ feet; thence
5. Easterly along the southerly line of lots 1-5 in block 320.20, a
distance of 850+ feet to the centerline of Cranbury Road; thence
6. Southerly along the centerline of the Old Fern Road and Fern Road,
a distance of 1,200+ feet to the centerline of Cranbury Road;
thence
7. Westerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road a distance of
3,800+ feet; thence
§ 228-266.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.1
1:1179
8. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 3 block 320, a distance of
1,340+ feet; thence
9. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 22.03 block 320, a distance
of 275+ feet; thence
10. Northerly along a line distant 1,300 feet and parallel to the
centerline of Dunhams Corner Road, a distance of 1,900+ feet;
thence
11. Westerly along the northerly property line of lot 4 in block 320
1,300+ feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road.
12. Northeasterly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road
2,070+ feet to the centerline of Irelands Brook, the point and place
of beginning.
H. Description of Lands Presently Zoned OP-1 To Be Rezoned RP, Property
Known As A Portion of Lot 1.11 in Block 323 In the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Cranbury Road and Old
Stage Road (a paper street) and from thence running: [Added 8-27-01
by Ord. No. 01-30]
1. Northeasterly along the centerline of Cranbury Road, a distance of
450+ feet to the southerly line of lot 1.04 block 323; thence
2. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 1.04 in block 323, a
distance of 233+ feet to a point; thence
3. Southwesterly through lot 1.11 in block 323, a distance of 75+ feet
to the centerline of Old Stage Road (a paper street); thence
4. Southwesterly along the centerline of Old Stage Road (a paper
street) a distance of 450+ feet to the centerline of Cranbury Road,
the point and place of beginning.
I. Description of Lands Presently Zoned C-2 Known As That Portion of Lot
1.01 and All of Lot 3 in Block 323, To Be Rezoned to RP, Property
Situated in The Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Old Stage Road (a paper street)
said point being distant 450+ feet northeasterly from the centerline
intersection of Cranbury Road and from thence running: [Added
8-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-30]
1. Northeasterly through lot 1.10 and along the rear lot lines of lots
1.04,1.01, 1.07, 1.08 and 1.05, to the southerly line of lot 2.02;
thence
§ 228-266.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.1
1:1180
2. Southeasterly and northeasterly along the rear of lot 2.02, a
distance of 230+ feet to the centerline of Helmetta Boulevard;
thence
3. Southeasterly and along the centerline of Helmetta Boulevard, a
distance of 700+ feet to the centerline intersection of Old Stage
Road (a paper street); thence
4. Easterly along the various courses of the centerline of Old Stage
Road (a paper street), a distance of 1,050+ feet to a point in the
centerline of Old Stage Road which is distant 450+ feet
northeasterly from the centerline of Cranbury Road, the point of
beginning.
J. Description of Lands Presently zoned MMHC To Be Rezoned RP,
Property Known As Lot 3 and The Westerly Portion of Lot 4 in Block
320, In The Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road opposite
the southerly line of Lot 3, said point being distant 330+ feet northerly
from the centerline intersection of Cranbury Road and from thence
running:
1. Northerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road, a distance
of 3,506+ feet; thence
2. Easterly along the northerly property line of Lot 4 in Block 320 to a
point distant 1,300+ feet from the centerline of Dunhams Corner
Road; thence
3. Southeasterly along a line, distant 1,300+ feet and parallel to the
centerline of Dunhams Corner Road a distance of 1,800+ feet to a
point on the northeasterly property line of Lot 22.03; thence
4. Westerly along the northerly line of Lot 22.03, a distance of 275+
feet to the northeasterly corner of Lot 3; thence
5. Southerly along the easterly line of Lot 3, a distance of 1,340+ feet
to the centerline of Cranbury Road; thence
6. Westerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road, a distance of 695+
feet to a point opposite the easterly line of Lot 2.04; thence
7. Northwesterly and along the said easterly line of Lot 2.04, a
distance of 190+ feet to a corner thereof, thence
8. Westerly along the northerly line of Lots 2.04, 2.03, 1.03 and 1.04 a
distance of 910+ feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road,
the point of beginning.
K. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-1 To Be Rezoned RP, Property
Located South of Cranbury Road and Old Stage Road and West of
§ 228-266.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.1
1:1181
Crescent Avenue in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County,
New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Cranbury Road at the
municipal boundary line of East Brunswick Township and South
Brunswick Township and from thence running:
1. Northerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road and the municipal
boundary line a distance of 1,950+ feet to the centerline of Old
Stage Road (a paper street); thence
2. Northeasterly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
2,650+ feet to the southerly line of lot 2 in block 573; thence
3. Southeasterly alone the southerly line of lot 2 in block 573, a
distance of 127+ feet to a point; thence
4. Southwesterly along the westerly line of lot 2 in block 573, a
distance of 210+ feet to a point; thence
5. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 2 in block 573, a
distance of 214+ feet to a point; thence
6. Northeasterly along the easterly line of lot 2 in block 573 a distance
of 400+ feet to a point; thence
7. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 2 in block 573 a
distance of 362+ feet to the centerline of Old Stage Road; thence
8. Northerly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
500+ feet to the southerly line of lot 3.01 in block 573; thence
9. Northeasterly along the southwesterly line of lot 3.01 in block 573,
a distance of 700+ feet to a point; thence
10. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 3.01 in block 573, a distance
of 1,182+ feet to a point; thence
11. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 3.01 in block 573, a
distance of 480+ feet to the centerline of Old Stage Road; thence
12. Northerly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
510+ feet to the southerly line of lot 4 in block 573; thence
13. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 4 in block 573, a
distance of 265+ feet to a point; thence
14. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 4 in block 573, a distance of
165+ feet to a point; thence
15. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 4 in block 573, a
distance of 265+ feet to the centerline of Old Stage Road; thence
16. Northeasterly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
205+ feet to the southerly line of lot 5.01 in block 573; thence
§ 228-266.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.1
1:1182
17. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 5.01 in block 573, a
distance of 325+ feet to a point; thence
18. Northeasterly along the easterly line of lot 5.01 in block 573, a
distance of 670+ feet to a point
19. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lots 5.01 and 7.01 in
block 573, a distance of 350+ feet to the centerline of Old Stage
Road; thence
20. Northeasterly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
420+ feet to the southerly line of lot 8 in block 573; thence
21. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 8 in block 573, a
distance of 577+ feet to a point; thence
22. Northeasterly along the easterly line of lots 8-10 in block 573, a
distance of 660+ feet to a point; thence
23. Northerly along the northerly line of lot 10 in block 573, a distance
of 565+ feet to the centerline of Old Stage Road; thence
24. Northeasterly along the centerline of Old Stage Road, a distance of
1,760+ feet to the southerly line of lot 11 in block 573; thence
25. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 11 in block 573, a
distance of 265+ feet to a point; thence
26. Northeasterly along the easterly line of lot 11 in block 573, a
distance of 237+ feet to the centerline of Crescent Avenue, the
municipal boundary line of East Brunswick Township and the
Borough of Spotswood; thence
27. Southeasterly along the centerline of Crescent Avenue, the
municipal boundary line of East Brunswick Township and the
Borough of Spotswood, a distance of 4,150+ feet to a point; thence
28. Southwesterly along the municipal boundary line of East
Brunswick Township and Borough of Spotswood, a distance of
4,425+ feet to a point; thence
29. Southeasterly along the above mentioned municipal boundary line,
a distance of 800+ feet to a point; thence
30. Southwesterly along the various courses of the municipal boundary
line of East Brunswick Township and the Borough of Helmetta, a
distance of 10,770+ feet to a point; thence
31. Northwesterly along the municipal boundary line of East
Brunswick Township and Monroe Township, a distance of 4,350+
feet to a point; thence
32. Northeasterly along the municipal boundary of East Brunswick
Township and South Brunswick Township, a distance of 3,450+ feet
§ 228-266.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.1
1:1183
§ 228-266.2. Creation of RP-3 Rural Preservation Low Density
Residential District. [Added 6-28-10 by Ord. No. 10-16]
The following designated areas presently zoned RP are hereby established
as the RP-3 Rural Preservation Low Density Residential District:
to the centerline of Cranbury Road, the point and place of
beginning.
A. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lots 31, and
32.11 in Block 307.12, to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue said point being
distant 100+ feet northerly from the intersection of the centerline of
Riva Avenue and the centerline of Starkin Road from thence running:
1. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 33 in block 307.12, a
distance of 133.54+ feet; thence
2. Northerly along the westerly line of lots 32, 32.07, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38 in block 307.12, a distance of 400+ feet; thence
3. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 32.12 in block 307.12, a
distance of 510+ feet; thence
4. Northerly along the westerly line of lot 32.12 in block 307.12, a
distance of 81+ feet; thence
5. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 32.12 in block 307.12 a
distance of 907.95+ feet; thence
6. Southerly along the easterly line of lot 1.01 in block 307.12 a
distance of 355.71+ feet; thence
7. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 1.01 in block 307.12 a
distance of 75+ feet; thence
8. Southeasterly along the easterly line of lot 1.01 in block 307.12 a
distance of 1312.25+ feet; thence
9. Easterly along the northerly line of lots 26.10, 42.01 and 48 in
block 307.10 and lots 44-46 in block 307.11 a distance of 619.8+
feet; thence
10. Northerly along the westerly line of lot 30 in block 307.11 a
distance of 25.56+ feet; thence
11. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 30 in block 307.11 a distance
of 125+ feet; thence
12. Northerly along the centerline of Riva Avenue 655+ feet to the
point and place of beginning.
§ 228-266.1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.2
1:1184
B. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lot 32.10 in
Block 307.12, to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue said point being
distant 550+ feet northerly from the intersection of the centerline of
Riva Avenue and the centerline of Starkin Road from thence running:
1. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 32.12 in block 307.12, a
distance of 438+ feet; thence
2. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 32.03 in block 307.12, a
distance of 60+ feet; thence
3. Northeasterly along the southerly line of lot 32.04 in block 307.12,
a distance of 480.38+ feet; thence
4. Southerly along the centerline of Riva Avenue distance of 263.33+
feet to the point and place of beginning.
C. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lot 57.01 in
Block 310 to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue and said point
being distant 285+ feet northerly from the intersection of the
centerline of Riva Avenue and the centerline of Oakmont Avenue from
thence running:
1. Southeasterly along the southeasterly line of lot 57.03 in block 310,
a distance of 530+ feet; thence
2. Southwesterly along the westerly line of lot 6 in block 310.03, a
distance of 554.18+ feet; thence
3. Southeasterly along the southerly line of lot 7 in block 310.03, a
distance of 181.9+ feet; thence
4. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 58 in block 310, a distance
of 869.4+ feet; thence
5. Southwesterly along the westerly line of lot 67 in block 310, a
distance 239.22+ feet; thence
6. Northwesterly along the northwesterly line of lots 54.01, 54.02,
54.06, 54.07, 55, and 84 in block 310, a distance of 1037.52+ feet;
thence
7. Northeasterly along the southwesterly line of lots 55 and 56 in
block 310, a distance 600 +/- feet to the centerline of Riva Avenue;
thence
8. Northwesterly along the centerline of Riva Avenue 1197.8+ feet to
the point of beginning.
§ 228-266.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.2
1:1185
D. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lots 16.12,
16.13, 17 and 18.021 in Block 309.04 to be rezoned RP-3, property
situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue and said point
being distant 280.4+ feet easterly from the intersection of the
centerline of Riva Avenue and the centerline of Patrick Street Road
from thence running:
1. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 16.03 in block 309.04, a
distance of 396.14+ feet; thence
2. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 16.03 in block 309.04, a
distance of 108.7+ feet; thence
3. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 15 in block 309.04, a
distance of 50+ feet; thence
4. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 15 in block 309.04, a
distance of 170+ feet; thence
5. Northerly along the centerline of Patrick Street, a distance of 50+
feet; thence
6. Westerly along the northerly line of the Patrick Street right-of-way
and lot 14.01 in block 309.04, a distance of 147.10+/- feet; thence
7. Northerly along the easterly line of lots 21 and 22.01 in block
309.04, a distance of 242.33+ feet; thence
8. Northwesterly along the northerly line of lot 21 in block 309.04 and
the Lennecke Lane right-of-way, a distance of 235.95+/- feet;
thence
9. Northerly along the centerline of Lennecke Lane, a distance of
32.61+ feet; thence
10. Easterly along the southerly line of lot 8.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 120+ feet; thence
11. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 8.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 140+ feet; thence
12. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 8.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 120+ feet; thence
13. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 8.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 205.34+ feet; thence
14. Northeasterly along the southerly line of lot 1.03 in block 309.04, a
distance of 1074.16+ feet; thence
§ 228-266.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.2
1:1186
15. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 19.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 985.6+ feet; thence
16. Westerly along the northerly line of lot 18.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 131.04+ feet; thence
17. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 18.01 in block 309.04, a
distance of 315.71+ feet; thence
18. Westerly along the centerline of Riva Avenue 248.17+ feet to the
point and place of beginning.
E. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lots 23 and
24 in Block 310 to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township
of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue and said point
being distant 140.60+/- feet northeasterly from the intersection of the
centerline of Riva Avenue and the centerline of Paul Street from thence
running:
1. Northeasterly along the centerline of Riva Avenue, a distance of
150 + feet; thence
2. Southeasterly along the northwesterly line of lot 25 in block 310, a
distance of 250+ feet; thence
3. Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of lot 25 in block 310, a
distance of 25+ feet; thence
4. Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of lot 28 in block 310, a
distance of 341.85+ feet; thence
5. Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of lots 28 and 29 in block
310, a distance of 250+ feet; thence
6. Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of lots 33.01, 35.01 and
35.02 in block 310, a distance of 697.66+ feet; thence
7. Southwesterly along the northerly line of lot 11 in block 310, a
distance of 595.68+ feet; thence
8. Westerly along the northwesterly line of lot 11 in block 310, a
distance of 36+ feet; thence
9. Northwesterly along the northeasterly line of lot 13 in block 310, a
distance of 485.1+ feet; thence
10. Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of the Paul Street rightof
way, a distance of 20+/- feet; thence
11. Northwesterly along the centerline of Paul Street, a distance of
202.23+ feet; thence
§ 228-266.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-266.2
1:1187
12. Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of lot 22 in block 310, a
distance of 140.60+ feet; thence
13. Northwesterly along the northeasterly line of lots 22, 21.03, 21.02
and 21.01 in block 310, a distance of 591.85+ feet, the point and
place of beginning.
F. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lot 16.01 in
Block 312 to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Church Lane and said point
being distant 824.66+/- feet northwesterly from the intersection of the
centerline of Church Lane and the centerline of Fresh Ponds Road from
thence running:
1. Southwesterly along the northwesterly line of lot 17.01 in block
312, a distance of 535.1+ feet; thence
2. Northwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot 16.02 in block
312, a distance of 552.56+ feet; thence
3. Northeasterly along the southwesterly line of lot 14 in block 312, a
distance of 210+ feet; thence
4. Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of lot 15 in block 312, a
distance of 70+ feet; thence
5. Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of lot 15, block 312, a
distance of 324.4+ feet to the centerline of Church Lane; thence
6. Southeasterly along the centerline of Church Lane 484.4+ feet to
the point and place of beginning.
G. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lot 2 in Block
310 to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Church Lane and said point
being distant 465.60+/- feet northwesterly from the intersection of the
centerline of Church Lane and the centerline of Fresh Ponds Road from
thence running:
1. Northeasterly along the northwesterly line of lots 1.02, 1.04, 1.11
and 1.12 in block 310, a distance of 864.6+ feet; thence
2. Northwesterly along the southerly line of lot 81 in block 310, a
distance of 582.12+ feet; thence
3. Southwesterly along the southwesterly line of lot 3 in block 310, a
distance of 864.6+ feet to the centerline of Church Lane; thence
4. Southeasterly along the centerline of Church Lane 583.4+ feet to
the point and place of beginning.
§ 228-266.2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-266.2
1:1188
§ 228-267. Additions to the R-2 Single-Family Suburban Residence
District.
H. Description of Lands Presently Zoned R-P known as all of Lot 22.06 in
Block 316.01 to be rezoned RP-3, property situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dutch Road and said point
being distant 1475+/- feet southerly from the intersection of the
centerline of Dutch Road and the centerline of Hidden Pond Court from
thence running:
1. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 22.01 in block 316.01, a
distance of 377.98+ feet; thence
2. Southerly along the easterly line of lot 12.22 in block 316.01, a
distance of 499.67+ feet; thence
3. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 12.22 in block 316.01, a
distance of 500+ feet; thence
4. Southerly along the easterly line of lot 7.03 in block 316.01, a
distance of 1228.26+ feet; thence
5. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 6.02 in block 316.01, a
distance of 1154.97+ feet; thence
6. Northerly along the westerly line of lots 23.10 and 27 in block
316.01, a distance of 800.58+ feet; thence
7. Westerly along the southerly line of lot 23.10 in block 316.01, a
distance of 537,8+ feet; thence
8. Northerly along the westerly line of lots 23.10 and 23.04 in block
316.01, a distance of 627+ feet; thence
9. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 23.04 in block 316.01, a
distance of 412.51 feet; thence
10. Northerly along the northerly line of lot 23.04 in block 316.01, a
distance of 169.73+ feet to the centerline of Dutch Road; thence
11. Northerly along the centerline of Dutch Road 190+ feet to the point
and place of beginning.
A. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-2 from C-2.
[Added 9-14-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-QQQ; repealed 9-26-77 by Ord.
No. 77-8-SSS]
B. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-2 from P-I.
§ 228-266.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-267
1:1189
Beginning at the center line intersection of Cranbury Road and
Lexington Avenue; thence: [Added 9-14-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-QQQ]
(1) In a southerly direction along the various courses of the center line
of Lexington Avenue a distance of 1,840 feet, plus or minus, to a
point opposite the division line of Lots 25.01 and 29.01 in Block
322, prolonged to the center line; thence
(2) In an easterly direction along said division line a distance of 430
feet, plus or minus, to the northeast corner of Lot 26.01; thence
(3) In a southerly direction along the easterly property line of Lot
26.01 a distance of 278.93 feet to the northerly line of Lexington
Avenue; thence
(4) In an easterly direction along the northerly line of Lexington
Avenue and its prolongation a distance of 1,370 feet, plus or minus,
to a point in the westerly outline of a certain filed map known as
"Oak Crest Estates, Section 3"; thence
(5) In a northerly direction along the westerly outline of the above
mentioned filed map a distance of 630 feet, plus or minus, to the
northwest corner of Lot 18.03 in Block 322; thence
(6) In an easterly direction along the northerly line of Lot 18.03 a
distance of 250 feet, plus or minus; thence
(7) In a northerly direction across Lot 29.01 and along the westerly
line of Lot 16 a distance of 700 feet, plus or minus; thence
(8) In an easterly direction along the northerly line of Lot 16 a distance
of 1,260 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of New Brunswick
Avenue; thence
(9) In a northerly direction along the center line of New Brunswick
Avenue a distance of 1,070 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite
the division line of Lots 8.21 and 15.01; thence
(10) In a westerly direction along the said division line and the southerly
line of Lot 13.04 a distance of 562.03 feet; thence
(11) In a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lots 13.04 and
8.22 a distance of 1,058.87 feet to the southwest corner of Lot
10.01; thence
(12) In a westerly direction along the southerly line of Lot 10.01 and Lot
27 a distance of 550.27 feet; thence
(13) In a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 27 a distance
of 392.42 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 8.14; thence
(14) In a southwesterly direction along the rear of Lots 8.14 and 8.17 a
distance of 367.73 feet; thence
§ 228-267 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-267
1:1190
(15) In a northwesterly direction along the westerly line of Lot 8.17 a
distance of 200 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Cranbury
Road; thence
(16) Along the center line of Cranbury Road in a southwesterly direction
a distance of 77.08 feet to the northeasterly corner of Lot 8.15;
thence
(17) In a southeasterly direction along the easterly line of Lot 8.16 a
distance of 235 feet; thence
(18) In a southwesterly direction along the rear of Lot 8.16 a distance of
276.20 feet; thence
(19) In a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 8.16 a
distance of 300.51 feet to the center line of Cranbury Road; thence
(20) In a southwesterly direction along the center line of Cranbury Road
a distance of 2,120 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of
Lexington Avenue, the point of beginning.
C. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-2 from P-I.
Beginning at a point in the northerly side of the terminus of Lexington
Avenue, and from thence running: [Added 2-27-78 by Ord. No
78-228-B]
(1) In an easterly direction along the prolongation of the northerly line
of Lexington Avenue a distance of 1,200 feet, plus or minus, to a
point in the westerly outline of a certain filed map known as "Oak
Crest Estates, Section 3"; thence
(2) In a southerly direction along the westerly outline of the above
mentioned filed map a distance of 1,730 feet, plus or minus, to the
center line of Old Stage Road; thence
(3) In a westerly direction along the center line of Old Stage Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,650 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Fern Road; thence
(4) In a northerly direction along the center line of Fern Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,150 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Cranbury Road; thence
(5) In an easterly direction along the center line of Cranbury Road a
distance of 630 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the easterly
line of Lot 1.12 in Block 322; thence
(6) In a southerly direction and along the easterly line of Lot 1.12 a
distance of 1,150 feet, plus or minus, to a point; thence
§ 228-267 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-267
1:1191
(7) In a northerly direction along lands belonging to Indian Forest,
Inc., a distance of 96.79 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(8) Continuing in an easterly direction along the last mentioned lands a
distance of 217.80 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(9) Still along said last mentioned lands in a northerly direction a
distance of 95.00 feet to a point in the southerly line of Lot 2.01 in
Block 322.06; thence
(10) In an easterly direction along the last mentioned line a distance of
320 feet to a point in the westerly line of Lot 3.01 in Block 322.06;
thence
(11) In a southerly direction along the last mentioned Lot 3.01 a
distance of 188 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(12) In an easterly direction and along said Lot 3.01 and along Lot 4 a
distance of 460.17 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(13) In an easterly direction along said Lot 4 and along the southerly
line of Lot 5 a distance of 432.95 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(14) In a northerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 5 and along
the easterly terminus of Lexington Avenue (60 feet wide) to a point
in the northerly side of said easterly terminus of Lexington Avenue
a distance of 460 feet to the point of beginning.
D. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-2. Beginning at
the center line intersection of Fern Road with the center line of Irelands
Brook and from thence running: [Added 3-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-2]
(1) In an easterly direction along the center line of Irelands Brook to its
intersection with the westerly line of Lot 22 in Block 806; thence
(2) In a southerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 22 in Block
806 and Lot 18.01 in Block 319 a distance of 1,520 feet, plus or
minus, to the center line of Fern Road; thence
(3) In a westerly and northerly direction along the center line of Fern
Road a distance of 1,740 feet, plus or minus, to the intersection of
the center line of Irelands Brook, the point of beginning.
E. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-2. Beginning at a
point in the northerly side of the terminus of Lexington Avenue, and
from thence running: [Added 3-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-2]
(1) In an easterly direction along the prolongation of the northerly line
of Lexington Avenue a distance of 1,200 feet, plus or minus, to a
§ 228-267 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-267
1:1192
§ 228-268. Additions to the R-3 Single Family Residence District.
[Amended 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61; 3-26-01 by Ord. No. 01-16;
9-27-10 by Ord. No 10-22]
point in the westerly outline of a certain filed map known as "Oak
Crest Estates, Section 3"; thence
(2) In a southerly direction along the westerly outline of the above
mentioned filed map a distance of 1,730 feet, plus or minus, to the
center line of Old Stage Road; thence
(3) In a westerly direction along the center line of Old Stage Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,650 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Fern Road; thence
(4) In a northerly direction along the center line of Fern Road, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 3,150 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of Cranbury Road; thence
(5) In an easterly direction along the center line of Cranbury Road a
distance of 630 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the easterly
line of Lot 1.12 in Block 322; thence
(6) In a southerly direction and along the easterly line of Lot 1.12 a
distance of 1,150 feet, plus or minus, to a point; thence
(7) In a northerly direction along lands belonging to Indian Forest,
Inc., a distance of 96.79 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(8) Continuing in an easterly direction along the last mentioned lands a
distance of 217.80 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(9) Still along said last mentioned lands in a northerly direction a
distance of 95.00 feet to a point in the southerly line of Lot 2.01 in
Block 322.06; thence
(10) In an easterly direction along the last mentioned line a distance of
320 feet to a point in the westerly line of Lot 3.01 in Block 322.06;
thence
(11) In a southerly direction along the last mentioned Lot 3.01 a
distance of 188 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(12) In an easterly direction and along said Lot 3.01 and along Lot 4 a
distance of 460.17 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(13) In an easterly direction along said Lot 4 and along the southerly
line of Lot 5 a distance of 432.95 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(14) In a northerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 5 and along
the easterly terminus of Lexington Avenue (60 feet wide) to a point
in the northerly side of said easterly terminus of Lexington Avenue
a distance of 460 feet to the point of beginning.
§ 228-267 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-268
1:1193
A. The R-3 Single-Family Residence District as shown on the Zoning Map
of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
hereby rezoned to R-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added 10-28-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-S]
(1) M-2 to R-3 Zone. Beginning in the center line of Ellison Avenue said
point being 225 feet southerly from the center line intersection of
Sawmill Place and Ellison Avenue; thence
(a) Easterly along the southerly line of Lot 175B in Block 17 as
shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township a distance
of 200 feet to a point; thence
(b) Southerly and parallel to the center line of Ellison Avenue a
distance of 393 feet to a point; thence
(c) Southwesterly a distance of 237.71 feet, more or less, to a
point; thence
(d) Westerly a distance of 150 feet to the center line of Ellison
Avenue said course being perpendicular to Ellison Avenue;
thence
(e) Northerly along the center line of Ellison Avenue a distance of
150 feet to the center line of Milton Avenue; thence
(f) Easterly along the center line of Milton Avenue a distance of
100 feet to the center line of Ellison Avenue; thence
(g) Northerly along the center line of Ellison Avenue a distance of
425 feet to the place of beginning.
(2) P-I to R-3 Zone. Beginning at a point in the center line of Manton
Avenue said point being 1,075 feet easterly along the said center
line of Manton Avenue from its intersection with the center line of
Ainsworth Avenue; thence
(a) Southerly and at right angles to Manton Avenue 205 feet, more
or less, to a point; thence
(b) Easterly and parallel to the center line of Manton Avenue 50
feet to a point; thence
(c) Northerly and parallel to the first course 205 feet, more or less,
to a point in the center line of Manton Avenue; thence
(d) Westerly, along said center line of Manton Avenue 50 feet to
the point of beginning.
B. The R-3 Single-Family Residence District as shown on the Zoning Map
of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
§ 228-268 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-268
1:1194
hereby rezoned to R-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added 11-25-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-T]
(1) R-2 to R-3. Beginning at the southwesterly corner of Lot 3 in Block
720 as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township at the
northerly right-of-way line of Cranbury Road; thence
(a) Westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of Cranbury
Road and Dunhams Corner Road the several courses a distance
of 5,000 feet, more or less, to the southeasterly corner of Lot
39 in Block 738-A as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick
Township; thence
(b) Northerly along the westerly line of the filed map of Greenfield
Homes, Section 2, as filed in the Middlesex County Clerk's
office a distance of 1,752.56 feet to a point at the northwesterly
corner of Lot 15 in Block 738-D as shown on the Tax Map of
East Brunswick Township; thence
(c) Along the northerly line of the existing R-2 Zone as shown on
the Zoning Map of East Brunswick Township Revised July 17,
1967, a distance of 3,300 feet, more or less, to the center line
of the Saw Mill Brook; thence.
(d) Southerly along the center line of the Saw Mill Brook 800 feet
more or less to the place of beginning.
C. The R-3 Single-Family Residence District as shown on the Zoning Map
of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
hereby rezoned to R-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added 12-23-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-U]
(1) C-2 and R-3 to R-3. All of Lots 1, 2, 17 and 18 in Block 175T as
shown and described on the Tax Map of the Township of East
Brunswick.
(2) R-2 to R-3. Beginning at the center line of the intersections of Old
Stage Road and New Brunswick Avenue and continuing; thence
(a) Northerly along the center line of New Brunswick Avenue a
distance of approximately 2,740 feet to the extension of the
northerly property line of Lot 16, Block 322; thence
(b) Along the northerly property line of aforementioned Lot 16,
Block 322, approximately 1,260 feet to the rear northwesterly
corner of said Lot 16; thence
(c) Southerly along the property line of Lots 16 and 17, Block 322,
a distance of approximately 696 feet; thence
§ 228-268 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-268
1:1195
(d) Westerly a distance of approximately 248 feet along the
northerly property line of Lot 18 C, Block 322, to a point in the
property line of Lot 25, Block 322; thence
(e) Southerly along the various courses of said Lot 25 a distance of
approximately 1,190 feet to a point representing the common
corner of said Lot 25 and Lot 21A-1, Block 322; thence
(f) Westerly approximately 250 feet along the common property
line between aforementioned Lots 25 and 21A-1 to a point;
thence
(g) Southerly approximately 1,260 feet to a point in the center line
of Old Stage Road; thence
(h) Easterly along the center line of Old Stage Road a distance of
approximately 1,900 feet to the center line intersection of Old
Stage Road and New Brunswick Avenue to the point or place of
beginning.
Being and intended to be the land which is located in the
northwest quadrant of the intersection of Old Stage Road and
New Brunswick Avenue and which was zoned R-2 on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick, dated August
22, 1966.
D. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-3 from C-2.
Beginning at the center line intersection of Ryders Lane with Cranbury
Road and from thence running: [Added 9-14-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-QQQ]
(1) In a westerly direction along the center line of Ryders Lane a
distance of 600 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the division
line of Lots 12.03 and 12.14 in Block 319 prolonged to the center
line; thence
(2) Along said division line in a southerly direction a distance of 200
feet, plus or minus, to a point; thence
(3) In an easterly direction and parallel to the center line of Ryders
Lane a distance of 420 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of
Cranbury Road; thence
(4) In a northeasterly direction along the center line of Cranbury Road
a distance of 270 feet, plus or minus, to the center line intersection
of Ryders Lane, the point of beginning.
E. The M-1 Research and Limited Manufacturing District as shown on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to
delete the following described land which is hereby rezoned to R-3
Single-Family Residence District. Beginning at the point of intersection
§ 228-268 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-268
1:1196
of the center line of the New Jersey Turnpike and the municipal
boundary line of the Township of East Brunswick and South Brunswick
Township; thence: [Added 3-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-2]
(1) In a northerly direction along the center line of the New Jersey
Turnpike a distance of 11,860 feet, plus or minus, to the
intersection of the municipal boundary line of the Borough of
Milltown and the prolongation of Lot 55 in Block 317.13; thence
(2) Southeasterly along the prolongation of the westerly line of Lot 55
in Block 317.13 and along the said westerly line a distance of 840
feet, plus or minus, to a corner of Lot 4.06; thence
(3) Northeasterly along the northerly line of Lot 4.06 a distance of
522.80 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(4) Southeasterly along the easterly line of Lot 4.06 a distance of 260
feet, plus or minus, to the existing M-1 Zone line; thence
(5) Southwesterly along the present M-1 Zone line distant 1,000 feet at
right angles from and parallel to the center line of the New Jersey
Turnpike a distance of 4,660 feet, plus or minus, to a point in the
northerly outline of "Colonial Oaks West Northerly Portion, Section
Four"; thence
(6) In a southwesterly direction along the last mentioned lands a
distance of 540 feet, plus or minus, to a point in the northerly
outline of Petty Farms, Section 2; thence
(7) In a northwesterly direction along the last mentioned lands a
distance of 643.03 feet to a point in the easterly line of the New
Jersey Turnpike right-of-way; thence
(8) Southwesterly along the easterly line of the New Jersey Turnpike a
distance of 748.16 feet to a corner of Petty Farms, Section 2; thence
(9) In a southeasterly direction along the westerly outline of Petty
Farms, Section 2 and Section 1, along the various courses thereof,
a distance of 2,570 feet to a point in the center line of Dunhams
Corner Road; thence
(10) In a southerly direction along the center line of Dunhams Corner
Road, the various courses thereof, 3,350 feet, plus or minus, to the
intersection of Irelands Brook, the municipal boundary line of
South Brunswick with East Brunswick Township; thence
(11) In a westerly direction along the center line of Irelands Brook the
municipal boundary line, a distance of 1,525 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line of the New Jersey Turnpike, the point of beginning.
F. Description of land belonging to East Mill Associates proposed for
Single Family Residential Zoning, property situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. Beginning at the point
§ 228-268 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-268
1:1197
of intersection of the easterly line of Ryders Lane with the
southwesterly line of lands of the Raritan River Railroad Company and
running thence: [Added 11-10-86 by Ord. No. 86-792; amended
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
1. Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of said lands on a curve
to the left having a radius of 2,897.03 feet, an arc distance of
1,120.136 feet to a point of tangent; thence
2. Still along the lands of said Raritan River Railroad Company
S67°-01'-38"E, a distance of 895.42 feet to a corner of lands of East
Brunswick Township; thence
3. Along said last mentioned lands S06°-20-15"W, a distance of 521.85
feet to a point in the northerly line of Lot 32 in Block 631 as shown
on a certain map filed in the Middlesex County Clerk's Office on
December 18, 1952 entitled "Map of Country Lane Homes, Section
3, situated in East Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, New
Jersey", Scale: 1"=50', dated November 8, 1952; thence
4. N67°-01'-38"W along lands designated on said map as Block 631 a
distance of 714.13 feet to the northeasterly corner of Lot 20 in
Block 631 as shown on said map; thence
5. N22°-58'-22"E, a distance of 10 feet to a point; thence
6. N67°-01'-38"W parallel with and distant 10 feet northerly as
measured at right angles from the northerly line of said lands
known as "Country Lane Homes, Section 3", a distance of 330.68
feet to a point of curve; thence
7. Northwesterly curving to the right with a radius of 3,387.93 feet
concentric with and distant 10 feet northeasterly as measured
radially from the northerly line of lands known as "Country Lane
Homes, Section 3" and the northerly line of lands known as
"Country Lane Homes, Section 4" a distance of 815.91 feet to the
easterly line of lands of East Brunswick Sewer Utility; thence
[Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
8. Along said easterly line of said lands N6°-25'-20"E, a distance of
72.94 feet to a point and corner; thence
9. Along the northerly line of said lands of East Brunswick Sewer
Utility N83° 34' 40"W, a distance of 100 feet to the easterly line of
Ryders Lane; thence [Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
10. Along the same N6°-25'-20"E, a distance of 589.003 feet to the
point and place of beginning.
Being also known as Lot 7.18 in Block 84 as shown on the official
tax map for the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County,
New Jersey.
§ 228-268 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-268
1:1198
G. Description Of Lands Presently Zoned P-I To Be Rezoned R-3, (Smith
Farm) Property Known As Portion Of Lots 1, 2.01, 2.03, & 11.01 In
Block 58 Situated In The Township Of East Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey.
All that portion of Block 58, Lots 1, 2.01, 2.03, 11.01 excepting the
following:
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Milltown Road and Harts
Lane and from thence running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Northerly along the centerline of Harts Lane, a distance of 150
feet; thence
2. Easterly and parallel to Milltown Road distant 150 feet therefrom
to the division line between lots 11.01 and 11.03, a distance of
approximately 2930 feet; thence
3. Southerly along the westerly line of lot 11.01 a distance of 150 feet
to the centerline of Milltown Road; thence
4. Westerly along the centerline of Milltown Road a distance of
approximately 2930 feet to the centerline intersection of Harts
Lane the point of beginning.
H. Lots 2.04 & 9 in Block 58 (Smith Farm) are rezoned from P-I to R-3, in
accordance with the Master Plan adopted on 4-4-90. [Added 11-19-90
by Ord. No. 90-61]
I. Description of Lands Presently Zoned OP-1 and Known As Lot 4.02 In
Block 85 to Be Rezoned R-3, Property Situated In The Township of East
Brunswick Middlesex County, New Jersey Description of Lands
Presently Zoned OP-1 To Be Rezoned R-3, Property Situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the northeasterly side of Milltown Road, said
point being the property line between Lots 4.02 and 3.10 on the official
Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick and thence; running
[Added 3-26-01 by Ord. No. 01-16]
1. S55°-32'E 16.52 feet along the northeasterly side of Milltown Road
to an angle point in said road; thence
2. S45°-30'E 55.67 feet along the northeasterly side of Milltown Road
to another angle point in said road; thence
3. S42°-32'E 37.81 feet along the northeasterly side of Milltown Road
to a point; thence
4. N47°-28'E 126.00 feet to a point; thence
5. S62°-08'-40"E 71.44 feet to a point; thence
6. S40°-27'-50"E 177.81 feet to a point; thence
§ 228-268 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-268
1:1199
§ 228-269. Additions to the R 4 General Residence District.
§ 228-269.1. Creation of R-5 Residence District. [Added 11-25-96 by
Ord. No. 96-39]
The following designated areas are hereby established as the R-5 Residence
District.
7. N4°-44'-30"E 211.54 feet and parallel with Ryders Lane to a point;
thence
8. N85°-15'-30"W 316.61 feet to a point; thence
9. S34°-28'W 95.73 feet to the northeasterly side of Milltown Road the
point and place of beginning.
Containing 0.94 Acres
J. Description of lands presently zoned both C-1 and R-3 in Block 132.04
and known as Lot 2 to be rezoned to be entirely within the R-3 zone,
property situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County,
New Jersey. [Added 11-23-15 Ord. 15-31]
K. Description of lands presently zoned P-I, OP-1, or C-3 in Block 317.17,
Lots 17-19, 24-32, Block 317.29, Lots 1-14, Block 317.13, Lots 21.10,
30-34, 35.01, 36.04, 36.06, Block 317.34, Lots 26-28, Block 85, Lots
4.07, 3.10, 3.11, 3.06, 29, 3.13, Block 795, Lots 12, 23, 27 & 28 to be
rezoned to be entirely within the R-3 zone, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
A. The Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby amended
by changing from the C-3 District to the R-4 District the following
described property in the Township of East Brunswick, notwithstanding
the fact that the boundaries are not presently shown on the Zoning
Map: [Added 5-23-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-NNN]
1. C-3 to R-4. Beings all of Lots 1.01 and 24 in Block 117 and Lots 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and
28 in Block 675 as shown on the official Tax Map of the Township of
East Brunswick.
A. Lands presently zoned R-1 are rezoned R-5; property known as lots
10.04, 10.05, 10.06, 10.07 and portion of 11.01 in Block 321 as further
described below.
Being Lots 10.04, 10.05, 10.6, 10.07 and portion of 11.01 in Block 321.
Said lot and block as shown on the current tax assessment maps of East
Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey, Sheet No. 79.
Beginning at the intersection formed by the centerline of Cranbury
Road, (a.k.a. County Route 535), with the centerline of Fern Road;
thence running
§ 228-268 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-269.1
1:1200
§ 228-270. Additions to the O-1 Office, Professional and Apartment
District.
None.
§ 228-271. Additions to the C-1 Professional and Office District.
None.
§ 228-272. Additions to the C-2 Neighborhood Business District.
[Amended 10-19-98 by Ord. No. 98-25; 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-3]
1. S. 33 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds E., along said centerline of
Fern Road 1797.60 feet to a point; thence
2. S. 27 degrees 34 minutes 35 seconds E., still along said centerline
of Fern Road 245.37 feet to a point; thence
3. S. 62 degrees 25 minutes 25 seconds W. through Lot 11.01 Block
321, and along a new line, 170.00 feet to a point; thence
4. N. 27 degrees 34 minutes 35 seconds W., continuing along said new
line 125.89 feet to a point; thence
5. S. 80 degrees 56 minutes 20 seconds W., continuing along said new
line, 188.12 feet to a point; thence
6. S. 09 degrees 03 minutes 40 seconds E., continuing along said new
line 130.00 feet to a point; thence
7. S. 24 degrees 49 minutes 44 seconds E., continuing along said new
line 194.63 feet to a point on the division line between Lots 11.01
and 28.03, Block 321; thence
8. S. 65 degrees 10 minutes 16 seconds W., 660.31 feet to a point;
thence
9. N. 17 degrees 53 minutes 32 seconds W., 256.60 feet to a point;
thence
10. N. 57 degrees 09 minutes 53 seconds E., 603.24 feet to a point;
thence
11. N. 53 degrees 18 minutes 08 seconds W., 1547.25 feet to a point in
the aforementioned centerline of Cranbury Road; thence
12. N. 36 degrees 41 minutes 52 seconds E., along said centerline of
Cranbury Road 992.88 feet to the point and place of BEGINNING.
A. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District located at the southwest
corner of Rues Lane and Summerhill Road is hereby redescribed and
enlarged to include the following described land in the Township of East
§ 228-269.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-272
1:1201
Brunswick, notwithstanding the fact that this area is described in a
different manner on the Zoning Map.
Beginning at the northeasterly corner of Lot 22 in Block 74 as shown
on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township being the intersection of
the southerly right-of-way line of Rues Lane and the westerly right-ofway
line of Summerhill Road; thence: [Added 11-25-68 by Ord. No.
68-8-T]
(1) Southerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Summerhill Road
the several courses a distance of 461 feet to the northeasterly
corner of Lot 3 in Block 741 as shown on the Tax Map of East
Brunswick Township; thence
(2) Westerly along the northerly line of said Lot 3 a distance of 150 feet
to the northwesterly lot corner of the said Lot 3; thence
(3) Northerly along the easterly lines of Lots 13, 14, 19 and 20 in said
Block 741 the several courses a distance of 278.75 feet; thence
(4) Westerly along a northerly line of said Lot 20 a distance of 20 feet
to a point; thence
(5) Northerly along an easterly line of Lot 21 a distance of 200 feet to
the southerly right-of-way line of Rues Lane; thence
(6) Easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Rues Lane a
distance of 182 feet to the place of beginning.
Also known and designated at Block 741, Lots 1, 2, 22 and 23
as shown and described on the Tax Map of the Township of East
Brunswick.
B. Description of lands presently zoned OP-l, known as that portion of Lot
1.01 and all of Lot 3 in Block 323, to be rezoned to C-2, property
situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Old Stage Road (a paper
street), said point being distant 450 + feet northeasterly from the
centerline intersection of Cranbury Road and from thence running:
[Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-583]
1. Northeasterly through lot l.10 and along the rear lot lines of lots
1.04, 1.01, 1.07, 1.08 and 1.05 to the southerly line of lot 2.02;
thence
2. Southeasterly and northeasterly along the rear of lot 2.02, a
distance of 230 + feet to the centerline of Helmetta Boulevard;
thence
§ 228-272 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-272
1:1202
3. Southeasterly and along the centerline of Helmetta Boulevard, a
distance of 700 + feet to the centerline intersection of Old Stage
Road (a paper street); thence
4. Easterly along the various courses of the centerline of Old Stage
Road (a paper street), a distance of 1050 + feet to a point in the
centerline of Old Stage Road which is distant 450 + feet
northeasterly from the centerline of Cranbury Road, the point of
beginning.
Containing 7 + Acres
C. Description of lands presently zoned P-1 to be rezoned C-2, property
known as Lots 1 and 2 in Block 322.05 situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Cranbury Road and
Lexington Avenue and from thence running: [Added 12-22-86 by Ord.
No. 86-813]
1. Southeasterly along the centerline of Lexington Avenue a distance
of 780'+ to a point opposite the division line of Lots 2 and 3 in Block
322.05 as shown on the official tax map for the Township of East
Brunswick, thence
2. Westerly and along said division line a distance of 430'+ to the
easterly line of Lot 21 in Block 322.10, thence
3. Northerly along said Lot 21 and the westerly line of Lots 1 and 2 a
distance of 600'+ to the centerline of Cranbury Road, thence
4. Northeasterly along the centerline of Cranbury Road a distance of
65'+ to the centerline intersection of Lexington Avenue, the point
of beginning.
D. Description of Lands presently zoned RP to be rezoned C-2, property
known as Lots 37 and 38 in Block 307.12 situated in the Township of
East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Riva Avenue, said point being
distant 790+ feet southwesterly from the centerline of Lawrence Brook,
the municipal boundary line between the Borough of Milltown and the
Township of East Brunswick and from thence running: [Added 2-14-89
by Ord. No. 89-991]
1. Southwesterly along the centerline of Riva Avenue, a distance of
100+ feet; thence
2. Northwesterly and along the division line of Lots 36 and 37 in Block
307.12, a distance of 142+ feet; thence
3. Northeasterly along the rear of Lots 37 and 38, a distance of 100+
feet; thence
§ 228-272 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-272
1:1203
4. Southeasterly along the northerly line of Lot 38, a distance of 142+
feet to the centerline of Riva Avenue, the point of beginning
E. The Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is Hereby Amended
By Changing The Following Property On Main Street From I/M To C-2:
Lots 1-12, 17, 18.01, 18.02, 19-21, 22.01, 22.02, 23, 24, 30-33, 39, 40,
and 41 in Block 150. [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
F. Description of lands presently zoned R-2 to be rezoned C-2, a portion of
property known as Lot 1 in Block 87.33
Beginning at a point, said point being a rebar with cap at the
intersection of Ryders Lane (130.43 from centerline) and Cranbury
Road (47.50' from centerline) and running thence; [Added 10-19-98
by Ord. No. 98-25]:
1. S44°-55'-00"W 347.89' along the westerly right-of-way line of
Cranbury Road (47-50' from centerline) to a point; thence
2. S46°-20'-56"W 120.04' along the westerly right-of-way line of
Cranbury Road to a point; thence
3. S44°-55'-00"W 265.00' along the westerly right-of-way line of
Cranbury Road (50.50' from centerline) to a point, said point being
a rebar with cap; thence
4. N45°-05'-00"W 5.00' to a point, said point being a rebar with cap;
thence
5. S44°-55'-00"W 26.34' along the westerly right-of-way line of
Cranbury Road (55.50' from centerline) to a point of curve, said
point being a rebar with cap; thence
6. Westerly on a curve to the right having a radius of 90.00', an arc
length of 77.11' to a point, said point being a rebar with cap; thence
7. N85°-59'-42"W 301.38' along the northerly right-of-way line of
Rues Lane to a point, said point being a rebar with cap; thence
8. S04°-00'-33"W 12.04' to a point in the northerly line of Rues Lane
(16.50' from centerline) to a point; thence
9. N86°-42'-30"W 232.97' along the northerly right-of-way line of
Rues Lane (16.50' from centerline) to a point; thence
10. N13°-14'-57"E 702.35' along a new line being established thru
lands of Kelemen Kelemen, et als to a point in the southerly right-ofway
line of Ryders Lane (44' from centerline); thence
11. N71°-30'-38" E 253.09' along the southerly right-of-way line of
Ryders Lane (44' from centerline) to a point of curve, said point
being a rebar with cap; thence
§ 228-272 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-272
1:1204
§ 228-273. Additions to the C-3 General Commercial District.
12. Easterly on a curve to the right having a radius of 806.00' and arc
length of 749.41' along said southerly right-of-way line of Ryders
Lane (44.00' from centerline) to a point, said point being a rebar
with cap; thence
13. S55°-12'-59"E 28.61' along the southerly right-of-way line of Ryders
Lane (44.00' from centerline) to a point of curve, said point being a
P.K. nail; thence
14. Easterly on a curve to the right having of radius of 65.00' an arc
length of 48.63' to a point of compound curve; thence
15. Southerly on a curve to the right having a radius of 76.00' an arc
length of 75.97 to a rebar with cap, the point of beginning.
Containing 15.21 Acres of Land
Being shown on a certain plan entitled Plan of Survey, Kelemen
Kelemen & Veronica h/w and Stephen Kelemen, single, Block 87
Lot 1.01 & Block 87.33 Lot 1" dated July 14, 1998 and prepared by
John D. Bergler, P.L.S.
G. Description of Lands to be Re-Zoned to Neighborhood Business Zone
and known as Lots 1.03, 1.05 and 1.06 in Block 314.02 Property
Situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey.
BEGINNING at a point in the centerline intersection of Dunhams
Corner Road and Irelands Brook (the Municipal Boundary Line between
the Township of East Brunswick and the Township of South Brunswick)
thence running: [Added 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 00-3]
1. Northerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road a distance
of 1,300+ feet to the centerline of Church Lane; thence
2. Northwesterly along the centerline of Church Lane, a distance of
210+ feet to the southerly line of the New Jersey Turnpike, thence
3. Southeasterly along the southerly line of the New Jersey Turnpike a
distance of 3,050+ feet to the centerline of Irelands Brook, the
municipal boundary line, thence
4. Northeasterly along the centerline of Irelands Brook, the municipal
boundary line, a distance of 1,200+ feet the centerline of Dunhams
Corner Road, the point of beginning.
H. Description of lands presently zoned OP-1 and R-3 in Block 741, Lot
22.02, Block 175.20, Lot 19.03, in accordance with the reexamination
report of the Master Plan to be rezoned C-2, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
§ 228-272 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-273
1:1205
A. The C-3 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick which map is incorporated as § 228-5 is
hereby enlarged to include the following land. Beginning at a point in
the southerly right-of-way line of Ruth Street, said point being the
northwesterly corner of Lot 6S, Block 6B, as shown on the Tax Map of
the Township of East Brunswick also being 280 feet from the
continuation of the westerly right-of-way line of New Jersey State
Highway Route 18 along the southerly right-of-way line of Ruth Street;
thence. [Added 5-27-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-P]
(1) Along the westerly line of Lot 6S, Block 6B, and continuing parallel
to the westerly right-of-way line of Route 18 a distance of 280 feet
as measured at right angles From said Route 18 right-of-way
bearing south 30° 44' 30" east a distance of 967.00 feet to a point;
thence
(2) South 62° 31' 24" west 470.21 feet to a point in the easterly line of
Lot 9, Block 610; thence
(3) Along the easterly line of Lot 9, Block 610, south 7° 05' east 546.97
feet to the southwesterly corner of Lot 16, Block 6A; thence
(4) North 82° 55' east a distance of 400.00 feet to a point in the line of
lands now or formerly of the Raritan River Railroad Company;
thence
(5) North 25° 17' 10" west a distance of 709.25 feet to the westerly
right-of-way line of New Jersey Route 18; thence
(6) Northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of New Jersey Route
18 a distance of 1,200 feet, more or less, to the southerly right-ofway
of Ruth Street; thence
(7) Westerly along the southerly right-of-way line of Ruth Street 280
feet to the point of beginning.
B. The C-3 General Commercial District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
hereby rezoned to C-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map; [Added 11-25-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-T]
(1) O-1 to C-3. Beginning at the southwesterly corner of Lot 6T in
Block 6B as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township said
point being 280.00 feet from the westerly right-of-way line of New
Jersey State Highway Route 18 and from said beginning point
running;
(a) Parallel to State Highway Route 18 south 30° 41' 30" east a
distance of 237.53 feet to a point; thence
§ 228-273 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-273
1:1206
(b) South 62° 31' 24" west a distance of 470.21 feet to a point in
the easterly line of Lot 9 in Block 610; thence
(c) Northerly along the easterly property line of said Lot 9, Block
610, north 7° 05' west a distance of 166.39 feet to a point;
thence
(d) Continuing along the easterly property line of said Lot 9, Block
610, north 22° 51' west a distance of 58.96 feet to a point;
thence
(e) North 59° 15' 30" east on a new line a distance of 394.60 feet
to the place of beginning.
C. The C-3 General Commercial District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
hereby rezoned to C-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added 12-23-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-U]
(1) R-3 and C-3 to C-3. All of Lots 1C, 2A-1 and 2C in Block 89 as shown
and described on the Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
D. The C-3 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the following
described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is hereby
rezoned to C-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries
are not shown on the Zoning Map. [Added 12-8-69 by Ord. No.
69-8-V]
(1) 0-1 to C-3, Lot 11B in Block 6B located on the corner of Ruth Street
and Highway 18.
E. The C-3 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the following
described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is hereby
rezoned to C-3, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged boundaries
are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added 5-24-71 by Ord. No.
71-8-Z]
(1) 0-1 to C-3. Beginning at a point where the southwesterly line of the
lands now or formerly of Frank W. Green intersect the
southeasterly line of Ruth Street; thence from said beginning point
running:
(a) South 30° 44' 30" east 729.42 feet; thence
(b) South 59° 15' 30" west 394.60 feet; thence
(c) North 22° 51' west 561.84 feet; thence
(d) North 31° 35' west 168.22 feet; thence
§ 228-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-273
1:1207
(e) North 58° 25' east 319.95 feet along the southeasterly line of
Ruth Street to the point and place of beginning, containing
approximately 5.80 acres.
F. The C-3 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the following
described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is hereby
rezoned to C-3 from C-1. Beginning at a point in the center line
intersection of the New Jersey Turnpike with School House Lane as
projected in an easterly direction from its terminus at the westerly line
of the said New Jersey Turnpike; thence [Added 3-14-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-GGG]
(1) Along the center line of School House Lane in a westerly direction
1,390 feet, plus or minus, to the center line intersection of Burnet
Street; thence
(2) Along the center line of Burnet Street, the various courses thereof,
1,970 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Lawrence Brook at
the municipal boundary line; thence
(3) Along the center line of Lawrence Brook at the municipal boundary
line; thence
(4) Along the center line of Lawrence Brook and the municipal
boundary line, the various courses thereof, 3,080 feet, plus or
minus, to the center line intersection of the New Jersey Turnpike;
thence
(5) Along the center line of the New Jersey Turnpike 470 feet, plus or
minus, to the point of beginning.
Being all of Lots 2.06, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 3.02 and 4.01 in Block
2.02 as shown on the Official Tax Map of the Township of East
Brunswick.
G. The R-4 and C-3 Zones as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick are hereby changed to incorporate the rear portion of
Lot 2.03 in Block 90 zoned R-4 become all inclusive in Zone C-3.
Beginning at a point in the northeasterly line of New Jersey State
Highway Route 18 at its intersection with the division line between
lands of John Dobrzynski and lands known as Hillcrest Manor; thence
running [Added 10-12-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-TTT]
(1) North 85° 44' 30" east along said lands known as Hillcrest Manor
638.62 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(2) South 5° 24' 30" east still along said last mentioned lands 195.9
feet; thence
(3) South 54° 23' 15" west along lands belonging to Bil Cor
Enterprises, Inc., a distance of 447.53 feet to the northeasterly line
of New Jersey State Highway Route 18; thence
§ 228-273 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-273
1:1208
(4) North 5° 31' 45" west along the northeasterly line of said state
highway 500.95 feet to the point of beginning.
H. The C-3 Highway Commercial District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to
include the following described land in the Township of East Brunswick
which is hereby rezoned to C-4, notwithstanding the fact that the
enlarged boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map: [Added
12-23-68 by Ord. No. 68-8-U]
(1) R-2, R-3 and C-3 to C-3. Beginning at the intersection of the
southwesterly line of New Jersey State Highway Route 18,
extended, with the northerly line of Rues Lane, extended, and
running; thence
(a) Westerly along the northerly line of Rues Lane 1,440 feet, more
or less, to a point; thence
(b) Northwesterly along a line distant 1,280 feet, as measured at
right angles, southwesterly from and parallel with the
southwesterly line of Route 18, 1,380 feet, more or less, to the
southerly line of Lot 13A in Block 131 as shown on the East
Brunswick Tax Map; thence
(c) Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 13A 1,485 feet, more or
less, to the easterly line of Summerhill Road; thence
(d) Northerly along the easterly line of Summerhill Road 1,061
feet, more or less, to the northerly line of Lot 15C; thence
(e) Easterly along the northerly line of Lot 15C and Lot 5A 2,165
feet, more or less, to the westerly line of Lot 3A in Block 131;
thence
(f) Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 3A 45.09 feet to the
northerly line of Lot 3A; thence
(g) Easterly along the northerly line of Lot 3A 258.03 feet to the
southwesterly line of Route 18; thence
(h) Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Route 18 2,532
feet, more or less, to the place of beginning.
(2) R-4 and C-3. All of Lot 61A in Block 175N as shown and described
on the Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
I. Description of lands presently zone O-1 in Block 26.01 and known as
the westerly portion of Lot 7, all of Lot 8 and the southwesterly portion
of Lot 9.02, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey.
§ 228-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-273
1:1209
§ 228-273.1. Additions to the HC-2 Highway Commercial District.
Beginning at the terminus of the westerly side of Rennee Road and
the southwest corner of Lot 8 in Block 26.01 and from thence running:
[Added 3-11-85 by Ord. No. 85-646]
1. Easterly along the terminus of said road and southerly line of Lot 8
and the northerly line of Lot 1, a distance of 423.31 to the
southwest corner of Lot 5; thence
2. Northwesterly along the westerly line of Lot 5 and through Lot 7
and the southeasterly corner of Lot 9.02 to a point in the westerly
line of said Lot 9.02; thence
3. Southwesterly along the westerly line of Lot 9.02 and the westerly
line of Lot 8 to the terminus of Rennee Road, the point of
beginning.
Containing 3.20 +
J. Description of lands presently zoned OP-1 and P-I in Block 317.13, Lots
22 & 43.01, Block 85, Lots 3.16 & 3.17 to be rezoned C-3, property
situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey. [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
A. Description Of Lands Presently Zoned P-I To Be Rezoned HC-2, (N.W.
Corner Of Milltown Road & Route 18), Property Known As Portion Of
Lot 11.03, In Block 58 Situated In The Township Of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Milltown Road opposite the
division line between Lots 11.01 and 11.03 in Block 58 and from thence
running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Northerly for a distance of 150 feet; thence
2. Easterly along a line parallel to Milltown Road to the centerline of
the southbound exit ramp from Highway 18; thence
3. Southwesterly along the centerline of the southbound exit ramp
from Highway 18 to the centerline of Milltown Road; thence
4. Westerly along the centerline of Milltown Road a distance of 200
feet + to a point opposite the division line of Lots 11.01 and 11.03
the point of beginning.
B. From I/M To HC-2. Edgeboro Road & Route 18: Lots 21.03, 23.01, 24.01
In Block 833, And Lots 38 & 39 In Block 834.01 Have Been Rezoned In
Accordance With The Master Plan Adopted On 4/4/90. [Added
11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
§ 228-273 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-273.1
1:1210
§ 228-274. Additions to the C-4 Highway Commercial District.
[Deleted]
§ 228-275. Additions to the C-5 Business Zone (Shopping Center).
§ 228-276. Additions to the M-1 Research and Limited
Manufacturing District.
[Deleted]
§ 228-277. Additions to the M-2 General Industrial District.
C. From P-I to HC-2: (N.W. Corner Milltown Rd. & 18) Lot 10.01 in Block
58, in accordance with the Master Plan adopted 4-4-90. [Added
11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
D. Description of lands presently zoned C-1 in Block 6.04 and known as the
most southerly portion of Lot 36.03 and all of Lot 37 to be rezoned to be
entirely within the HC-2 zone, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added 11-23-15 Ord.
15-31]
E. Description of lands presently zoned R-3 in Block 132.05 and known as
the most easterly portion of Lots 21.09 and 21.10 to be rezoned to be
entirely in HC-2 zone, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added 11-23-15 Ord.
15-31]
A. The C-4 and R-3 Zones as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick are hereby changed to delete the following described
land which is hereby rezoned to C-5. Beginning in the center line of the
Old Bridge Turnpike opposite the southerly line of a certain filed map
known as "Windsor Homes, Section 1"; thence running [Added
9-26-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-RRR]
(1) Southwesterly along said last mentioned lands a distance of 1,170
feet, more or less, to the center line of New Jersey State Highway
18; thence
(2) Southerly along the center line of said highway a distance of 1,060
feet to a point opposite the northerly line of lands belonging to Paul
and Otto Chardoussin; thence
(3) Northwesterly along land of Paul and Otto Chardoussin and lands
of the Township of East Brunswick a distance of 1,170 feet, more or
less, to the center line of Old Bridge Turnpike; thence
(4) Northwesterly along the center line of Old Bridge Turnpike a
distance of 1,060 feet, more or less, to the place of beginning.
A. The M-2 General Industrial District as shown on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the following
§ 228-273.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-277
1:1211
§ 228-278. Additions to the I/M Industrial Manufacturing District.
described land in the Township of East Brunswick. Beginning at the
northwest corner of Lot 1G in Block 32 as shown on the East Brunswick
Tax Map; thence [Added 6-26-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-K]
(1) Easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Tices Corner Road
1,000 feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of Lot 2A, Block
32; thence
(2) Southerly along the westerly line of Lot 2A in Block 32 2,065 feet,
more or less, to the southwest corner of Lot 2A in Block 32; thence
(3) Easterly along the common property line of Lots 2A and 1J 642.21
feet to the westerly line of Lot 11, Block 32; thence
(4) Along the westerly line of Lots 11 and 12A and continuing along the
easterly right-of-way line of Sixth Street a distance of 1,459 feet,
more or less, to the northeasterly corner of Lot 7 in Block 60 on the
East Brunswick Township Tax Map; thence
(5) Westerly 257 feet across Sixth Street to the northwesterly corner of
Lot 1B in Block 59; thence
(6) Southerly along the easterly property line of Lot 7A in Block 32
220.96 feet to the southwesterly corner of Lot 8 in Block 59; thence
(7) Easterly 236.33 feet to the southwesterly corner of Lot 4 in Block
60; thence
(8) Southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of Sixth Street 701
feet to the northerly right-of-way line of the Raritan River Railroad;
thence
(9) Along the northerly right-of-way line of the Raritan River Railroad
Company westerly a distance of 2,570 feet, more or less, to Harts
Lane; thence
(10) Along the easterly right-of-way line of Harts Lane northerly a
distance of 2,630 feet, more or less, to the southwesterly corner of
Lot 1, Block 31, as shown on the East Brunswick Township Tax
Map; thence
(11) Along the southerly line of Lot 1, Block 31, easterly a distance of
880 feet, more or less, to a point where the prolongation of the
common dividing line of Lot 1F and 1G in Block 32 intersects and
said southerly line of Lot 1 in Block 31 in the East Brunswick
Township Map; thence
(12) Along the said extension of the common line of Lots 1F and 1G in
Block 32 northerly a distance of 1,650 feet, more or less, to Tices
Corner Road and the place of beginning.
§ 228-277 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-278
1:1212
A. The I/M District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick, dated August 8, 1966, is hereby amended
to include the following property. The I/M Industrial Manufacturing
District as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick
is hereby enlarged to the following described District. Beginning at a
point in the boundary line between the Township of East Brunswick and
the Borough of South River where the center line of a fifteen-foot
sanitary sewer easement crosses Lot 1K in Block 18 as shown on the
Tax Map of East Brunswick; thence [Added 1-23-67 by Ord. No.
67-8-G]
(1) Along the said municipal boundary line in an easterly direction to
the South River; thence
(2) In a northerly direction along the several courses of the South
River to the Raritan River; thence
(3) In a northwesterly direction along the several courses of the
Raritan River to the northwest corner of Lot 63A in Block 17 as
shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick; thence
(4) Along the westerly line of Lot 63A and Lot 64 in Block 17 to a point
750 feet from the intersection of School House Lane and Weston
Place, said Weston Place to be called Edgeboro Road henceforth;
thence
(5) Parallel with Edgeboro Road 1,500 feet in an easterly direction to a
point; thence
(6) At right angles to the fifth course and in a general westerly
direction 700 feet, more or less, to the easterly line of Edgeboro
Road, said point being formerly the southerly end of Weston Place,
now known as the continuation of Edgeboro Road; thence
(7) Along the easterly line of Edgeboro Road in a southerly direction
4,500 feet, more or less, to the westerly corner of Lot 184 in Block
17 as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick; thence
(8) Along the southwesterly line of Lot 184 300 feet to a point; thence
(9) Parallel to Edgeboro Road in a general northwesterly direction 600
feet, more or less, to the center line of a sanitary sewer easement
crossing Lot 1K in Block 18 on the East Brunswick Tax Map; thence
(10) Along the center line of said easement 150 feet, more or less, to the
point of beginning.
B. Description Of Lands Presently Zoned P-I To Be Rezoned I/M, Property
Known As Portion Of Lot 10.03 In Block 29.04 Situated In The Township
Of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey
§ 228-278 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-278
1:1213
§ 228-279. Additions to the P-I Planned Industrial Park District.
Beginning at a point in the southwest corner of Lot 10.03 in Block 29.04
and the northerly line of Raritan River Railroad Company and from
thence running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Northeasterly along the westerly property line of Lot 10.03 the
various courses to a point in the southerly line of Lot 9 which point
is distant 1150 feet from the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike
measured at right angles therefrom; thence
2. Through lot 10.03 along a line distant 1150 feet and parallel to the
New Jersey Turnpike a distance of 850 feet + to a point in the
northerly line of the Raritan River Railroad Company; thence
3. Westerly along the northerly line of the Raritan River Railroad
Company a distance of 150 feet + to a point in the southwest corner
of Lot 10.03 the point of beginning.
A. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick. Beginning
at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Tices Corner
Road and the easterly right-of-way of Harts Lane; thence [Added
6-26-67 by Ord. No. 67-8-K]
(1) Easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Tices Corner Road
a distance of 831 feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of Lot
1G in Block 32 as shown on the East Brunswick Township Tax Map;
thence
(2) Southerly along the common property line between Lots 1F and 1G
in Block 32 and continuing along the prolongation of said line to the
northerly property line of Lot 2B in Block 31 as shown on the East
Brunswick Tax Map, being a distance of 1,650 feet, more or less;
thence
(3) Westerly along the southerly property line of Lot 1 in Block 31 as
shown on the East Brunswick Township Tax Map a distance of 880
feet, more or less, to the easterly right-of-way line of Harts Lane;
thence
(4) Northerly along the easterly right-of-way line of Harts Lane a
distance of 1,670 feet, more or less, to Tices Corner Road and the
place of beginning.
B. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick is hereby enlarged to include the
following described land in the Township of East Brunswick which is
hereby rezoned to P-I, notwithstanding the fact that the enlarged
boundaries are not shown on the Zoning Map. [Added 10-28-68 by
Ord. No. 68-8-S]
§ 228-278 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-279
1:1214
(1) M-2 to P-I Zone. Beginning in the center line of Ellison Avenue, said
point being the continuation of the northerly lot line of Lot 40K in
Block 17 as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township;
thence
(a) Easterly and along the northerly line of Lot 40K a distance of
622.31 feet, more or less, to the center line of Edgeboro Road;
thence
(b) Northerly along the center line of Edgeboro Road 560 feet,
more or less, to the end of said road; thence
(c) Continuing northerly a distance of 265 feet, more or less, to the
center line of the existing southerly end of Weston Avenue said
point being 227.99 feet from the center line intersection of
Sawmill Place and Weston Place; thence
(d) Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 175B in Block 17 as
shown on the aforesaid Tax Map of East Brunswick Township a
distance of 279.85 feet to a point; thence
(e) Southerly 200 feet from and parallel to the center line of
Ellison Avenue a distance of 393 feet to a point; thence
(f) Southwesterly a distance of 237.71 feet, more or less, to a
point; thence
(g) Westerly a distance of 150 feet to the center line of Ellison
Avenue, said course being perpendicular to Ellison Avenue and
said center line point being 150 feet southerly from the center
line intersection of Milton Avenue and Ellison Avenue; thence
(h) Southerly along the center line of Ellison Avenue 250 feet,
more or less, to the place of beginning.
C. Rezoning I/M to P-I. [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
(1) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOTS 29, 36,
38, 39, and 40 in Block 29.01, PORTION OF LOTS 6 AND 9 IN
BLOCK 29.04, PORTION OF LOT 5 IN BLOCK 29.06.
(2) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 9 IN
BLOCK 29.04 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Lot 9 in Block
29.04 which point is distant 1150 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike thence running:
[1] Through Lot 9 on a line parallel to the centerline of the
New Jersey Turnpike and distant 1150 feet therefrom, a
§ 228-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-279
1:1215
distance of 530 feet + to a point in the northerly line of lot
9; thence
[2] Along the northerly line of Lot 9 a distance of 250 feet + to
the northeast corner of said lot; thence
[3] Southerly and westerly along the various courses of Lot 9
to a point in the southerly line of Lot 9 in Block 29.04
distant 1150 feet measured at right angles to the
centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike, the point of
beginning.
(3) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 6 IN
BLOCK 29.04 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Lot 6 in Block
29.04 which point is distant 1150 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike thence running:
[1] Through Lot 6 on a line parallel to the centerline of the
New Jersey Turnpike and distant 1150 feet therefrom, a
distance of 390 feet + to a point in the northerly line of lot
6; thence
[2] Along the northerly line of Lot 6 a distance of 120 feet + to
the northeast corner of said lot; thence
[3] Southerly and westerly along the various courses of Lot 6
to a point in the southerly line of Lot 6 in Block 29.04
distant 1150 feet measured at right angles to the
centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike, the point of
beginning.
(4) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 40 IN
BLOCK 29.01 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the westerly line of Lot 40 in Block
29.01 which point is distant 1030 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of Tices Lane thence running:
[1] Through Lot 40 on a line parallel to the centerline of Tices
Lane and distant 1030 feet therefrom, a distance of 280
feet + to a point in the northerly line of lot 40; thence
[2] Easterly, southwesterly, southerly, westerly and northerly
along the various courses of Lot 40 to a point in the
westerly line of Lot 40, the point of beginning.
§ 228-279 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-279
1:1216
(5) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 39 IN
BLOCK 29.01 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the westerly line of Lot 39 in Block
29.01 which point is distant 1030 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of Tices Lane thence running:
[1] Through Lot 39 on a line parallel to the centerline of Tices
Lane and distant 1030 feet therefrom, a distance of 580
feet + to a point in the easterly line of lot 39; thence
[2] Southerly, westerly and northerly along the various
courses of Lot 39 to a point in the westerly line of Lot 39,
the point of beginning.
(6) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 38 IN
BLOCK 29.01 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the westerly line of Lot 38 in Block
29.01 which point is distant 1030 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of Tices Lane thence running:
[1] Through Lot 38 on a line parallel to the centerline of Tices
Lane and distant 1030 feet therefrom, a distance of 250
feet + to the point where the northerly line of lot 38
intersects Mill Brook Court; thence
[2] From the point where the east side of Mill Brook Court
intersects the northerly lot line of lot 38 thence easterly,
southerly, westerly and northerly along the various
courses of Lot 38 to a point in the westerly line of Lot 38,
the point of beginning.
(7) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 36 IN
BLOCK 29.01 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point which is distant 1150 feet measured at
right angles to the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike and is
also distant 1030 feet measured at right angles to the
centerline of Tices Lane thence running:
[1] Through Lot 36 on a line parallel to the centerline of Tices
Lane and distant 1030 feet therefrom, a distance of 770
feet + to a point in the easterly line of lot 36; thence
[2] Southerly, westerly and northerly along the various
courses of Lot 36 to a point in the westerly line of Lot 36 in
§ 228-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-279
1:1217
Block 29.01 distant 1150 feet measured at right angles to
the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike; thence
[3] Northerly a distance of 60 feet + to the point of beginning.
(8) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 29 IN
BLOCK 29.01 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Lot 29 in Block
29.01 which point is distant 1150 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike thence running:
[1] Through Lot 29 on a line parallel to the centerline of the
New Jersey Turnpike and distant 1150 feet therefrom, a
distance of 290 feet + to a point in the northerly line of lot
29; thence
[2] Along the northerly line of Lot 29 a distance of 10 feet + to
the northeast corner of said lot; thence
[3] Southerly and westerly along the various courses of Lot 29
to a point in the southerly line of Lot 29 in Block 29.01
distant 1150 feet measured at right angles to the
centerline of the New Jersey Turnpike, the point of
beginning.
(9) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED I/M TO BE
REZONED P-I, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 5 IN
BLOCK 29.06 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST
BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
(a) Beginning at a point in the southwesterly line of Lot 5 in Block
29.06 which point is distant 1030 feet measured at right angles
to the centerline of Tices Lane thence running:
[1] Through Lot 5 on a line parallel to the centerline of Tices
Lane and distant 1030 feet therefrom, a distance of 500
feet + to a point in the centerline of Harts Lane; thence
[2] Southerly along the centerline of Harts Lane a distance of
340 feet + to a point opposite the southerly line of lot 5;
thence
[3] Westerly and northwesterly along the various courses of
lot 5 to a point in the southwesterly line of lot 5, the point
of beginning.
D. The following lands on Harts Lane have been rezoned from I/M to P-I in
accordance with the Master Plan adopted on April 4, 1990:
§ 228-279 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-279
1:1218
§ 228-280. Additions to the OP-1 Office Professional District.
[Added 5-24-76 by Ord. No. 76-8-DDD; amended 4-11-77 by Ord. No.
77-8-LLL]
Lot 1 in Block 30 and Lot 7 in Block 29.04. [Added 11-19-90 by Ord.
No. 90-61]
E. Description of lands presently zoned R-3 in Block 17.24, Lot 1.01 and
Block 17.26, Lot 18.33 to be rezoned P-I, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added
11-23-15 Ord. 15-31]
A. The C-2 Neighborhood Business District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to
delete the following described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1
from C-2. Beginning at the center line intersection of Summerhill Road
with Racetrack Road and from thence running:
(1) In a southerly direction along the center line of Summerhill Road a
distance of 1,600 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the
southerly line of Lot 13.02 in Block 131; thence
(2) In an easterly direction along the southerly line of Lot 13.02 a
distance of 330.04 feet to the rear line of said lot; thence
(3) Northerly along said rear lot line a distance of 200 feet to a point in
the southerly line of Lot 15.12; thence
(4) In an easterly direction along the southerly line of Lot 15.12 a
distance of 585 feet, plus or minus, to the most easterly corner of
Lot 15.12; thence
(5) Northerly along the rear property lines of Lots 15.12, 15.11 and 24
and through Lots 22.01 and 23 a distance of 630 feet, plus or
minus, to a point in the northerly line of Lot 23; thence
(6) In a westerly direction along the northerly line of Lot 23 a distance
of 640 feet, plus or minus; thence
(7) In a northerly direction across Lot 16 and along the rear property
lines of Lots 1.07, 1.06 and 1.05 a distance 765 feet, plus or minus,
to the center line of Racetrack Road; thence
(8) Westerly along the center line of Racetrack Road 280 feet, plus or
minus, to the center line intersection of Summerhill Road, the point
of beginning.
Being all of Lot 1.05, 1.06, 1.07, 17.01, 24, 15.11, 15.12, 14.01,
13.02, and a portion of Lots 16.23 and 22.01 in Block 131 as shown
on the official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
B. The C-3 General Commercial District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to
§ 228-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-280
1:1219
delete the following described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1
from C-3. Beginning at the center line intersection of Summerhill Road
with Old Stage Road and from thence running:
(1) Along the center line of Old Stage Road in a westerly direction a
distance of 665 feet, plus or minus; thence
(2) Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 6.01 in Block 1243 a
distance of 772.11 feet; thence
(3) Easterly along the northerly line of Lot 6.01 a distance of 806.28
feet to the center line of Summerhill Road; thence
(4) Southerly along the center line of Summerhill Road a distance of
605 feet to the intersection of Old Stage Road, the point of
beginning.
Being all of Lot 6.01 in Block 243 as shown on the official Tax Map
of the Township of East Brunswick.
C. The P-I Planned Industrial Park District as shown and described on the
Zoning Map of the Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to
delete the following described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1
from P-I.
Beginning in the center line intersection of Cranbury Road and
Helmetta Boulevard and from thence running:
(1) Along the center line of Helmetta Boulevard in a southerly
direction a distance of 1,050 feet, plus or minus, to the intersection
of Old Stage Road; thence
(2) Along the center line of Old Stage Road in a westerly direction, the
various courses thereof, a distance of 1,050 feet, plus or minus, to a
point; thence
(3) In an easterly direction and along the rear property lines of Lots
1.04, 1.01, l.07, 1.08 and 1.05 in Block 323 a distance of 750 feet,
plus or minus, to a point in the westerly line of Lot 2.01; thence
(4) Along the easterly line of Lot 2.01 a distance of 226 feet, plus or
minus, to the center line of Cranbury Road; thence
(5) Along the center line of Cranbury Road in an easterly direction a
distance of 200 feet, plus or minus, to the intersection of Helmetta
Boulevard the point of beginning.
Being all of Lots 2.01, 3 and 4 portion of Lot 1.10 in Block 323 as
shown on the official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
D. The R-2 and C-2 Districts as shown and described on the Zoning Map of
the Township of East Brunswick are hereby changed to delete the
following described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1 from R-2 and
C-2. Beginning at a point in the center line of Summerhill Road said
§ 228-280 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-280
1:1220
point being opposite the northerly line at Lot 7.06 in Block 88 and from
thence running:
(1) Along the center line of Summerhill Road in a southerly direction a
distance of 1,640 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the
northerly line of Lot 11.10 in Block 131; thence
(2) In an easterly direction and along the northerly line of Lot 11.10 a
distance of 380 feet, plus or minus; thence
(3) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 11.10 a
distance of 500 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Rues Lane;
thence
(4) In a westerly direction along the center line of Rues Lane a
distance of 220 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the easterly
line of Lot 19.01 in Block 175.20; thence
(5) Southerly along the easterly line of Lots 19.01 and 19.02 a distance
of 350 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Overhill Road;
thence
(6) In a westerly direction along the center line of Overhill Road a
distance of 123 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Summerhill
Road; thence
(7) Northerly along the center line of Summerhill Road a distance of 87
feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the division line of Lots 1
and 23 in Block 741; thence
(8) In a westerly direction and along the last mentioned division line a
distance of 193 feet, plus or minus, to the rear of Lot 20; thence
(9) In a northerly direction along the rear property lines of Lots 20 and
21, the various course thereof, a distance of 383 feet, plus or minus,
to the center line of Rues Lane; thence
(10) Along the center line of Rues Lane in a westerly direction a
distance of 290 feet, plus or minus, to a point distant 500 feet
westerly from the center line intersection of Rues Lane with
Summerhill Road; thence
(11) In a northerly direction parallel to Summerhill Road a distance of
500 feet measured at right angles thereto across Lots 8.02, 7.09
and 7.08 in Block 88 to a point in the northerly line of Lot 7.08;
thence
(12) In an easterly direction along the northerly line of Lot 7.08 and Lot
7.06 a distance of 500 feet to the center line of Summerhill Road
the point of beginning.
Being all of Lot 11.10 in Block 131, all of Lots 19.01 and 19.02 in
Block 175.20, all of Lots 22 and 23 in Block 741, all of Lots 7.06 and
§ 228-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-280
1:1221
7.07 and portions of Lots 7.08, 7.09 and 8.02 in Block 88 as shown
on the official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
E. The R-3 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the following
described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1 from R-3. Beginning at
a point in center line of Milltown Road opposite the westerly line of Lot
3.13 in Block 85; thence
(1) In a northerly direction along said westerly line of Lot 3.13 a
distance of 125 feet, plus or minus, to the rear property line; thence
(2) In an easterly direction along the rear property lines of Lots 3.13,
3.12, 3.07, 3.06, 3.11 and 3.10 a distance of 606.46 feet; thence
(3) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 3.10 a
distance of 155 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Milltown
Road; thence
(4) In an easterly direction along the center line of Milltown Road a
distance of 250 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the
prolongation of the easterly line of Lot 36.02; thence
(5) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 36.02 a
distance of 368 feet, plus or minus, to the northerly corner of Lot.
40.01; thence
(6) Along the northerly line of Lot 40.02 in an easterly direction a
distance of 193.26 feet; thence
(7) Continuing along the said northerly line a distance of 72.0 feet;
thence
(8) In an easterly direction along the southerly line of Lot 41.02 a
distance of 130 feet, plus or minus; thence
(9) Across Lot 40.01 in a southerly direction a distance of 85 feet, plus
or minus, to the northeast corner of Lot 21.13; thence
(10) In a westerly direction along the various courses of the rear
property line of Lots 21.13, 21.10, 21.17, 21.11 and 21.18 a
distance of 613 feet, plus or minus; thence
(11) Continuing along the prolongation of the rear lot line of Lot 21.18
in a westerly direction a distance of 140 feet, plus or minus, to a
point; thence
(12) In a northerly direction and in a direct line, a distance of 500 feet,
plus or minus, to the southwest corner of Lot 30; thence
(13) In a westerly direction across Lot 55 and then along the rear lot
lines of Lots 28, 27 and 26 a distance of 240 feet; thence
§ 228-280 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-280
1:1222
(14) In a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 26 a distance
of 210 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Milltown Road;
thence
(15)Westerly along the center line of Milltown Road a distance of 100
feet, plus or minus, to the point of beginning.
Being all of Lots 3.13, 3.12, 3.07, 3.06, 3.11, and 3.10 in Block 85;
also all of Lots 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.02, 36.03, 36.04
and portions of Lots 40.01 and 55 in Block 317.13 as shown on the
official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
F. The property now zoned as C-5 is hereby redescribed to include the
following land in the Township of East Brunswick OP-1 Zone. Beginning
at a point in the center line of Cranbury Road, said point being the
division line Lots 17.01 and 16 in Block 319 prolonged to said center
line; thence
(1) In a northerly direction along said division line a distance of 921
feet, plus or minus; thence
(2) Along the division line between Lot 34 on the north and Lot 33 on
the south in a westerly direction 519.82 feet, more or less, to a
point; thence
(3) Along the division line between Lot 8, Block 810, on the west and
Lot 33, Block 319, on the east, in a southerly direction a distance of
35 feet, more or less, to a point; thence
(4) Along the division line between Lot 8 on the north and Lots 33 and
17.23 on the south, in a westerly direction a distance of 581 feet,
more or less, to a point; thence
(5) Along the division line between Lot 18.01 on the west and Lot 17.23
on the east, in a southerly direction a distance of 1,595.54 feet,
more or less, to the center line of Cranbury Road; thence
(6) Along the center line of Cranbury Road in an easterly direction a
distance of 1,780 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.
G. The R-2 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the following
described land which is hereby rezoned to OP-1 from R-2. [Repealed
7-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-OOO]
H. The OP-1 Zone as previously established is hereby amended to add
portions of M-1 and C-3 Districts and is now more particularly
described as follows. Beginning at a point in the center line of Milltown
Road opposite the westerly line of Lot 3.13 in Block 85; thence [Added
2-27-78 by Ord. No. 78-228-A]
(1) In a northerly direction along said westerly line of Lot 3.13 a
distance of 126 feet, plus or minus, to the rear property line; thence
§ 228-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-280
1:1223
(2) In an easterly direction along the rear property lines of Lots 3.13,
3.12, 3.07, 3.06, 3.11 and 3.10 a distance of 696.46 feet; thence
(3) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 3.10 a
distance of 35 feet, plus or minus, to the northerly line of Lot 4.02;
thence
(4) In an easterly direction along the rear of Lot 4.02 a distance of
316.61 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(5) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 4.02 a
distance of 211.54 feet to a corner of Lot 4.04; thence
(6) Along the northerly line of Lot 4.04 in a westerly direction a
distance of 61.90 feet to a corner thereof; thence
(7) Continuing along the northerly line of Lot 4.04 a distance of 175
feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Milltown Road; thence
(8) In a westerly direction along the center line of Milltown Road a
distance of 10 feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the
prolongation of the easterly line of Lot 36.02 in Block 317.13;
thence
(9) In a southerly direction along the easterly line of Lot 36.02 a
distance of 368 feet, plus or minus, to the northerly corner of Lot
40.01; thence
(10) Along the northerly line of Lot 40.01 in an easterly direction a
distance of 193.26 feet to a corner of Lot 40.02; thence
(11) In a southerly direction along Lots 40.02, 40.01 and 4.02 a distance
of 72 feet; thence
(12) In an easterly direction along the southerly line of Lot 41.02 a
distance of 130 feet, plus or minus; thence
(13) Across Lot 40.01 in a southerly direction a distance of 35 feet, plus
or minus, to the northeast corner of Lot 21.13; thence
(14) In a westerly direction along the various courses of the rear
property line of Lots 21.13, 21.10, 21.17, 21.11 and 21.18 a
distance of 613 feet, plus or minus; thence
(15) Continuing along the prolongation of the rear lot line of Lot 21.18
in a westerly direction a distance of 140 feet, plus or minus, to a
point; thence
(16) In a northerly direction and in a direct line a distance of 500 feet,
plus or minus, to the southwest corner of Lot 30; thence
(17) In a westerly direction across Lot 55 and then along the rear lot
lines of Lots 28, 27 and 26 a distance of 240 feet; thence
§ 228-280 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-280
1:1224
(18) In a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 26 a distance
of 210 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Milltown Road;
thence
(19)Westerly along the center line of Milltown Road a distance of 100
feet, plus or minus, to the point of beginning.
Being all of Lots 3.13, 3.12, 3.07, 3.06, 3.11, 3.10, 4.02 and 4.03 in
Block 85; also all of Lots 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.02,
36.03, 36.04 and portions of Lots 40.01 and 55 in Block 317.13 as
shown on the official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick.
I. Description of a portion of Lot 8.05 in Block 88.25 presently zoned VG-II
to be rezoned to OP-1, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Lot 8.05 distant 500 feet
westerly along said line from the centerline of Summerhill Road and
from thence running: [Added 4-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-567]
1. Westerly along said southerly line, a distance of 155+ feet to the
centerline of the proposed new relocation of Ryders Lane; thence
2. Along the centerline of the said proposed Ryders Lane in a
northwesterly direction, a distance of 600+ feet to the northerly
line of Lot 8.05; thence
3. In an easterly direction along the northerly line of Lot 8.05, a
distance of 435+ feet to a point distant 500 feet westerly along said
line from the centerline of Summerhill Road; thence
4. Across Lot 8.05 in a southerly direction and parallel to the
centerline of Summerhill Road, a distance of 5l5+ feet to the
southerly line of Lot 8.05 distant 500 feet westerly from the
centerline of Summerhill Road, the point of beginning.
J. Description of a portion of Lot 8.07 in Block 88.25 presently zoned VG-II
to be rezoned to OP-1, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the northerly line of Lot 8.07 distant 500 feet
westerly along said line from the centerline of Summerhill Road and
from thence running: [Added 4-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-567]
1. Westerly along said northerly line, a distance of 100+ feet to the
westerly corner of Lot 8.07; thence
2. Southerly along the westerly line of Lot 8.07, a distance of 110+
feet to the proposed centerline of Ryders Lane; thence
3. Southeasterly along the proposed centerline of Ryders Lane a
distance of 220+ feet, thence
§ 228-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-280
1:1225
4. In a northerly direction, a distance of 300+ feet to the northerly
line of Lot 8.07, distant 500 feet westerly along said line from the
centerline of Summerhill Road, the point of beginning.
K. DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED HC-1 TO BE REZONED
OP-1, (W. PROSPECT), PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 3, IN
BLOCK 50 SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK,
MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY.
Beginning at a point at the southeast corner of Lot 6, Block 50 and from
thence running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Northerly a distance of 20 feet to the southwest corner of lot 5 of
Block 50; thence
2. Easterly along the northerly line of Lot 3 a distance of 240 + feet to
the centerline of Old Bridge Turnpike; thence
3. Southerly along the centerline of Old Bridge Turnpike, a distance of
20 feet; thence
4. Westerly along a line parallel with the second course, a distance of
240 + feet to the point of beginning.
L. The following lands on W. Prospect have been rezoned from HC-1 to
OP-1: Lots 9.02, 10, 11.01, 23, 24, and 25 in Block 40, Lots 1-11 in Block
45, and Lots 1, 2, 4-11, 12.01, 14.01, and 26 in Block 50.
M. DESCRIPTION OF LANDS PRESENTLY ZONED R-2 TO BE REZONED
OP-1, PROPERTY KNOWN AS PORTION OF LOT 18.04 IN BLOCK 133,
SITUATED IN THE TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK, MIDDLESEX
COUNTY, NEW JERSEY.
Beginning at a point at the northeast corner of Lot 18.04 in Block 131
and from thence running: [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
1. Southeasterly along the easterly line of lot 18.04 a distance of 1880
feet + to the centerline of Rues Lane; thence
2. Westerly along the centerline of Rues Lane a distance of 1700 feet
+ to a point opposite the easterly line of lot 11.10; thence
3. Northerly along the easterly line of lot 11.10 a distance of 517 feet
+ to the northeasterly corner of said lot; thence
4. Easterly into lot 18.04 a distance of 28 feet +; thence
5. In a northerly direction parallel and distance 400 feet to
Summerhill Road a distance of 1160 feet + to a point in the
westerly line of lot 18.04; thence
6. Easterly along the northerly line of lot 18.04 a distance of 887 +
feet to the northeast corner of lot 18.04 in Block 131, the point of
beginning.
§ 228-280 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-280
1:1226
§ 228-281. Additions to the OP-2 Office Professional District.
[Added 7-25-77 by Ord. No. 77-8-OOO]
N. The following land by Vo-Tech has been rezoned from R-2 to OP-1:
Lot 10.02 in Block 133. [Added 11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]
O. THE FOLLOWING LANDS ON TICES LANE, WEST OF THE
TURNPIKE, HAVE BEEN REZONED FROM P-I TO OP-1 [Added
11-19-90 by Ord. No. 90-61]: Block 6.05, Lots 22.01, 23.03, 24,
25.01, 25.02, 26, 37, and ALL LOTS in Block 29.02.
P. From P-I To OP-1. CRANBURY ROAD: LOTS 12.08, 12.19, 16.02, 16.03,
16.04, 38, 38.01-38.16, 40, AND 40.01-40.14 IN BLOCK 319, AND
LOTS 18.03, 19, 20, AND 21 IN BLOCK 322.05. [Added 11-19-90 by
Ord. No. 90-61]
Q. Description of lands presently zoned C-2 in Block 741, Lots 1.01 and 2,
in accordance with the reexamination report of the Master Plan to be
rezoned OP-1, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added 12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
A. The R-2 District as shown and described on the Zoning Map of the
Township of East Brunswick is hereby changed to delete the lands
referred to in Section 10 of Ordinance No. 77-8-LLL, Schedule G, which
is hereby rezoned from R-2 to OP-2;
Editor's Note: See § 228-280G.
(1) The intersection of Cranbury Road and Dunhams Corner Road:
(a) Block 87, Lot 13.03.
(b) 13.13.
(c) 13.14.
(d) 14.06.
(e) 14.03.
(f) 15.01.
(g) 15.03.
(h) 15.04.
(i) 16.01.
(j) 16.02.
(k) 17.
(l) 18.
§ 228-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-281
1:1227
§ 228-282. Additions to the MXD Mixed Use Development Option
Zone. [Added 4-3-78 by Ord. No. 78-4]
(m) 19.
A. The interim C-5 Business Zone as rezoned by Township Ordinance No.
77-8-RRR is hereby assigned an option zone and the following
described lands established as a MXD Mixed Use Development Option
Zone in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at the center line intersection of the center line of New
Jersey State Route 18 with the prolongation of the southerly outline of
Windsor Homes, Section 1; thence
Editor's Note: See § 228-275A.
(1) Easterly along the said outline of Windsor Homes, Section 1, 1,170
feet, plus or minus to the center line intersection of Old Bridge -
New Brunswick Turnpike; thence
(2) Southeasterly along the center line of the Old Bridge - New
Brunswick Turnpike a distance of 1,060 feet, plus or minus, to a
point opposite the prolongation of the southerly line of Lot 2.04 in
Block 132; thence
(3) Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 2.04 a distance of 1,170
feet, plus or minus, to the center line of New Jersey State Highway
Route 18; thence
(4) Northerly along the center line of New Jersey State Highway Route
18 a distance of 1,060 feet, plus or minus, to the intersection of the
prolongation of the southerly outline of Windsor Homes, Section 1,
the point of beginning.
B. The O-1 Office, Professional and Apartment District and C-4 Highway
Commercial District as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of
East Brunswick is hereby changed to assign an option zone to the
following described lands which are hereby established as a MXD
Mixed Use Development Option Zone. Beginning at the center line
intersection of Tices Lane and the center line of Rennee Road and from
thence running:
(1) Northerly along the center line of Rennee Road a distance of 860
feet, plus or minus, to a point opposite the northerly line of Lot 3.29
in Block 26; thence
(2) Easterly along the northerly line of Lots 3.29, 3.27 and the
prolongation of Lot 3.27 a distance of 1,400 feet, plus or minus, to
the center line intersection of New Jersey State Highway Route 18;
thence
§ 228-281 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-282
1:1228
§ 228-283. Historic Districts. [Added 8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-8-TT]
(3) Northerly along the center line of New Jersey State Highway Route
18 a distance of 1,900 feet, plus or minus, to its intersection with
the center line of the Old Bridge - New Brunswick Turnpike; thence
(4) Southeasterly along the center line of Old Bridge - New Brunswick
Turnpike a distance of 3,500 feet, plus or minus, to its intersection
with the center line of Tices Lane; thence
(5) Westerly along the center line of Tices Lane crossing New Jersey
State Highway Route 18 a distance of 3,300 feet, plus or minus, to
its center line intersection with Rennee Road, the point of
beginning.
A. The following designated areas are hereby established as a Historic
District Residential Zone. Beginning at a point in the center line of the
Old Bridge - New Brunswick Turnpike, said point being opposite the
prolongation of Lot 2 in Block 133.28 known as the "Chestnut Hill
Cemetery property"; thence [Amended 8-25-75 by Ord. No
75-8-UU]
(1) In a northeasterly direction along the northerly property line of
said cemetery 750 feet, plus or minus (more or less), to a point in
the westerly line of Lot 24.07 in Block 133.28; thence
(2) Along the westerly and southerly property lines of Lot 24.07, the
various courses thereof, 1,851 feet, plus or minus (more or less), to
a point in the center line of River Road; thence
(3) Along the center line of River Road 151 feet, plus or minus (more or
less), to a point opposite the southerly boundary line of Lot 17A in
Block 134 now owned by South River Sand Company; thence
(4) In an easterly direction along said southerly boundary line 470 feet,
plus or minus (more or less), to a point in the center of the South
River, said point being the municipal boundary line of the Borough
of Sayreville and the Township of East Brunswick; thence
(5) Along several courses of the South River upstream passing under
the Main Street and Matawan Road Bridges to the culvert at the
easterly slope of New Jersey State Highway Route 18; thence
(6) Along the easterly property line of Route 18 in a northerly direction
a distance of 330 feet, plus or minus (more or less), to a point
where the exit ramp to Old Bridge - New Brunswick Turnpike
leaves Route 18; thence
(7) Along said exit ramp a distance of 820 feet, plus or minus (more or
less), to the intersection of the center line of Old Bridge - New
Brunswick Turnpike; thence
§ 228-282 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-283
1:1229
(8) In a northerly direction along the center line of the Old Bridge -
New Brunswick Turnpike a distance of 1,900 feet, plus or minus
(more or less), to the point or place of beginning.
Being approximately 125 acres plus or minus and as further
defined on a map title "Old Bridge Historic Boundaries" situated in
East Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey, prepared
by Raymond J. Toth, Licensed Land Surveyor No. 19005, East
Brunswick Township Engineering Division, dated October 10, 1974,
except the lands described in Subsection B which shall comprise a
Historic District Commercial Zone.
B. The following designated areas are hereby established as a Historic
District Commercial Zone. Beginning at a point, said point being the
intersection of the center line of Main Street (South Amboy -
Bordentown Turnpike) and the northerly line of New Jersey State
Highway Route 18; thence [Amended 8-25-75 by Ord. No. 75-8-UU]
(1) Along the center line of said Main Street in a northeasterly
direction a distance of approximately 1,000 feet, plus or minus, to a
point opposite the division line of Lots 17 and 18 in Block 147 as
shown on the East Brunswick Tax Map; thence
(2) In a northwesterly direction along said division line a distance of
134 feet, plus or minus, to the northwest corner of Lot 17; thence
(3) In a northeasterly direction a distance of 51.77 feet to a point being
the northeast corner of Lot 17; thence
(4) In a southeasterly direction along the division line of Lots 16 and 17
a distance of 133 feet, plus or minus, to the center line of Main
Street; thence
(5) Along the center line of Main Street in a northeasterly direction a
distance of 350 feet to a point opposite the division line of Lots 10
and 11 in Block 145; thence
(6) In a northwesterly direction a distance of 130 feet; thence
(7) In a northeasterly direction along the rear property line of Lots 10,
9.32, 8.03 and through Lot 8.01 220 feet, plus or minus, to the
center line of River Road; thence
(8) Along the center line of River Road in a southeasterly direction a
distance of 138 feet, plus or minus, to the center line or
intersection of River Road and Main Street; thence
(9) Along the center line of Main Street in a southeasterly direction a
distance of 300 feet, plus or minus, to the municipal boundary line
of the Township of East Brunswick with Madison Township; thence
(10) In a southeasterly direction along the said boundary line a distance
of 140 feet, plus or minus, to the southerly line of property
§ 228-283 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-283
1:1230
belonging to the United New Jersey Railroad and Canal Company;
thence
(11) In a southwesterly direction along the southerly property line of
said railroad a distance of 1,350 feet, plus or minus, to the center
line of Emerson Street; thence
(12) In a southwesterly direction along said road a distance of 220 feet,
plus or minus, to a point opposite the division line of Lots 11.02 and
13 in Block 143; thence
(13) In a northeasterly direction along said division line a distance of
110 feet, plus or minus, to the northwest corner of Lot 12.01;
thence
(14) Along the division line of Lots 12.01 and 12.02 in a southwesterly
direction and crossing Squire Street a distance of 105.5 feet to the
point in the southerly line of Squire Street; thence
(15) Northeasterly along the southerly line of Squire Street a distance
of 42 feet, plus or minus, to a point, said point being the division
line of Lots 5 and 6 in Block 148; thence
(16) Southeasterly along said division line a distance of 42 feet to the
northerly line of Lot 4; thence
(17) Continuing along said division line of Lot 4 and Lot 6 in a
northeasterly direction a distance of 5 feet to an angle point;
thence
(18) Continuing along said division line in a southeasterly direction a
distance of 88 feet to the southerly corner of Lot 4; thence
(19) In a southwesterly direction a distance of 137 feet to the center line
of Matawan Road; thence
(20) In a northwesterly direction along the center line of Matawan Road
a distance of 430 feet, plus or minus, to the southerly right-of-way
line of the United New Jersey Railroad and Canal Company; thence
(21) In a southwesterly direction along the said right-of-way, the various
courses thereof, a distance of 270 feet, plus or minus, to the
northerly right-of-way line of the New Jersey State Highway Route
18; thence
(22) In a northwesterly direction along said highway a distance of 180
feet, plus or minus, to the point of beginning.
C. The following blocks and lots located within the area described in
Subsection A shall be considered to constitute a Historic District
Commercial Zone.
(1) Block 147: Lots 8A, 8C, 9B, 17.
§ 228-283 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-283
1:1231
§ 228-284. Proposed O/I (Office/Industrial Planned Development)
Option Zone. [Added 4-26-82 by Ord. No. 82-452]
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Tices Lane, said point being
opposite the division line of Lots 23 and 33 in Block 29.01 and from thence
running;
(2) Block 148: Lots 5, 12 B.
(3) Block 150.01: Lots 2, 3, 4.
(4) Block 152: Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
(5) Block 153: Lots 1, 2.
(6) Block 155: Lots 1A, 1B, 2.
D. The following blocks and lots lying in commercial zones outside the
boundaries of the Historic District Commercial Zone shall be subject to
the minimum lot size and yard requirements of the zoning district in
which they lie at the time of adoption of this subsection and shall
otherwise be subject to all of the requirements of Article IX: [Deleted
11-12-79 by Ord. No. 79-193]
E. Description of a portion of property to be rezoned from the HRC Zone to
the HR Zone.
Beginning at a point in the easterly line of River Road, said point being
distant 110.20' on a course of N 33° 39' 10"W from the northeast corner
of River Road and Bordentown Amboy Turnpike (Main Street) and from
thence running: [Added 9-28-81 by Ord. No. 81-405]
(1) N 51° 32' 13" E. 205.32', plus or minus, to the South River; thence
(2) Along the mean high water line of the South River S 23° 28' 00"E
29.0', plus or minus; thence
(3) S 59° 45' 00"W, 199.82', plus or minus, to the easterly line of River
Road, the point of beginning.
1. Easterly, along the centerline of Tices Lane, a distance of 2,600' + to a
point distant 900' easterly of Harts Lane, thence
2. Southerly and parallel to Harts Lane centerline distant 900' therefrom,
a distance of 1,300' +, thence
3. Westerly and parallel to Tices Lane distant 1,300' + therefrom, a
distance of 900' to the centerline of Harts Lane, thence
4. Southerly along the centerline of Harts Lane, a distance of 1,850' + to
the centerline of Kimberly Road, thence
5. Westerly along the centerline of Kimberly Road, a distance of 1,220' +
to a point opposite the westerly line of Lot 18.04, thence
§ 228-283 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-284
1:1232
§ 228-285. Additions to the VG-II, Village Green Two. [Added
4-25-84 by Ord. No. 84-567]
6. Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 18.04, a distance of 1,010' + to
the southeast corner of Lot 4, thence
7. Westerly along the southerly side of Lot 4, the various courses thereof a
distance of 1,251' + to the northwest corner of Lot 4 and the northerly
line of Cotters Lane, thence
8. Westerly along the northerly line of Cotters Lane, a distance of 306' +
to the division line of Lots 29 and 26.05 in Block 29.01, thence
9. Northerly, easterly and then northerly along the property line of Lot
26.05 the various courses thereof a distance of 1,818' +, to the
southwest corner of Lot 23, thence
10. Continuing in a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot 23 and
the easterly line of Lot 33, a distance of 441' + to the centerline of Tices
Lane, the point of beginning.
A. Description of a portion of Lot 8.07 in Block 88.25 zoned OP-l to be
rezoned to VG-II, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Rues Lane distant 208+ feet
westerly from the centerline intersection of Summerhill Road and from
thence running:
1. Westerly along the centerline of Rues Lane, a distance of 292+ feet;
thence
2. In a northerly direction, parallel to Summerhill Road, a distance of
235+ feet to the centerline of the proposed relocated Ryders Lane;
thence
3. Southeasterly along the proposed centerline of Ryders Lane, a
distance of 357+ feet to a point; thence
4. Southerly and parallel to Summerhill Road, a distance of 40+ feet
to the centerline of Rues Lane distant 208+ feet westerly from the
centerline intersection of Summerhill Road, the point of beginning.
B. Description of property zoned R-l located in the Township of East
Brunswick, to be rezoned to VG-II.
Being all those lands bounded by Cranbury Road on the North, Fern
Road on the East, Old Stage Road on the South and Helmetta Boulevard
on the West.
Being all lots in Block 321, with the exception of the following:
Lots 2.01, 2.04, 2.06, 2.07, 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 4.01, 4.02, 5, 6.01, 6.03,
6.07, 6.08, 6.10, 6.11, 7, 13, 14, 15.01, 15.03, 15.05, 15.06, 17.01,
20.02, 28.03, 28.06. [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-584]
§ 228-284 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-285
1:1233
§ 228-286. Additions to the MMH, Modular Manufactured Housing
and Mobile Manufactured Housing. [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No.
84-579]
C. Description of lands zoned I/M, known as Lots 1, 2.01 and 2.02 in Block
134, to be rezoned VG-II, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of River Road opposite the
municipal boundary line between East Brunswick Township and the
Borough of South River at the northwest corner of Lot 1 in Block 134
and from thence running: [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-586]
1. Easterly along the various courses of the municipal boundary line,
a distance of 2765 + feet to the centerline of the South River and
municipal boundary line of the Borough of Sayreville; thence
2. Southerly along the various courses of the centerline of the South
River and municipal boundary line of the Borough of Sayreville, a
distance of 4900 + feet to a point opposite the southerly line of Lot
2.01; thence
3. Westerly and along the southerly line of Lot 2.01, a distance of 550
+ feet to the centerline of River Road; thence
4. Along the various courses of the centerline of River Road, a
distance of 3318 + feet to a point opposite the northwest corner of
Lot l in Block 134, the point of beginning.
Containing 156 + Acres
D. Description of lands presently zoned P-I, OP-1 and R-3 in Block 317.33,
all lots to be rezoned in its entirety to VG-II, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. [Added
12-10-18 by Ord. No. 18-30]
A. Description of lands presently zoned R-l, known as part of Lot l in Block
324, to be rezoned to MMH property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Cranbury Road distant 3280
+ feet southwesterly from the intersection of Helmetta Boulevard,
said point being the municipal boundary line between East Brunswick
Township and South Brunswick Township, and from thence running:
1. Northeasterly along the various courses of the centerline of
Cranbury Road and said municipal boundary line, a distance of
1,930+ feet to the centerline intersection of Old Stage Road (a
paper street); thence
2. Northeasterly along the various courses of the centerline of said
Old Stage Road (a paper street), a distance of 1,456+ feet to the
centerline of Helmetta Boulevard; thence
§ 228-285 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-286
1:1234
3. Southeasterly along the centerline of Helmetta Boulevard, a
distance of 298+ feet to a point opposite the northwesterly line of
Jamesburg Park; thence
4. Southeasterly along the last mentioned lands, a distance of 4,620+
feet to a point; thence
5. Northwesterly, at right angles to the last course, across Lot 1, a
distance of 970+ feet to the intersection of the municipal boundary
line of South Brunswick Township; thence
6. Northeasterly along the municipal boundary line of South
Brunswick Township, a distance of 1,360+ feet to the centerline of
Cranbury Road, which is distant 3280+ feet southwesterly from the
intersection of Helmetta Boulevard, the point of beginning.
Containing 98+ Acres
B. Description of proposed contingent MMH Zone of property known as all
of Lot 3 and southerly portion of Lot 4 in Block 320, situated in the
Township of East Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road opposite
the southerly line of Lot 3, said point being distant 330+ feet northerly
from the centerline intersection of Cranbury Road and from thence
running: [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-582]
1. Northerly along the centerline of Dunhams Corner Road, a distance
of 3506+ feet; thence
2. Easterly along the northerly property line of Lot 4 in Block 320 to a
point distant 1300 + feet from the centerline of Dunhams Corner
Road; thence
3. Southeasterly along a line, distant 1300 + feet and parallel to the
centerline of Dunhams Corner Road to a point on the northeasterly
property line of Lot 22.03; thence
4. Westerly along the northerly line of Lot 22.03, a distance of 275 +
feet to the northeasterly corner of Lot 3; thence
5. Southerly along the easterly line of Lot 3, a distance of 1340 + feet
to the centerline of Cranbury Road; thence
6. Westerly along the centerline of Cranbury Road, a distance of 695
+ feet to a point opposite the easterly line of Lot 2.04; thence
7. Northwesterly and along the said easterly line of Lot 2.04, a
distance of 190 + feet to a corner thereof; thence
8. Westerly along the northerly line of Lots 2.04, 2.03, 2.02, 1.03 and
1.04, a distance of 910 + feet to the centerline of Dunhams Corner
Road, the point of beginning.
§ 228-286 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-286
1:1235
§ 228-287. Additions to the MXD/R (Mixed Use Development/
Residential) Zone. [Added 7-9-84 by Ord. No. 84-585]
Containing 95+ acres
A. Description of lands zoned MXD, known as Lots 3.29 and 4.01 in Block
26 to be rezoned MXD/R, property situated in the Township of East
Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Rennee Road opposite the
northwest corner of Lot 3.29 in Block 26 and from said beginning point
running:
1. Northeasterly along the northerly line of Lot 3.29, a distance of
1170 + feet to the northwesterly corner of Lot 3.27; thence
2. Southeasterly along the rear line of Lots 3.27 and 3.28, a distance
of 244.6 + feet; thence
3. Northeasterly along the southerly line of Lot 3.28, a distance of 230
+ to the centerline of Route 18; thence
4. Southeasterly along the centerline of Route 18, a distance of 300 +
feet to a point; thence
5. Southwesterly and along the northerly line of Lot 3.31, a distance
of 230 + feet; thence
6. Southeasterly and along the westerly line of Lots 3.31 and 3.32, a
distance of 300 + feet to a point in the northerly line of Lot 3.33;
thence
7. Southwesterly along the northerly line of Lot 3.33, a distance of
235 + feet; thence
8. Southeasterly and along the westerly line of Lot 3.33, a distance of
200 + feet to the centerline of Tices Lane; thence
9. Southwesterly along the various courses of the centerline of Tices
Lane, a distance of 1070 + feet to the centerline intersection of
Rennee Road; thence
10. Northwesterly along the various courses of the centerline of
Rennee Road, a distance of 850 + feet to a point opposite the
northwest corner of Lot 3.29, the point of beginning.
Containing 26 + acres
B. Description of lands zoned O-I, known as Lot 2 in Block 26.03, to be
rezoned MXD/R, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick.
Beginning at a point in the centerline of Rennee Road opposite the
easterly corner of Lot 2 in Block 26.03 and from thence running:
§ 228-286 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-287
1:1236
§ 228-288. Additions to the Senior Citizen Housing Option Zone.
[Added 12-22-86 by Ord. No. 86-809; amended 5-22-89 by Ord. No.
89-28]
§ 228-289. Additions to the VG-I Village Green One Zone. [Added
3-8-99 by Ord. No. 99-6]
Description of lands presently zoned R-2 TG option zone in Block 87 and
known as the most southerly portion of Lot 10.03 and all of Lot 10.02
1. Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 2, a distance of 930 + feet;
thence
2. Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 2, a distance of 12 + feet to
the southwest corner of Lot l; thence
3. Northeasterly along the southerly line of Lot 1, a distance of 800 +
feet to the centerline of Rennee Road; thence
4. Southeasterly along the various courses of the centerline of Rennee
Road, a distance of 300 + feet to a point opposite the easterly
corner of Lot 2, the point of beginning.
Containing 2 + acres
A. Description of lands for Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone, property
known as Lots 5 and 6 in Block 322.61 situated in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Rues Lane and New
Brunswick Avenue and from thence running:
1. Southeasterly along the centerline of New Brunswick Avenue, a
distance of 938+ feet to a point opposite the northerly line of
Henley Drive; thence
2. Southwesterly and partially along the northerly line of Henley
Drive and along the southerly line of Lots 5 and 6 in Block 322.61, a
distance of 563+ feet; thence
3. Continuing along the southwesterly line of Lot 5, a distance of
624+ feet to the centerline of Cranbury Road; thence
4. Northeasterly along the centerline of Cranbury Road, a distance of
466+ feet; thence
5. In a southeasterly and northeasterly direction and along the outline
of Lot 7 in Block 322.61, the various courses thereof a distance of
438+ feet to the centerline of Rues Lane; thence
6. Southeasterly along the centerline of Rues Lane, a distance of
265+ feet to the centerline intersection of New Brunswick Avenue,
the point of beginning.
§ 228-287 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-289
1:1237
to be rezoned VG-I, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point, said point being a rebar with cap in the northwesterly
line of Cranbury Road (Distant 64.25 feet from the centerline) said point
being the property line between Lots 10.02 and 1.01 in Block 87 on the
official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick and thence; running
§ 228-289.1. Creation of SCMXD Senior Citizen Mixed Use Planned
Development District. [Added 7-8-02 by Ord. No. 02-11]
Description of lands presently zoned I/M to be rezoned SCMXD, property
located south of Main Street and north of the South River in the Township
of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Beginning at a point, said point being the centerline intersection of Main
Street and Old Stage Road and from thence running:
1. N63°-43'-30"W 2,115.65 feet along the northerly line of Lot 1.01 to a
point, said point being an iron pipe; thence
2. N2°-52'-41"E 365.74' along the easterly line of Lots 20.01 and 5.01 in
Block 87 to a point, said point being a pin; thence
3. S79°-29'-19"E 1156.82 feet along the present zone line between zones
TG and VGI thru Lot 10.03 in Block 87 to a point, said point being the
southwesterly corner of Lot 4 in Block 87-07 and a monument; thence
4. S79°-24'-32"E 1113.12 feet along the southerly line of Block 87.07 and
87.11 to a point, said point being in the westerly line of Lot 12.11 in
Block 87 and a steel pipe; thence
5. S3°-9'-20"W 589.89 to a point on the westerly line of Cranbury Road
(distant 47.50 feet from the centerline) and a monument; thence
6. S45°-14'-04"W 79.88 along the westerly line of Cranbury Road (distant
47.50 feet from the centerline); thence
7. S44°-51'-40"W 184.65 along the westerly line of Cranbury Road (distant
47.50 feet from the centerline); thence
8. S48°-17'-41"W 50.09 along the westerly line of Cranbury Road; thence
9. S44°-51'40"W 100.00 along the westerly line of Cranbury Road (distant
50.50 feet from the centerline); thence
10. S77°-02'-40"W 26.16' along the westerly line of Cranbury Road to the
point and place of beginning.
1. Northeasterly along the centerline of Main Street, a distance of 750+
feet to a point opposite the property line of Lots 37 and 38.01 in Block
150 on the official Tax Map of the Township of East Brunswick; thence
§ 228-289 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-289.1
1:1238
§ 228-289.2. Additions to the HC-1 Neighborhood Highway
Commercial District.
§ 228-289.3. Additions to the VG-II Village Green II District.
2. Southerly along the property line of Lots 37 and 38.01 in Block 150, a
distance of 220+ feet to a point in the centerline of the United New
Jersey Railroad and Canel Company; thence
3. Northeasterly along the centerline of the United New Jersey Railroad, a
distance of 500+ feet, to a point in the centerline of State Highway
Route 18; thence
4. Southerly along the centerline of State Highway Route 18, a distance of
100+ feet to a point in the centerline of the South River, the Municipal
Boundary line of East Brunswick Township and the Township of Old
Bridge; thence
5. Southwesterly along the centerline of the South River, a distance of
6,000+ feet to a point, said point being the Municipal Boundary line
between the Township of East Brunswick, Township of Old Bridge and
the Borough of Spotswood; thence
6. Northerly along the Municipal Boundary line between the Township of
East Brunswick and the Borough of Spotswood, a distance of 750+ feet
to a point in the rear property line of Lot 39 in Block 150; thence
7. Northeasterly along the rear property line of Lots 39, 40 and 30-33 in
Block 150, a distance of 202+ feet to a point; thence
8. Northwesterly along the property line between Lots 33 and 34.01 in
Block 150 a distance of 210+ feet to a point in the centerline of Main
Street; thence
9. Northeasterly along the centerline of Main Street, a distance of 1,150+
feet to the point of beginning.
A. Description of lands presently zoned C-1 in Block 131.04, Lots 25.01
through Lot 35.01 to be rezoned HC-1, property situated in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
B. Description of lands presently zoned C-1 in Block 132.05, Lots 14
through Lot 18 and Lot 21.07 and Block 132.04, Lot 1 to be rezoned
HC-1, property situated in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey.
A. Description of lands presently zoned I/M in Block 134.01, part of Lot 79
to be rezoned in its entirety to VG-II, property situated in the Township
of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
§ 228-289.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-289.4
1:1239
§ 228-289.4. Creation of MDA Multiple Dwelling/Apartment
District. [Added 11-28-16 by Ord. 16-20; Amended 3-6-17 by Ord.
17-13]
Description of lands presently zoned O/I, zoned P-1 and I/M to be rezoned
MDA, property located south of Tices Lane and west of Harts Lane, off
of Eagle Road and Mill Brook Court in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey. Being all the lands in Block 29.01, Lots 37,
38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 and in Block 29.06, Lots 1 through 7.
§ 228-289.5. Addition to TG Town Green District. [Added 11-28-16
by Ord. 16-20]
Description of lands presently zoned OP-1 to be rezoned TG, located at the
northwest corner of the intersection of Summerhill Road and Old Stage
Road in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Being all the lands in Block 243, Lot 6.04.
§ 228-289.6. Creation of MXD-2 Mixed Use Two District. [Added
9-25-2017 by Ord. 17-33]
Description of lands presently zoned I/M to be rezoned MXD-2, property
located south of Tices Lane and east of Harts Lane in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. Being all the lands in Block 32,
Lot 1.33.
§ 228-289.7. Creation of MXD-3 Mixed Use Three District. [Added
9-25-2017 by Ord. 17-33]
Description of lands presently zoned HC-2 to be rezoned MXD-3, property
located south of Ruth Street and west of Route 18 in the Township of East
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey. Being all the lands in Block 6.01,
Lot 16.03.
§ 228-289.4 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-289.7
1:1240
ARTICLE XXXV
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
[Added 2-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-1]
§ 228-290. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, "communications tower" shall mean an
elevated structure situated on or affixed to real property or structures
thereon that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, microwave,
radio or telephone communications.
§ 228-291. Local requirements.
With the exception of those towers delineated in § 228-292, no
communication tower shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
a residential property line or residential zone boundary line, public park
property line or school property line.
§ 228-292. Construction guidelines.
Construction of communications towers shall be subject to the requirements
of State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., and
the Uniform Construction Code, promulgated thereunder.
§ 228-293. Exemptions.
A. Communication towers used for the following purposes are hereby
specifically exempted from the requirements of this Chapter:
(1) Citizen band operation;
(2) Amateur Operation;
(3) Public Safety, including but not limited to communications for the
Federal, State or County Municipal Government.
B. Communication towers which have been constructed or which have
received preliminary and or final site plan approval prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempted from the
requirements of this Chapter.
§ 228-290 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-293
1:1241

ARTICLE XXXVI
Riparian Zone Regulations
[Added 4-20-09 by Ord. No. 09-10]
§ 228-294. Intent and purpose.
The governing body of East Brunswick Township finds that riparian lands
adjacent to streams, lakes, or other surface water bodies that are
adequately vegetated provide an important environmental protection and
water resource management benefit. It is necessary to protect and maintain
the beneficial character of riparian areas by implementing specifications
for the establishment, protection, and maintenance of vegetation along the
surface water bodies within East Brunswick Township, consistent with the
interest of landowners in making reasonable economic use of parcels of land
that include such designated areas.
The specific purposes and intent of this Ordinance are to:
A. Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of
the Township's water resources;
B. Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as well as
biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification, which
occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed through vegetated buffers as
stable, distributed flow prior to reaching receiving waters;
C. Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
D. Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves and twigs)
and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that provide food and habitat
for aquatic organisms (insects, amphibians, crustaceans, and small
fish), which are essential to maintain the food chain;
E. Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream bank
erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms;
F. Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
G. Control downstream flooding; and
H. Conserve the natural features important to land and water resources,
e.g., headwater areas, ground water recharge zones, floodways,
floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, and prime wildlife
habitats.
§ 228-294 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-295
1:1243
§ 228-295. Statutory authority.
East Brunswick Township is empowered to regulate land uses under the
provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use
in order to protect public health, safety and welfare by protecting and
maintaining native vegetation in riparian areas. The Township is also
empowered to adopt and implement this Ordinance under provisions
provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of New Jersey:
Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A 1 et seq.
Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A 1 et seq.
Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10 23 et seq.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24 39 et seq.
Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A 50 et seq.
§ 228-296. Definitions.
All definitions in New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3,
Town Code 132-3 and Town Code 228-3 shall also apply to this Ordinance.
Certain words and terms in this chapter are defined for the purpose thereof
as follows:
ACID PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide materials (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acid
producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower. After
exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this ordinance, and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated Riparian Zone.
FLOODWAY — Shall have the meaning ascribed to this term by the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and regulations
promulgated thereunder published at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq., and any
supplementary or successor legislation and regulations from time to time
enacted or promulgated.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
§ 228-295 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-296
1:1244
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
LINEAR DEVELOPMENT — Developments that are constructed in a linear
fashion across the landscape; i.e., power lines, roads, railways, pipelines
(gas, oil), telecommunications infrastructure and man-made waterways.
Linear development is often consequential to other forms of commercial and
industrial development.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water Resource
Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a
professional engineer or a registered landscape architect which evaluates
the effects of proposed activity/uses on a designated riparian zone. The
plan shall include an identification of existing conditions, all proposed
activities and all proposed management techniques, including any measures
necessary to offset disturbance to any affected riparian zone and shall
be prepared in accordance with the Township's adopted performance
standards for riparian zones.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream, lake,
pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or
State open waters identified in a Letter of Interpretation issued under
the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land Use
Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
§ 228-296 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-296
1:1245
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. '
'1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 228-297. Establishment of Riparian Zones.
A. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected
from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
1. The riparian zone shall be one hundred fifty feet (150') wide along
both sides of any segment of a surface water body flowing through
an area that contains acid producing soils;
2. The riparian zone shall be fifty feet (50') wide along both sides of all
other surface water bodies.
B. The designated riparian zone as defined above shall be based on New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection GIS digital data and
include all land and water bodies within its boundaries. The official
mapping of the designated riparian zone areas within East Brunswick
Township shall be on file in the Department of Planning and
Engineering.
C. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
1. Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline;
2. Along a non linear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
3. Along a non linear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high water line; and
4. Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a definable channel, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline.
D. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning district. The
provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full force except
§ 228-296 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-297
1:1246
§ 228-298. Uses permitted in Riparian Zones.
where the provisions of the riparian zone differ from the provisions
of the underlying district, in which case the provision that is more
restrictive shall apply. These provisions apply to land disturbances
resulting from or related to any activity or use requiring application for
any of the following permits or approvals:
Building permit
Bulk variance/use variance
Conditional Use
Subdivision/site plan approval
E. Activity within the riparian zone shall be exempt from the riparian zone
protection requirements provided compliance with one of the following
is demonstrated:
1. The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route;
2. The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in accordance with a
stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or
project approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
3. The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary to provide
for public pedestrian access or water dependent recreation that
meets the requirements of the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E;
4. The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or Federal oversight
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq. or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. '
'9601 et seq.;
5. The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does not
exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
A. Property located within a designated riparian zone shall remain in a
natural condition or, if in a disturbed condition, including agricultural
activities, at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be restored to a
natural condition. There shall be no clearing or cutting of trees and
brush, except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning for reasons of
public safety or for the replacement of invasive species with indigenous
species. There shall be no altering of watercourses, dumping of trash,
soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris, regrading or construction.
§ 228-297 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-298
1:1247
§ 228-299. Performance standards for Riparian Zones.
The following conditions shall apply to land situated within a designated
riparian zone:
B. The following uses are permitted either by right or after review and
approval by the municipality in riparian zones. No new construction,
development, use, activity, encroachment, or structure shall take place
in a riparian zone, except as specifically authorized in this Section. The
following uses shall be permitted within a riparian zone:
1. Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone, provided near
stream vegetation is preserved. Such uses include wildlife
sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas,
game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated for the
protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures.
Such uses also include passive recreation areas of public and
private parklands, including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle
trails, provided that said trail have been stabilized with pervious
materials;
2. Fences installed in compliance with applicable Township Code
requirements;
3. Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails, roads,
railroads, storm water lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines and
public utility transmission lines, provided that the land disturbance
is the minimum required to accomplish the permitted use, any
applicable State permits are acquired, and any disturbance is offset
by buffer improvements in compliance with a Riparian Zone
Management Plan approved by the Township Engineer and that the
area of the crossing is stabilized against significant erosion due to
its use as a crossing;
4. Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conform
to the guidelines of a Riparian Zone Management Plan approved by
the Township Engineer;
5. Wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, subject to
compliance with a Riparian Zone Management Plan approved by
the Township Engineer.
A. All major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be designed to
provide sufficient areas outside of the riparian zone to accommodate
principal structures, any normal accessory structures/uses appurtenant
thereto, as well as lawn areas.
B. Portions of lots within the riparian zone shall be permanently restricted
by deed or conservation easement held by East Brunswick Township to
provide adequate protection to prevent adverse impacts within the
§ 228-298 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-299
1:1248
§ 228-300. Existing structures and uses in Riparian Zones.
Structures and uses of land within the riparian zone which were in existence
prior to the effective date of these regulations are subject to the following
requirements:
§ 228-301. Uses prohibited in Riparian Zones.
riparian zone. A complete copy of the recorded conservation restriction
that clearly identifies the deed book and pages where it has been
recorded in the office of the Middlesex County Clerk or the registrar
of deeds and mortgages of Middlesex County must be submitted to
the municipality. The recorded conservation restriction shall be in the
form approved by the municipality and shall run with the land and
be binding upon the property owner and the successors in interest in
the property or in any part thereof. The conservation restriction may
include language reserving the right to make de minimus changes to
accommodate necessary regulatory approvals upon the written consent
of the municipality, provided such changes are otherwise consistent
with the purpose and intent of the conservation restriction.
C. Any lands proposed for development which include all or a portion of a
riparian zone shall as a condition of any major subdivision or major site
plan approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation of any
portions of the riparian zone which are not vegetated at the time of the
application or which were disturbed by prior land uses, including for
agricultural use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize native and noninvasive
tree and plant species to the maximum extent practicable in
accordance with an approved Riparian Zone Management Plan.
D. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow through a
riparian zone and shall comply with the Standard For Off Site Stability
in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey",
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq. (see N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.) If stormwater discharged outside
of and flowing through a riparian zone cannot comply with the Standard
for Off-Site Stability, then the proposed stabilization measures must
meet the requirements of the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et seq., and have an approved flood hazard area
permit.
A. Legally existing but noncompliant structures or uses may be continued.
B. Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred and shall be in
conformance with the Stormwater Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the riparian
zone as a result of encroachments where previous development or
disturbances have occurred.
§ 228-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-301
1:1249
§ 228-302. Riparian Zone Management Plan.
A. Any use or activity not specifically authorized by the Riparian Zone
Ordinance;
B. Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation removal
for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization or restoration
projects that require vegetation removal or grading prior to
implementation;
C. Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials;
D. Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of the
Soil Conservation District;
E. Roads or driveways, except where permitted as permitted by this
Ordinance;
F. Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as permitted by this
Ordinance;
G. Parking lots;
H. New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The expansion and
replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal system areas for
existing uses is permitted;
I. Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise permitted pursuant
to this Ordinance.
A. A Riparian Zone Management Plan shall accompany all requests for
bulk variance relief from the provisions of the Riparian Zone Ordinance.
A Riparian Zone Management Plan is not required where the riparian
zone is not being disturbed and conservation easements/deed
restrictions are applied to ensure there will be no future clearing or
disturbance of the riparian zone.
B. The applicant shall submit to the Approving Authority a Riparian Zone
Management Plan prepared by a Professional Engineer or Registered
Landscape Architect which fully evaluates the effects of any proposed
uses on the riparian zone. The Riparian Zone Management Plan shall
include data on the following:
1. Existing vegetation;
2. Field delineated surface water bodies;
3. Field delineated wetlands;
4. The 100 year floodplain;
§ 228-301 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-302
1:1250
§ 228-303. Conflicts.
All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local requirements that
are inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby superseded
to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and the provisions of this
ordinance apply.
§ 228-304. Severability.
This Ordinance shall be so construed as not to conflict with any provision
of New Jersey or Federal law. Notwithstanding that any provision of this
Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall continue to be
of full force and effect. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be cumulative
5. Flood Hazard Areas, including floodway and flood fringe areas, as
delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
6. Soil classifications as found on Soil Surveys;
7. Existing subdrainage areas on site with HUC (Hydrologic Unit
Code) 14 designations;
8. Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of slopes
less than 15%; above 15% but less than 20%; and steep slopes
greater than 20%.
9. Description of all proposed uses/activities, and full evaluation of
the effects of all proposed uses/activities in the riparian zone;
10. Management provisions in narrative and/or graphic form
specifying:
(a) The manner in which the area within the riparian zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
(b) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the riparian
zone, as applicable.
(c) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to
be necessary, in order to maintain and manage the riparian
zone.
(d) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes: three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground
cover, understory shrubs, and trees that when fully mature,
will form an overhead canopy. Vegetation selected must be
native, non invasive species, and consistent with the soil, slope
and moisture conditions of the site. Dominant vegetation in the
Riparian Zone Management Plan shall consist of plant species
that are suited to the riparian zone environment.
§ 228-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-304
1:1251
with, and not in substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and
land use regulations.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter
§ 228-304 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § 228-304
1:1252
Appendix
Chapter A241
WATER FRANCHISE
§ A241-1. Consent of township.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey, hereby consent to the filing of the certificate of
incorporation of the Industrial Water Supply Company in the offices of
the Secretary of State of New Jersey and in such other public offices as
may be required by law and consent to the construction, operation and
maintenance of pipes, mains and conduits for supplying nonpotable water
for industrial and commercial uses and consumption in, through and along
certain streets, avenues, highways, roads and public places in the Township
of East Brunswick, subject to the following.
§ A241-2. Area in which franchise shall be in effect. [Amended
9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
The Industrial Water Supply Company, its successors and assigns, is hereby
granted consent, permission and franchise to lay, construct, operate and
maintain pipes, mains, conduits, pumping facilities, wells, storage tanks
and other requisites for supplying nonpotable water for industrial and
commercial use and consumption in, through and along any and every part
of the following of East Brunswick Township:
A. "Beginning at a point in the southerly boundary line of the Township of
East Brunswick (said line also being the northerly boundary line of the
Borough of South River), said beginning point being one thousand two
hundred (1,200) feet, more or less, easterly of the easterly line of the
Old Bridge-New Brunswick Turnpike; thence
(1) Northerly, along the center line of East Brunswick Township Sewer
Utility Trunk Line, one thousand seventy (1,070) feet, more or less,
to the southerly line of Serviss Acres Sec. 2-C and the northerly line
of lands formerly of the Raritan River Railroad Company; thence
[Amended 9-27-10 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(2) Easterly, along said line of Serviss Acres Sec. 2-C, four hundred
(400) feet, more or less, to the westerly line of the present
industrial area (being also the most westerly corner of Lot 33-K in
Block 17 as shown on the Tax Map of East Brunswick Township;
thence
(3) Northeasterly, along the northwesterly line of present industrial
tract, one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet, more or less, to
the intersection of the southerly line of Manton Avenue with the
easterly line of Ellison Avenue; thence
§ 228-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A241-2
1:1253
§ A241-3. Term of franchise.
The permission, privileges and franchise in this ordinance granted shall
continue for a period of fifty (50) years from the date of the final passage
hereof. During said period, Industrial Water Supply Company, its successors
and assigns, shall have power to lay, maintain and operate conductors for
conducting nonpotable water through the streets, avenues, highways and
public places aforesaid, and other areas beneath the surface thereof, for
the purpose of selling and furnishing such quantities of nonpotable water as
may be required in said area for industrial and commercial purposes, under
the regulations and restrictions in this ordinance prescribed.
§ A241-4. Right to perform required work.
The said water company shall also have the privilege of doing all the
necessary work incident to laying and constructing pumping facilities,
wells, storage tanks, pipes, mains, water systems and works and the
privilege of keeping the mains in repair and make the necessary excavations
for so doing, provided that all the facilities which comprise the water
system and works are constructed, installed, maintained and repaired in
accordance with regulations or specifications now or hereafter adopted by
the township.
(4) Northerly, along the easterly line of Ellison Avenue, two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet, more or less, to a point four hundred fifty
(450) feet northerly of the southerly line of Milton Avenue (said
point also being the intersection of the westerly line of Ellison
Avenue, with the northerly line of the present industrial area;
thence
(5) Easterly, along said northerly line of the present industrial area,
four hundred eighty (480) feet, more or less, to the easterly line of
Weston Place; thence
(6) Northerly, along the easterly line and prolongation of the easterly
line of Weston Place and across Schoolhouse Lane, one thousand
eighty (1,080)feet, more or less, to the Lawrence Brook; thence
(7) Easterly, along the Lawrence Brook to the Raritan River; thence
(8) Easterly and southerly along the Raritan River to the South River;
thence
(9) Southerly, along the South River to the dividing line between the
Borough of South River and the Township of East Brunswick;
thence
(10) Northwesterly and westerly, along said boundary line, four
thousand two hundred (4,200) feet, more or less, to the point of
beginning.
§ A241-2 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § A241-5
1:1254
§ A241-5. Restoration of public roads and other public places.
Whenever said water company installs or lays mains or pipes, connections,
conductors, conduits and water systems upon public roads, parks,
parkways, highways and other public places, it shall restore said public
roads and public places in accordance with the then existing township
ordinance pertaining to street openings.
§ A241-6. Cross-connections with potable water supply prohibited.
Absolutely no cross-connections shall be made between the potable water
supply of the township and the nonpotable water supply of the Industrial
Water Supply Company except upon the written consent of the State
Department of Health.
§ A241-7. Streets and other facilities not deemed accepted.
It is recognized by the passage of this ordinance that the Mayor and Council
of the Township of East Brunswick do not accept any places which have not
been accepted or maintained by the township as accepted streets, avenues,
parks, parkways, alleys, roads, highways or other public places and that
said municipality by the passage of this ordinance does not assume any
liability or responsibility for the maintenance, care, construction or repair
of the same and with regard to said streets, avenues, parks, parkways,
alleys, roads, highways or other public places, the consent and permission
aforesaid is limited to the rights and jurisdiction of the public in said places.
§ A241-8. Sales limited to area specified.
The company shall not sell or transmit any water beyond the area set
forth in § A241-2 or beyond the boundaries of the township without further
permission and authority from the governing body. The rates charged by
the said company shall be filed with the Township Clerk and shall be those
approved by the Public Utility Commission of the State of New Jersey when,
as and if required by law.
§ A241-9. Installations limited to areas assigned; plans to be filed.
The company shall install all water mains, pipes and conduits in that portion
of the public right-of-way assigned to it by the Township Department of
Public Works and shall file with the Township Clerk a map or plan showing
the location of all water mains, pipes, conduits, cisterns, reservoirs,
culverts, filter beds and other devices used in the distribution of water
contemplated herein, showing the sizes of the pipes and mains and
dimensions of all the installations.
§ A241-10. Notification of stoppages of service to be supplied.
Said water company shall notify all customers of any stoppage of service for
any period of time that it will not furnish water due to repairs, adjustments,
leakage or other foreseeable contingencies.
§ A241-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A241-11
1:1255
§ A241-11. Specifications and procedure for installations.
The top of said water pipes and mains and fittings and water supply system
shall be at least three (3) feet below the surface of all streets, avenues,
parks, parkways, highways and public places in the said Township of East
Brunswick (according to the grade which is now or may hereafter be
established). The work of laying, maintaining and repairing said pipes,
mains, supply lines, connections and conduits and the restoring in good
condition of the roadways and road surfaces shall be carried on with as
little interference as possible with public travel and the ordinary use of
said streets, avenues, parks, parkways, highways and public places. The
design and installation of all aboveground facilities for the use and purpose
intended by this ordinance shall be approved by the Township Engineer
before the start of construction.
§ A241-12. Commencement of work.
Said Industrial Water Supply Company shall commence to lay its pipes
and mains within the area described in § A241-2, of this ordinance within
one (1) year after the completion of the work necessary to utilize the
proposed sources of water supply and approval thereof by the Department
of Conservation and Economic Development, Division of Water Policy and
Supply, and the approval of such other governmental agencies as may be
required for the utilization of said sources of water supply, and after plans
and needs are established for the initial plant to be located in the franchised
area following the adoption of this ordinance. Said Industrial Water Supply
Company will progressively lay its pipes and mains as requirements of the
area described in § A241-2 of this ordinance may demand.
§ A241-13. Users to be supplied. [Amended 7-11-66 by Ord. No.
66-50-A]
The Industrial Water Supply Company shall supply nonpotable water to all
industrial and commercial consumers in the designated area who require a
minimum average of one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons of nonpotable
water per day, determined on a yearly basis. The company shall not be
required to supply smaller industrial and commercial consumers which do
not require the minimum referred to above. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary herein contained, the company shall not serve any existing
industrial or commercial user without the prior written consent of the
municipality, and the municipality reserves the right to sell potable water to
all consumers throughout the designated area. The obligation on the part
of the Industrial Water Supply Company to supply water under the terms of
this ordinance shall at all times be subject to the diversion rights granted by
the Division of Water Policy and Supply Council and to the conditions, rules
and regulations of that agency.
§ A241-11 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § A241-14
1:1256
§ A241-14. Failure to supply services.
Should said Industrial Water Supply Company, its successors and assigns,
fail or refuse to carry out the conditions, terms and provisions of this
ordinance and should such failure or refusal (except when the conditions,
terms and provisions of this ordinance cannot be carried out by an act of
God or the public enemy) continue for the space of ninety (90) days after
notice thereof to the company, then and in that event all of the rights,
powers and privileges and franchises hereby granted to said Industrial
Water Supply Company, its successors and assigns, shall, at the option
of the Mayor and Council of the Township of East Brunswick, cease and
forthwith become forfeited and void, said option being subject, however, at
all times, to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, the Division
of Water Policy and Supply and such other governmental agencies as may
have jurisdiction over the water supply and distribution contemplated
herein.
§ A241-15. Advertising expenses.
Said company shall pay the expenses incurred by this township for
advertising, if any, done in connection with the adoption of this ordinance
within thirty (30) days after the date of its going into effect.
§ A241-16. Effectiveness upon acceptance by company.
Said company shall file with the Township Clerk of this township is written
acceptance of this franchise within thirty (30) days after the receipt by it
from the Township Clerk of notice of approval thereof, and said ordinance
shall, upon the filing of such acceptance, become effective.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
17-22 5-8-17 Zoning: Definitions 228-3, Article
XIXA-A2 HC-2 General Highway
Commercial District 228-176,
228-176.1, 228-178
1
18-03 3-26-18 Administration: Water Utility 3-81,
Sewer Utility 3-83.2
2
18-04 3-26-18 Water: Definitions 218-1,
Discontinuance of Service 218-5
2
§ A241-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1257
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
18-05 4-9-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-62 Schedule
XXIII: Speed Limits
3
18-07 6-11-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-52 Schedule
XIII: Stop Intersections, 209-68
Schedule XXIX: Permit Parking
3
18-08 6-11-18 Sewer Utility: Definitions 219-1, Fees
and Charges 219-11
3
18-09 6-11-18 Water: Definitions 218-1, Water
Consumption Rates 218-15, Charges
for Multiple-Dwelling Units and
Trailers 218-16, Miscellaneous
Charges and Permit Fees 218-18
3
18-10 6-11-18 Administration of Government: East
Brunswick Arts Coalition, Nonprofit,
LLC Appointments 3-23.2
3
18-16 7-23-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-63 Schedule
XXIV: Traffic Control Signals
4
18-17 7-23-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-43 Schedule
IV: No Stopping or Standing
4
18-18 8-13-18 Zoning: 228-3 Definitions and Word
Usage, 228-222 Restrictions on
Accessory Buildings, Structures, and
Uses for Residential Properties
Land Use Procedures: 132-56.1
Zoning Permits Required
4
18-19 8-13-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-44 Schedule
V: Time Limit Parking
4
18-20 8-27-18 Administration of Government:
3-118.1 Schedule of Fees for Mayor
Services
4
18-23 10-8-18 Property Maintenance Code: 166-19
Maintenance of Vacant Properties,
Structures, Registration
Requirements and Fees, Registration
Form
5
18-25 10-22-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-17
Handicapped Parking, 209-49
Schedule X: Registered Trucks Four
(4) Tons Gross Weight or Over
5
18-26 10-22-18 Administration: 3-68 Hotel and Motel
Room Occupancy Tax
5
§ DL-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
1:1258
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
18-30 12-10-18 Zoning: 228-5 Adoption of Zoning
Map (adds amendments DDD—HHH),
Additions to Districts: 228-268 (R-3),
228-272 (C-2), 228-273 (C-3), 228-280
(OP-1), 228-285 (VG-II)
5
18-33 12-10-18 Property Maintenance Code: 166-3.1
Summons
5
18-34 12-10-18 Food and Beverage Vending
Machines: 107-5 Permit and License
Fees, Food Handling Establishments:
109-6 Fees, Swimming Pools-Public:
197-6 Fees, Terms of Permit
5
18-35 12-10-18 Vehicles and Traffic: 209-62 Schedule
XXIII: Speed Limits
5
18-39 12-10-18 Zoning: Alternative Treatment
Centers and Medical Marijuana
Program: 228-3 Definitions, 228-209
Conditional Uses for Alternative
Treatment Center in I/M District
5
18-43 12-10-18 Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables:
114-1, 114-2, 114-4—114-8, 114-17,
114-19, 114-21, 114-23—114-25,
114-26, 114-28
5
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-02 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-04 3-25-2019 Parks and Public
Lands Amendment
Ch. 158 6
19-05 3-25-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-06 4-8-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 228 6
19-07 4-8-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-10 5-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-12 5-13-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 3 6
19-17 6-24-2019 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 75 6
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1259
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-18 7-8-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 3 6
19-21 8-12-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-22 8-12-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 6
19-23 8-26-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 3 6
19-24 9-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 1
19-26 10-14-2019 Licenses: Retail
Electronic Smoking
Device
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 135, Art.
XIV
1
19-27 10-14-2019 Garbage, Refuse and
Recyclables
Amendment
Ch. 114 1
19-28 10-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 1
19-32 11-18-2019 Swimming Pools,
Private Amendment
Ch. 195 1
19-33 11-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 228 1
19-34 12-9-2019 Sewer Utility
Amendment
Ch. 219 1
19-35 12-9-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 218 1
19-36 12-9-2019 Land Use
Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 132 1
19-37 12-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 1
19-38 12-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 209 1
19-39 12-9-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 228 1
19-41A 12-23-2019 Licenses:
Recreational Uses;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 135, Art.
XVI; Ch. 228
1
20-01 1-27-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 1
§ DL-1 EAST BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
1:1260
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
20-02 1-27-2020 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 3 1
20-03 2-10-2020 Land Use
Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 132 1
20-04 2-10-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 228 1
20-05 2-10-2020 Bond NCM 1
20-06 2-10-2020 Bond NCM 1
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1261