Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (§ 1-1 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Township Council:
COUNCIL or TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The Township Council of the
Township of Franklin.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, Joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Extends and applies to associations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes a public highway, road, avenue, court, lane or alley,
and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Township Council.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin.
TOWNSHIP CLERK, CHIEF OF POLICE or OTHER OFFICERS — The
Township Clerk, Chief of Police or such other Township officer or
department, respectively, of the Township of Franklin, New Jersey.
WRITING or IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words, letters
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
A. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well
as to males.
B. May. The word "may" is permissive.
C. Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things, as well as to one person or thing.
D. Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
E. Committee. Whenever in this Code any committee is mentioned by
name or title, such committee shall be understood to be the committee
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
of the Township Council designated by such name or title, unless
otherwise indicated.
F. Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act
or event after which the designated period begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included,
unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the
period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a
Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. When a period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
§ 1-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 8-14-1969 by Ord. No. 441 (§ 1-2 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 1-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in this Code or in any other
ordinance of the Township or in any rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant to such Code or other ordinance of the Township
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense
or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or in such other Township
ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this Code or of any other ordinance of
the Township or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant
to such Code or other Township ordinance shall be punished by one or
more of the following: a minimum fine of $100 with said fine not
exceeding $2,000; imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 90 days; a
period of community service of not to exceed 90 days, except that any
violation of Subsection L of § 260-6, Prohibited activities, and § 260-26,
Trail use rules, that regulates vehicle operation shall be punished by a
minimum fine of $500 with said fine not exceeding $2,000. In addition,
any person under the age of 18 years who violates these sections shall
be deemed to be a juvenile delinquent and shall be proceeded against
as such. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591; 6-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 3615; 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 3645; 2-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 3803A]
B. Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Revised Statutes limits the
authority of the Township to punish the violation of any particular
provision of this Code or other Township ordinance or rule, regulation
or order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than
that provided in this section or imprisonment for a shorter term or for a
shorter term of community service than that provided in this section,
then the violation of such particular provision of this Code or other
Township ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by the
imposition of not more than the maximum fine or imprisonment or
community service so authorized. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
3591]
C. Each day any violation of this Code or any other Township ordinance or
rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided.
D. Whenever any such fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and
costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt
or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5

ARTICLE III
Enforcement of Code
[Added 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 3189 (Ch. 1, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 1-4. Authority of Manager.
The Township Manager shall have enforcing authority over all provisions in
the Township Code unless otherwise specified.
§ 1-5. Delegation of enforcement responsibility.
The Township Manager may delegate enforcement responsibility in writing.
Notice of such written delegation of authority shall be provided to the
Township Council and the Township Clerk.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:7

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Franklin of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of the
Township of Franklin, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 390, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Franklin," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1990 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Franklin by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Franklin" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:9
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Franklin, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Franklin to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 1-16
1:10
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 12-13-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Township's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
C. The following penalty sections have been revised (or added) so that
they refer to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, §§ 20-8, 85-12,
88-4, 93-7, 93-13, 93-16, 99-11, 112-325A(1), 115-23.2, 115-30, 115-35,
115-43, 121-9, 125-4A, 132-40, 134-2, 138-7, 142-32, 151-15, 156-15,
161-6A, 169-15, 183-4D, 183-9, 187-3, 192-8, 201-3, 201-13, 201-21,
201-28, 206-15, 206-53, 210-5B, 222-13A, 222-23, 230-14, 241-7,
248-5A, 253-13, 260-10, 260-18, 265-10, 271-15, 278-10, 284-20, 290-3,
298-4, 303-8, 303-17, 303-23, 308-4, 325-18, 333-18A, 333-42A, 340-3,
345-10E, 350-2, 354-15, 359-8A, 374-5, 378-4, 378-6, 384-63, 390-15A.
D. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19D, the sections which were amended, added or
deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by footnotes referring to
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV. During routine supplementation, footnotes and
histories indicating amendments, additions and deletions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591." Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-18 FRANKLIN CODE § 1-19
1:12
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 13.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:13

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 5-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CHARTER — The pertinent provisions of the State Optional Municipal
Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., as amended) governing the Council-
Manager Plan (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.) under which the Township
government is constituted.[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
DEPARTMENT — An organized unit of the government established or
designated by this chapter as a department or any agency or
instrumentality not allocated or assigned to such organizational unit.
DIVISION — An organized subunit of a department.
GENERAL LAW — Statutes which are not inconsistent with this Charter
and either are, by their terms, applicable or available to all municipalities
or relate to local courts, education, health, welfare or public authorities
serving more than one municipality and municipalities in an unsound
financial condition.
MANAGER — The Municipal Manager appointed pursuant to the Charter or
any Assistant Manager or Acting Manager temporarily serving in place of
the Manager, pursuant to the Charter or Township ordinance.
MUNICIPAL and MUNICIPALITY — The Township.
ORDINANCE — Any and all ordinances of the Township in force and effect
on November 1, 1986, and thereafter.
§ 5-2. Allocation of administrative functions. [Amended 2-14-2006
by Ord. No. 3591]
A. The administrative and legislative functions, powers and duties, except
as are by the Charter or general law reserved to the Council, shall be
allocated among and within the following functional areas:
(1) Executive and legislative. (See Article II.)
(2) Administrative Services and Municipal Court. (See Article III.)
(3) Community Development. (See Article IV.)
(4) Public Works and Engineering. (See Article V.)
(5) Public Health. (See Article VI.)
(6) Public Safety. (See Article VII.)
(7) Recreation, Community Celebrations and Parks Administration.
(See Article VIII.) [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1990]
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:15
(8) Community Resources and Services. (See Article IX.) [Amended
1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1990]
(9) Fire Prevention. (See Article X.)
(10) Economic Development. (See Article XI.)
(11) Information Technology. (See Article XII).
B. Special services, boards, committees and commissions. In addition to
the organizational units described in this chapter, there are special
services, boards, committees and commissions cited in the Code of the
Township of Franklin only to provide legislative authority for elements
identified, known as required by state law and audit requirements.
Inclusion of these entities does not necessarily mean that they are
staffed. The special services, boards, committees, commissions and
authorities shall include those enumerated in Chapter 13, Boards,
Commissions and Committees, of the Code.
§ 5-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-2
1:16
ARTICLE II
Executive and Legislative
§ 5-3. Power of Township Council.
All the powers of the Township and the determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the Township Council, except as otherwise provided by
the Charter, general law and this chapter.
§ 5-4. Meetings of Township Council. [Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 3115; amended 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 3333]
A. Conduct of meetings. [Amended 2-11-2003 by Ord. No. 3355;
2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3525; 10-9-2007 by Ord. No. 3710; 9-8-2009
by Ord. No. 3839; 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882]
(1) All meetings shall be conducted by the Mayor when present.
(2) The Deputy Mayor shall conduct the meeting when the Mayor is
absent.
(3) If the Mayor and Deputy Mayor are both absent, the Township
Clerk shall call the meeting to order and conduct the nomination
and election of a Temporary Chairperson. The Temporary
Chairperson shall conduct the meeting, but shall have no powers
beyond those necessary to conduct the meeting.
(4) The Township Attorney shall be the Parliamentarian.
(5) The meeting shall be conducted in accordance with these
regulations and Robert's Rules of Order for items not covered in
these regulations.
B. Agenda. [Amended 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 3333; 2-11-2003 by
Ord. No. 3355; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3525; 6-14-2005 by Ord. No.
3549; 10-9-2007 by Ord. No. 3710; 1-6-2009 by Ord. No. 3808;
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3839; 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882]
(1) The proposed agenda for each meeting shall be compiled by the
Township Clerk and the Township Manager, who shall consult with
the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor as the presiding officers of the
Township Council. The Township Clerk shall make the proposed
agenda available to the public and press upon request after same
has been made available to Council. All ordinances and resolutions
shall be distributed to the Council no later than the third business
day preceding the meeting of the Council.
(2) The Council may amend the agenda at the meeting upon the
determination that a need to amend the agenda exists. A majority
of Council members present must agree that a need exists in order
to add an item for discussion.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:17
(3) A member of Council, the Manager, and the Attorney may cause
matters to be listed on the proposed agenda to be reviewed at the
work session meeting. If a majority of members of Council do not
agree the items should be included in the agenda for the regular
meeting, the items shall be deleted.
(4) The agenda for the work session meetings shall be as follows:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Public discussion (two minutes per speaker).
(c) Council's subcommittee report.
(d) Council discussion items.
(e) Council comments/reports.
(f) Executive session.
(g) Adjournment.
(5) The agenda for regular meetings of the Council shall be as follows:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Pledge of allegiance.
(c) Invocation.
(d) Roll call.
(e) Commendations and proclamations.
(f) Mayor's report.
(g) Deputy Mayor's report.
(h) Public discussion (five minutes per speaker).
(i) Council comments/reports.
(j) Approval of minutes.
(k) Approval of warrants.
(l) Public hearing and adoption of ordinances on second hearing.
(m) Introduction of ordinances on first reading.
(n) Adoption of consent agenda resolutions.
(o) Resolutions.
(p) Old business.
(q) Executive session.
§ 5-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-4
1:18
(r) Adjournment.
(6) The agenda for combined worksession/regular meetings of the
Council shall be as follows:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Pledge of allegiance.
(c) Invocation.
(d) Roll call.
(e) Commendations and proclamations.
(f) Mayor's report.
(g) Deputy Mayor's report.
(h) Public discussion (five minutes per speaker).
(i) Council comments/reports.
(j) Council discussion items.
(k) Approval of minutes.
(l) Approval of warrants.
(m) Public hearing and adoption of ordinances on second reading.
(n) Introduction of ordinances on first reading.
(o) Adoption of consent agenda resolutions.
(p) Resolutions.
(q) Old business.
(r) Executive session.
(s) Adjournment.
(7) All ordinances shall be read by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or
Township Clerk, by title only, before introduction and adoption.
(8) All consent agenda resolutions shown on the regular meeting
agenda shall be considered in the form of one motion by the
Township Council. If any member of the Township Council requests
that a consent agenda resolution be considered and voted upon
independently of all other consent agenda resolutions, then that
item will be read by title by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or Township
Clerk and a separate vote shall be taken. All other consent agenda
items not affected by the requests shall be considered in the form of
one motion by the Township Council. All resolutions not on the
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:19
consent agenda shall be voted on separately and shall be read by
title only by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or Township Clerk.
C. Addressing the Council. Any person desiring to address the Council
shall first seek recognition by the Mayor or presiding officer and, upon
recognition shall confine his or her statement to the order of business
prescribed by this section:
(1) Ordinances. Under the heading of "Public Hearing on Ordinances"
any person may address the Council during the public hearing on
the ordinance under consideration at that meeting.
(2) Oral petitions and remarks. Under the heading of "Public
Discussion" any person may address the Council on any matter.
[Amended 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3525]
(3) Upon recognition from the Mayor or the presiding officer, a person
shall proceed to the floor and give his or her name and address. He
or she shall limit his or her statement to five minutes or such
shorter time as may be determined by Council. [Amended
2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3525]
D. Minutes. [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3657]
(1) All meetings other than closed session, shall be recorded on digital
disc.
(a) Audio recordings shall be authenticated by the Township Clerk
and the person conducting the meeting.
(b) Audio recordings shall be preserved in a manner prescribed by
the State Records Retention Law (N.J.S.A. 17:16W-1 et seq.).
(c) The Township Clerk shall make available to any member of
Council a recording on compact disc of any portion of a
meeting within one working day of the request.
(d) The Township Clerk shall make available a computer so that
the public may listen to the audio recording of the meeting.
(e) Any person may purchase a compact disc in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Chapter 180, Fees, of the Code of the
Township, if any. Compact discs may not be returned for credit
if they have been taken from the Township Clerk’s office. The
Township Clerk shall make available for purchase a compact
disc within seven working days of receiving the request to
purchase same, as per the Open Public Records Act.
(f) The Township Clerk shall post on the Township’s Web site the
audio recording of the meeting within three days of the
meeting.
§ 5-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-4
1:20
(2) In case of conflict between the written minutes and the audio
recording, the audio recording shall be authoritative. In case of a
defect in the audio recording, the written minutes shall be
considered the authoritative record of the meeting.
(3) Closed session minutes shall be approved in open session;
provided, however, that any discussion concerning the contents of
the minutes, prior to approval, shall be conducted in closed session.
(4) Approved minutes, other than minutes of closed sessions, with all
corrections and additions made, shall be made available to the
public within three working days of approval. Any person may
purchase a copy of the minutes at the rates fixed by law.
(5) The Township Clerk shall make an index of open session minutes
and released closed session minutes showing ordinances,
resolutions and discussions by topic.
(6) The Township Clerk shall preserve approved minutes as a
permanent record and the official authoritative record of the
Council proceedings.
E. Closed session minutes.
(1) The Municipal Clerk shall forward copies of all executive session
minutes still held in confidentiality to the Township Attorney during
the months of June and December of each year. The Township
Attorney shall review these minutes, determine which, if any can be
released to the public in whole or in part without jeopardizing the
need for confidentially, and advise the Municipal Clerk. The
Municipal Clerk shall present a resolution to the Township Council
for adoption releasing the executive session minutes, in whole or in
part, as approved for release by the Township Attorney. Those
executive session minutes to be released shall be designated by
subject matter. Upon adoption of the resolution, those minutes or
portions of minutes approved for release shall be placed in the
minute books of the Township Council and available for public
inspection.
(2) If a member of the public requests from the Municipal Clerk access
to executive session minutes not yet released to the public as set
forth above, the Municipal Clerk shall submit a request to the
Township Attorney within three business days to review the specific
minutes or subject matter as requested. The Township Attorney
shall advise the Municipal Clerk within three business days if the
minutes can be released. If approved for release by the Township
Attorney, a resolution releasing said minutes shall be presented to
the Township Council for adoption at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Council,
the minutes shall be released to the public.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:21
§ 5-5. Independent auditor.
An independent auditor shall be appointed by the Council pursuant to the
general law. He/she shall receive such compensation as may be agreed upon
and determined by the Council. The auditor shall be a registered municipal
accountant of the state but need not be a resident of the Township. In lieu of
appointing an individual auditor, the Council may appoint a firm of auditors,
one or more members of which shall be registered municipal accountants of
the state. The auditor shall make the annual audit.
§ 5-6. Township Attorney. [Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2025;
6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882]
F. Standing committees. [Added 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3525; amended
6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 3549; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3839]
(1) There shall be six standing committees of the Township Council as
follows: [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3936; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 4131-16]
(a) Administration.
(b) Financial Oversight.
(c) Public Safety.
(d) Land Use, Open Space, Parks and Recreation.
(e) Public Works.
(f) Economic Development.
(2) The standing committees shall consist of four members of the
Township Council appointed by the Township Council in January of
each year.
G. Meeting dates and times. Boards and Commissions that are appointed
by the Township Council shall not schedule their regularly scheduled
meetings on the same date and time of regularly scheduled meetings of
the Township Council. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3747]
A. Appointment; term of office; qualifications; compensation. The
Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Council by a majority vote
of its members for a term of one year from the first day of January of the
year of the appointment and until his/her successor has been appointed
and qualified. The Township Attorney shall be an attorney at law of the
state but need not be a resident of the Township. The Attorney shall be
paid such retainer as may be agreed upon and authorized by the
Council plus such fees and charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
B. Powers and duties. The Township Attorney shall:
§ 5-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-6
1:22
§ 5-7. Additional attorneys. [Added 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 38822]
Appointment; term of office; qualifications; scope of work; compensation.
The Council may appoint, by a majority vote of its members, for a term of
one year from the first day of January of the year of the appointment and
until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified, such additional
attorneys as may be deemed necessary and appropriate. The additional
attorneys shall be attorneys at law of the State but need not be residents
of the Township. The additional attorneys shall provide such legal work as
directed by Council and shall be paid as authorized by Council.
§ 5-8. Township Clerk. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
Township Clerk shall be appointed by the Township Council by a majority
vote of its membership to hold office and perform the duties of a Municipal
Clerk as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.
§ 5-9. Deputy Township Clerk. [Amended 6-10-2010 by Ord. No.
3882]
There shall be a Deputy Township Clerk who shall be appointed by the
Manager. The Deputy Township Clerk shall generally assist the Township
Clerk in the proper performance of all his/her duties. The Deputy Township
Clerk shall also have all the powers and perform all duties vested in the
Township Clerk at such times as the Township Clerk shall be absent from
the Township or unable to serve by reason of disability or otherwise. The
Deputy Clerk shall attain the Registered Municipal Clerk certification from
the State of New Jersey within three years of appointment.
(1) Serve as legal advisor to the Council and Manager on all legal
matters of Township business.
(2) Represent the Township in all judicial and administrative
proceedings, except as otherwise directed by Council, in which the
municipality or any of its officers or agencies may be a party or
have an interest.
(3) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the municipality.
(4) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize
for special or regular employment in or for the municipality.
(5) Perform such duties as may be deemed necessary to provide legal
counsel to the Council and the Manager in the administration of
municipal affairs.
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 5-7 through
5-9 as §§ 5-8 through 5-10.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:23
§ 5-10. Division of Election Administration. [Amended 10-10-2000
by Ord. No. 3162]
Within the Department of the Township Clerk, there shall be a Division of
Election Administration under the jurisdiction of the Township Clerk. This
Division shall be responsible for performing election duties in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 for all elections set forth in Titles 19, Chapters 40
and 40A of the New Jersey statutes.
§ 5-11. Division of Vital Statistics.3 [Added 6-10-2010 by Ord. No.
3882]
§ 5-12. Township Manager.
A. Within the Department of the Township Clerk, there shall be a Division
of Vital Statistics under the jurisdiction of the Township Clerk. He/she
shall be responsible for the maintenance of vital statistics in accordance
with mandated standards.
B. Within the Division of Vital Statistics, there shall be a Registrar of Vital
Statistics, a Deputy Registrar and a Subregistrar, all of whom shall be
appointed by the Manager for terms of service in accordance with state
guidelines.
A. Appointment, compensation; assistant. The Township Manager shall be
appointed and may be removed in accordance with the Charter. He/she
shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance,
payable as other municipal salaries are paid, unless and until otherwise
provided by ordinance. The Manager may designate that the Assistant
Township Manager or a qualified administrative officer of the
municipality perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence
or disability. In the event of his/her failure to make such designation,
the Council may, by resolution, appoint an administrative officer of the
municipality to perform the duties of the Manager during such absence
or disability until he/she shall return or his/her disability shall cease.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) Generally. The Manager shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the municipality. He/she shall see that all
ordinances, resolutions and policies of the Council and all the state
laws subject to enforcement by municipal action are faithfully
enforced and executed. He/she shall:
(a) Represent the municipality and assert its proper interest in
relation to the state and other political subdivisions and with
respect to municipal contracts and franchises.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 5-11, Division of Grant Administration, was repealed 3-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 3966. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 5-12
through 5-14 as §§ 5-11 through 5-13, respectively.
§ 5-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-12
1:24
(b) Attend all meetings of the Township Council with the right to
take part in discussions but without the right to vote.
(c) Keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the
municipality, make reports to the Council as requested by it
and, at least once a year, make an annual report on the
government for the benefit of the Council and the public.
(d) Study the governmental and administrative operations and
needs of the municipal government and prepare and
recommend to the Council necessary and desirable plans and
programs to meet present and foreseeable needs.
(e) Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department
of the municipality.
(f) Receive inquiries and complaints concerning Township
business, provide information and assistance and remedy or
cause to be remedied the source of any just complaint.
(g) Perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by
ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(h) Enter, with the Township Council, into employment
agreements.
(2) Administrative supervision and direction. The Township Manager
shall:
(a) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments of
the municipal government and be responsible for the
maintenance of sound personnel policies and administrative
practices.
(b) Approve all bills and vouchers for payment, subject to preaudit
control as may be provided herein.
(c) Establish working, personnel, vacation and sick leave
schedules and appropriate records and reports.
(d) Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget
operations, work programs and costs of municipal services.
(e) Approve or prescribe the internal organization of each
department.
(f) Assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and
duties among and within departments, subject to the Charter
and organization code.
(g) Delegate to department heads and officers such of his/her
duties and powers as he/she may deem necessary for efficient
administration.
§ 5-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12
1:25
§ 5-13. Assistant Township Manager. [Amended 4-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 3038]
There shall be an Assistant Township Manager who shall be appointed by
the Manager. The Assistant Township Manager shall generally assist the
Township Manager in the proper performance of all his/her duties. The
Assistant Township Manager shall also have all the powers and perform all
the duties vested in the Township Manager at such times as the Township
Manager shall be absent from the Township or unable to serve by reason or
disability or otherwise.
§ 5-14. Special Projects Manager. [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No.
3966]
There shall be a Special Projects Manager who shall be appointed by the
Manager. The Special Projects Manager shall generally assist the Township
Manager in the proper performance of all his/her duties, more particularly,
special projects as directed by the Manager.
§ 5-15. Personnel administration. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4013-13]
The Township Manager shall perform the duties of Director of Personnel
and shall designate a Human Resources Officer, whose duties shall include
the following: recruiting, examination, classification, assignment and
coordination of performance evaluation functions; implementation of
Township personnel ordinances, rules and regulations; maintenance of an
official personnel records repository; conducting and coordination of
personnel investigations and hearings; preparation and implementation of
a pay plan and Salary Ordinance approved by Council; implementation and
review of contracts with municipal employee organizations; implementation
of the separation process; municipal employee training; benefits
administration; and performance of such other personnel functions as the
Manager may assign.4
(h) Assign, as necessary, any department head, division head or
other employee to any administrative, special staff or task
force.
(i) Operate a reproduction center for internal forms and other
documents.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 5-16, Procurement of goods and services, § 5-17, Division of
Economic Development, and § 5-18, Division of Information Technology, were repealed
3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3966..
§ 5-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-16
1:26
§ 5-16. Human Resources Officer. [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No.
39665]
There shall be a Human Resources Officer who shall be appointed by the
Township Manager. The Human Resources Officer shall be responsible for
all of the duties set forth in § 5-15, Personnel administration, and shall assist
the Township Manager in his/her duties as the Director of Personnel.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 5-16 through
5-23 as §§ 5-17 through 5-24.
§ 5-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16
1:27

ARTICLE III
Revenue and Finance
[Added 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319; amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1586; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2053; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165;
6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882; 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3966]
§ 5-17. Divisions. [Amended 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3966]
Within the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be:
§ 5-18. Duties of Director of Revenue and Finance.
The Director of Revenue and Finance shall supervise the work of the above
divisions, with the exception of the Municipal Court. He/she shall be
appointed by the Manager.
§ 5-19. Division of Financial Administration.
A. Division of Financial Administration.
B. Division of Revenue Collection Administration.
C. Division of Tax Assessment Administration.
D. Division of Grant Administration.
E. Division of Procurement of Goods and Services.
A. Within the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be Division
of Financial Administration, the head of which Division shall be the
Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer. He/she shall have, perform and
exercise all of the functions, powers and duties as provided by general
law and municipal ordinances. He/she shall keep and maintain books
and records of all financial transactions of the Township in accordance
with the standards and requirements of the Division of Local
Government in the State Department of the Treasury. He/she shall have
custody of all public monies of the Township and shall make monthly
reports to the Director of all receipts, expenditures, commitments and
unexpended appropriations. All moneys received from any source by or
on behalf of the Township by any department, board, office or agency,
except as otherwise provided by municipal ordinance, shall be paid to
the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer, who shall, by the next ensuing
bank day after their receipt, deposit them to the credit of the Township
in the authorized public depository of the Township to the credit of the
proper account.
B. Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present a
detailed bill of demand to the Treasurer, duly certified or, in the
alternative, supported by an affidavit of the claimant. It shall be the
duty of the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer to see that the signature of
the officer or employee who has been duly assigned by the Township to
§ 5-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:29
§ 5-20. Chief Financial Officer to handle special payments.
In the event that it is not possible to preestimate or wait for a regularly
scheduled meeting for approval of payroll, all related mandatory payroll
deductions and expenses and payments for principal reduction and interest
payments for Township bonds and notes, the Chief Financial Officer shall
present such claims for approval at the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Council after disbursement by the Chief Financial Officer for such
claims.
§ 5-21. Division of Revenue Collection Administration; Municipal
Collector of Revenue.
certify that the materials have been received or the services rendered
to the Township appears on every claim.
C. The Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall prepare a voucher list
supported by vouchers and submit the same to an agenda meeting for
the Township Council prior to its regular meeting. Claims shall be
considered by the Council, which shall approve the same, except that
the Council may, for sufficient legal cause, reject any claim presented to
it, stating the reasons for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer with such
instructions as the Council may give at the time of disapproval. The
Township Clerk will record all claims in the official minutes, indicating
that the Township Council has, by formal action, approved the same.
D. Disbursements and payment of bills, claims and demands shall be made
upon preaudit and warrant of the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer and
approved by the Manager. After the Township Council has approved
such claims for payment, the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall
forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof. The
checks shall be signed by the Mayor and Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer or any officer hereafter designated by state statute.
A. Within the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be a
Division of Revenue Collection Administration. The head of the Division
shall be the Municipal Collector of Revenue. The Collector of Revenue
shall have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties as
are provided by general law and municipal ordinances. He/she shall
receive and collect all moneys assessed or raised by taxation or
assessment for any purpose. He/she shall keep proper records and shall
report to the Director, at least once a month, all receipts and deposits
made by him/her and shall report and account for all moneys for which
he/she is responsible. He/she shall keep a current record of all tax title
liens, advising the Director promptly as such liens become subject to
foreclosure under law. He/she shall also bill, receive and collect water
charges and other revenues.
B. Within the Office of the Tax Collector of Revenue, there shall be a
Division of Tax Title Lien Administration. This Division shall be under
§ 5-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-21
1:30
§ 5-22. Division of Tax Assessment Administration.
Within the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be a Division
of Tax Assessment Administration. The head of the Division shall be the
Municipal Tax Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Township Council
for a term as prescribed by law. The Tax Assessor shall have, perform and
discharge all the functions, powers and duties prescribed for assessors by
state statute and municipal ordinance.
§ 5-23. Division of Grant Administration.
Within the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be a Division
of Grant Administration. This Division shall be under the jurisdiction of
the Grants Coordinator and shall be responsible for the administration of
grants.
§ 5-24. Procurement of goods and services.
the jurisdiction of the Collector of Revenue and shall be responsible for
the administration of tax title liens.
A. The Director of Revenue and Finance shall perform the duties as
Director of Purchasing and designate a Purchasing Agent, whose duties
shall include the planning, organizing and implementing of all Township
procurement and property disposal. He/she shall coordinate the writing
of specifications but shall not write technical specifications in detail
unless the material or services involved are directly related to his/her
department. Technical specifications for the particular commodity or
services concerned shall be written by individual department heads.
B. The Director of Purchasing and/or the designated Purchasing Agent
shall coordinate, organize and plan all activities related to
procurement.
C. Procedure.
(1) General. All purchases shall be made in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto as amended from time to time.
(2) Contracting agent. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(3), the Township
Manager is hereby designated as contracting agent for the
Township. The Manager may name a designee who would act as
Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent as defined in the
rules and regulations of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq. As contracting agent for the Township, the
Manager or his/her designee shall:
(a) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3, enter into contracts on behalf of
the Township for performance of any work, or the furnishing of
any materials or supplies, the total cost of which is less than
$17,500 and does not exceed the bid threshold as established
§ 5-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-24
1:31
§ 5-25. through § 5-28. (Reserved)6
by statute. The Township Manager or his/her designee shall
prepare requests for resolution for purchases of commodities
or services over the bid threshold following the procurement
guidelines established by statute. [Amended 11-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 4216-17]
(b) Prepare specifications for and advertise for receipt of bids, and
receive and review bids for items or services as are authorized
for purchase in the annual budget as approved pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4. The Purchasing Agent shall coordinate
purchases made from state or other cooperative purchasing
contracts and assist the departments in the preparation of
requests for proposals, requests for competitive contracts, and
requests for quotations.
(3) Bid advertisement.
(a) All legal advertisements for any item to be bid will be prepared
by the Purchasing Agent.
(b) The bids shall be received at such place and time as may be
provided for in the legal notice of bid proposals. Upon receipt
of sealed bids by the Purchasing Agent, the bids shall be
opened by the Purchasing Agent in the presence of the
Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee, and the department
head involved in said bid.
(c) A record of the proceedings shall be submitted to the Township
Council, including a summary of all bids received. The award of
bid shall be accomplished by resolution of the Township
Council. Items purchased through a:
[1] Cooperative purchasing agreement; or
[2] Commodity/service exempt from bidding as noted in
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5 are exempt from the foregoing process
but shall require approval of the Township Council if the
bidding threshold established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-3 is exceeded.
(4) Contracts. Contract documents, other than professional service
agreements, will be prepared or obtained by the Purchasing Agent.
Purchase orders for purchases from all departments will be issued
and signed by the Purchasing Agent after the guidelines for
procurement above have been fulfilled.
D. Emergency purchases can only be made following the rules and
procedures outlined in Local Public Contract Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.
§ 5-24 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-25
1:32
6. Editor's Note: Former § 5-25, Division of Information Technology, and former § 5-28,
Municipal Court, as amended, were repealed 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4013-13. For current
provisions, see Article VII, Department of Information Technology, and Article XII,
Municipal Court, of this chapter, respectively.
§ 5-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-25
1:33

ARTICLE IV
Department of Planning and Zoning
[Amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 3352; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 3490;
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656; 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882]
§ 5-29. Establishment of Department; Director. [Amended
6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 38827]
There shall be a Department of Planning and Zoning, the head of which
shall be the Planning Director. He/she shall be appointed by the Township
Manager and shall be qualified by training and experience in municipal land
use.8
§ 5-30. Administrative Officer; Planning Board; Board of
Adjustment.
A. Within the Department of Planning and Zoning, there shall be an
Administrative Officer. He/she shall have, perform and exercise all of
the functions, powers and duties as provided by general law and
municipal ordinance. He/she shall be responsible for the day-to-day
administration of the Department.
B. The Department shall provide planning support for all Township bodies
and, in particular, provide staff support and liaison to the Planning
Board and Board of Adjustment. The Department shall perform
planning research and related work as required. The Department shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the Township's zoning
regulations.9
C. Planning Board. The Township Planning Board and Secretary thereto,
heretofore created by ordinance pursuant to general law, are continued
with the functions, powers, and duties prescribed by general law and
ordinance. The Council shall appoint the members of the Board, who
shall serve without compensation for terms prescribed by law.
D. Board of Adjustment. The Township Board of Adjustment and Secretary
thereto, heretofore created by ordinance pursuant to general law, are
continued with the functions, powers, and duties prescribed by general
law and ordinance. The Council shall appoint the members of the
Board, who shall serve without compensation for terms prescribed by
law.
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 5-27 as
§ 5-30.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 5-26, Divisions, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Land Development.
§ 5-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-30
1:35

ARTICLE V
Department of Construction Code Enforcement
[Added 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 388210]
§ 5-31. Department of Construction Code Enforcement; Municipal
Construction Official.
A. Within the Department of Construction Code Enforcement, there shall
be a Municipal Construction Official. He/she shall be appointed by the
Township Manager, and he/she shall be competent in the field of
building construction, plumbing, and fire and electrical inspection. He/
she shall develop, coordinate and implement the various code
enforcement activities and operations as well as conduct overall
administrative activities to the code enforcement function of the
Department.
B. The Construction Official shall possess licensing as required by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs for plan review and
inspections under the uniform construction code in at least one
category of trade inspections. Said individual shall ensure that all
provisions of the uniform construction codes are adequately enforced
through the Township and, further, that all persons performing
inspections are licensed to do so by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
C. The Construction Official shall be responsible, in addition to those
functions and duties listed specifically above, for overall operation of
the Department, which shall include planning, programming,
budgeting, personnel and other related matters and functions.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Art. V as Art.
VI and former §§ 5-28 through 5-34 as §§ 5-31 through 5-37.
§ 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-31
1:37

ARTICLE VI
Department of Public Works and Engineering11
[Amended 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 3490]
§ 5-32. Establishment of Department; Director.
There shall be a Department of Public Works and Engineering, the head of
which shall be the Director of Public Works and Engineering. The Director
may also serve as the Township Engineer. He/she shall be appointed by the
Township Manager and shall be qualified by training and experience. In
absence of the Director of Public Works and Engineering, he/she may select
an Acting Director to serve.
§ 5-33. Divisions.
Within the Department of Public Works and Engineering, there shall be the
following Divisions:
§ 5-34. Assistant Directors.
The Director shall have the authority to appoint two Assistant Directors as
follows:
§ 5-35. Division of Public Works.
Within the Department of Public Works and Engineering there shall be a
Division of Public Works. The Division of Public Works shall be headed by
the Public Works Manager who shall supervise the following sections:
A. Public Works.
B. Water.
C. Engineering.
A. An Assistant Director of Public Works who shall supervise the Division
of Public Works and the Division of Water. The Assistant Director of
Public Works shall be certified by the State of New Jersey as a Public
Works Manager.
B. An Assistant Director of Engineering, who, in those circumstances
where the Department Director is not so designated, shall be the
Township Engineer.
A. Roads and Stormwater.
B. Trees and Signs.
C. Solid Waste.
11.Former Art. VI, Public Health, adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319, as amended, was
repealed 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation
of former §§ 5-42 through 5-45 as §§ 5-38 through 5-41.
§ 5-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-35
1:39
§ 5-36. Division of Water Utilities.
§ 5-37. Division of Engineering.
Within the Department of Public Works and Engineering, there shall be a
Division of Engineering who shall be supervised by the Director, in those
circumstances where he/she serves as the Municipal Engineer, or by the
Assistant Director of Engineering. The head of the Division of Engineering
shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and duties
as provided by general law and municipal ordinance. He/she shall be
responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Division of Engineering.
He/she shall possess a New Jersey professional engineering license in the
field of civil engineering.
D. Building.
E. Parks.
F. Vehicle Maintenance.
G. Open Space.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Division of
Water Utilities. The Division of Water Utilities shall be under the
Director of Public Works and shall be headed by the Water Utility
Manager. The Division shall have under its employ a New Jersey
licensed water operator, who shall preferably also serve in the capacity
as the Water Operator/Superintendent.
B. This Division shall be responsible for the testing of water in accordance
with State of New Jersey regulations. Said Division shall further be
responsible for the maintenance of the municipal water system,
including repairs and replacement of waterlines, fire hydrants, water
meters and other such related items. The Division shall also make
inspections as required by existing state and local standards.
§ 5-35 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-37
1:40
ARTICLE VII
Department of Information Technology
[Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4013-13]
§ 5-37.1. Department of Information Technology.
There shall be a Department of Information Technology, the head of which
shall be the Information Technology Director. He/she shall be appointed by
the Township Manager and shall be responsible for:
A. The planning and administration of overall computer service
requirements for the Township's computer network and/or personal
computer systems utilizing generic or department-specific software.
B. The planning, coordination and direction of the work-designated
support staff assisting with departmental computer efforts.
C. Serving as the Department's focal point for systems development,
software acquisition and overall development, maintenance and
operation of the local- and wide-area networks (LAN/WAN).
§ 5-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-37.1
1:41

ARTICLE VIII
Public Safety
[Added 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319]
§ 5-38. Establishment of Department; Director. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
A. There is hereby created a Department of Public Safety, the head of
which shall be the Director of Public Safety. He/she shall be appointed
by the Manager and shall be qualified by training and experience.
B. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Township Manager, the
Director of Public Safety shall be responsible for the proper and
efficient conduct of the Department and the supervision of its activities.
The Director of Public Safety shall be the Executive Officer of the
Division of Police and, subject to the supervision of the Township
Manager, shall be directly responsible for the efficient and routine dayto-
day operations of the Police Department. The Public Safety Director
shall be charged with the duties of supervising the Division of Police in
all areas and aspects as shall impact upon policy and the good order
and discipline of the Division and shall adopt rules and regulations for
the Division of Police and establish policies for the daily operation of the
Division of Police and the discipline of its members. Any reference to
the "Chief of Police" in this Code shall be deemed to mean the Director
of Public Safety. These duties shall be consistent with the authority
permitted to be vested in the Public Safety Director pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 and shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers;
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department;
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the officer in charge's direction and control; and
(5) Report at least monthly to the Township Manager in such form and
at such times as shall be prescribed by the Township Manager
regarding the operation of the Police Department during the
preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the Township Manager.
§ 5-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-39
1:43
§ 5-39. Police force.
The police force heretofore established by ordinance is continued within the
Department. The Department shall have all the functions, powers, duties
and responsibilities prescribed by law for a municipal Police Department
generally12 and by any provision of the Charter and ordinances relating to
the Department of Public Safety.
§ 5-40. Standards and regulations.
The Department of Public Safety shall exist in accordance with the
standards and regulations as set forth in Chapter 50 of the Code of the
Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey, entitled "Police
Department."
§ 5-41. Office of Emergency Management. [Amended 2-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 3591]
See Chapter 50, Police Department.
§ 5-42. Division of Animal Control. [Added 6-10-2010 by Ord. No.
3882]
§ 5-43. through § 5-45. (Reserved)
A. Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be a Division of
Animal Control, the head of which shall be the Director of Public Safety.
He/she shall be responsible for the enforcement of general laws and
municipal ordinances governing the control of wild and domestic
animals within the Township as well as for the maintenance and
operation of an animal shelter.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall supervise the functions of the Animal
Control Officer.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Police Department.
§ 5-39 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-43
1:44
ARTICLE IX
Recreation, Community Celebrations and Parks Administration
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1990]
§ 5-46. Establishment of Department; Director.
§ 5-47. Divisions.
§ 5-48. Division of Recreation. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
3165]
Within the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Parks
Administration, there shall be a Division of Recreation, the head of which
shall be the Director of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration. He/she shall be responsible for the day-to-day
administration of the Division of Recreation, which shall include recreation
program development and implementation for all age groups, including
youth, teen, adult and senior populations. Further the Director shall be
responsible for coordinating with and recommending assistance to
volunteer athletic leagues in the Township. The Director shall be
responsible for the day-to-day management and oversight of a Community/
Senior Center upon same being developed by the Township.
§ 5-49. Division of Community Celebrations.
Within the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations, Park
Administration, there shall be a Division of Community Celebrations, the
head of which shall be the Director of Recreation. He/she shall be
responsible for the planning and coordination of activities for special as well
A. There shall be a Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations
and Parks Administration, which shall be responsible for, but not
necessarily limited to the planning, organizing and effecting of public
recreation policies and programs within the Township. The head of the
Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Parks
Administration shall be the Director of Recreation, Community
Celebrations and Parks Administration.
B. The Director of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Parks
Administration shall be appointed by the Township Manager and shall
be qualified by training and experience in management of a municipal
parks system and recreation programming and operations.
A. Within the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and
Park Administration, there shall be:
(1) The Division of Recreation.
(2) The Division of Community Celebrations.
(3) The Division of Park Administration.
§ 5-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-49
1:45
and annual public events within the community and preparation of a budget
funding such activities.
§ 5-50. Division of Park Administration.
Within the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations, Park
Administration, there shall be a Division of Park Administration, the head
shall be a Director of Recreation. He/she shall be responsible for the
scheduling of use of Township park facilities and coordinating with Public
Works and Engineering so as to ensure that the day-to-day maintenance
and repair of park facilities is addressed. The Director shall be responsible
for planning park improvements and the submission of an annual capital
improvement program to the Township Manager. Further the Director shall
seek grants and low interest loans to assist in the funding of park
improvements.
§ 5-49 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-50
1:46
ARTICLE X
Community Resources and Services
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1990; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
3165]
§ 5-51. Establishment of Department; Director.
There shall be a Department of Community Resources and Services, the
head of which shall be a Director of Community Resources and Services.
He/she shall be appointed by the Township Manager and shall be qualified
by training, experience and education in the field of social work, theory,
practice and the delivery systems in accordance with standards as
promulgated by the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-52. Public assistance program.
The Director of Community Resources and Services shall serve in the
capacity of Welfare Director for the Township of Franklin and shall maintain
a public assistance program complying with federal law and local
ordinance.
§ 5-53. Duties.
A. The Department of Community Resources and Services shall be
responsible for assisting Township residents in obtaining and
maintaining human services as may be available through community,
state and federal agencies.
B. The Director of Community Resources and Services shall develop and
manage programs at the local level to meet community needs as
identified by the Director as well as the community and the Township
Manager.
§ 5-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-53
1:47

ARTICLE XI
Department of Fire Prevention13
[Added 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319]
§ 5-54. Establishment.
§ 5-55. Director of Fire Prevention. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 3165]
The head of the Department of Fire Prevention shall be the Director of Fire
Prevention, who shall also be the Fire Official for the Township of Franklin.
Said Director of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the Township
Manager and shall be certified by the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs as a Fire Official.
§ 5-56. Fire Prevention Board. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
3591]
For the Fire Prevention Board, see Chapter 13, Boards, Commissions and
Committees, Article IX, Fire Prevention Board, and Chapter 132, Fire
Prevention.
§ 5-57. Procedure for appeals under Uniform Fire Safety Act.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208,
respectively) of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any
order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Franklin Township Construction Board of Appeals. In the event that said
Franklin Township Construction Board of Appeals is not constituted, the
aggrieved person may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
of the County of Somerset.
A. There shall be a Department of Fire Prevention, which shall enforce,
administer and otherwise effect the provisions of the fire prevention
codes, regulations and local ordinances, with emphasis on meeting the
basic inspection requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.14
B. The Department of Fire Prevention shall exist in accordance with the
standards and regulations as set forth in Chapter 132 of the Code of the
Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey, entitled "Fire
Prevention."
13.Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Economic Development, added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
3498, was repealed 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Fire Prevention.
§ 5-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:49

ARTICLE XII
Municipal Court15
[Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4013-13]
§ 5-58. Municipal Court.
A. There is hereby established in the Township a Municipal Court, to be
known and designated as the "Municipal Court of the Township of
Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey."
B. Powers and duties. The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall
have, possess and exercise all of the functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction in all cases of every nature conferred upon such court or
such Judge by the statutes of the state in such case made and provided.
Such court and Judge shall have jurisdiction over complaints for
violations of any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of
the Township.
C. Officials and personnel.
(1) The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Council
as provided by general law and municipal ordinance and shall hold
office for such term as provided therein. He/she shall have and
possess the qualifications and shall have and perform the
jurisdiction, powers and duties prescribed by general law.
(2) There may also be appointed by the Council an Associate Judge,
who, if such position is appointed, shall hold office for such term as
provided by general law and municipal ordinance and shall have
and possess the qualifications and have and perform the
jurisdiction, powers and duties as prescribed for the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
(3) There shall be a Public Defender who shall be appointed by the
Council as provided by general law and municipal ordinance and
shall hold office for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 next ensuing. He/she shall have and possess
the qualifications and shall have and perform the jurisdiction,
powers and duties prescribed by general law. In the event Council
appoints Assistant Public Defenders, as authorized in Subsection
C(4), the Public Defender shall serve as the Chief Municipal Public
Defender and shall have authority over the Assistant Public
Defenders serving the court with respect to the performance of
their duties.
(4) There may also be appointed by Council Assistant Public
Defenders, as deemed necessary and appropriate, who shall hold
office for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and ending
15.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII, Information Technology, added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
3498, was repealed 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3882.
§ 5-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-58
1:51
December 31 next ensuing. Such Assistant Public Defenders shall
have and possess the qualifications and shall have and perform the
jurisdiction, powers and duties prescribed by law.
(5) There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall
be appointed by the Manager. The Administrator of the Municipal
Court shall be responsible for the supervision of administrative
operations of said entity.
D. The Chief Financial Officer shall supervise the fiscal transactions of the
Municipal Court so as to ensure compliance with accounting standards
as established for municipal courts in the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-58 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-58
1:52
ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)
§ 5-59. through § 5-60. (Reserved)
§ 5-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-59
1:53

ARTICLE XIV
Indemnification of Officers and Employees
[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 1887]
§ 5-61. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide for the defense of
actions against and the indemnification of public employees for civil actions,
as permitted by N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.
§ 5-62. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
set forth:
INSURANCE — Coverage afforded by insurance policies of every kind
whether the premiums be paid by the Township, the public employee or
someone on his/her behalf.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any officer, employee, board or committee member
appointed or hired by the Township Manager whether full-time or part-time.
The term shall also include any person elected by the voters to fill any
official position in the Township or any person subsequently appointed to fill
such a position.
§ 5-63. Defense of actions.
The Township shall provide for the defense of any action brought against
a public employee on account of any act or omission in the scope of his
employment, and this obligation shall extend to any cross actions,
counterclaims or cross complaints against such an employee. Where the
allegations against the public employee include allegations that the act or
failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual
malice, the Township shall provide for the defense on the express condition
that the public employee shall execute a reimbursement agreement that
shall provide that in the event the public employee shall be adjudicated
or admit to have acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice then, in such event, the public employee shall
reimburse the Township for all fees and costs incurred by the Township in
providing such defense
§ 5-64. Exceptions.
The Township shall not provide a defense to a public employee when the
Township Council determines that:
A. The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
B. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the public employee, including:
§ 5-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-64
1:55
§ 5-65. Procedure for claims.
A public employee shall, within 10 calendar days of the time he/she is
served with any summons, complaint, process notice, demand or pleading,
deliver the original or a copy thereof to the Township Clerk.
§ 5-66. Method of defense.
§ 5-67. Indemnification.
(1) Where the legal proceeding involves a claim of misfeasance or
malfeasance in office or a claim of fraud, theft or misappropriation
of public funds.
(2) Where the legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the
municipality against the public employee.
C. Where defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy or policies, whether obtained by the Township or by
any other person.
D. Where the legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the public
employee.
E. When public employee failed to deliver to the Township Clerk, within 10
calendar days after the time he/she is served with any summons,
complaint, process notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy of
the same.
F. The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
A. The governing body of the municipality shall provide the public
employee with the necessary means for the defense of such action
which may include assigning the Township Attorney or any attorney for
any board or committee of the Township, permitting the insurance
carrier to assign counsel, or payment to an attorney of the public
employee's own choice at a rate not to exceed that set forth by
Township ordinance.
B. The public employee shall be obliged to cooperate with the Township in
the conduct of his/her defense. The refusal of the public employee to
cooperate with the Township shall terminate the Township's obligation
to defend the public employee.
A. In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense under
this chapter, the Township shall pay or shall reimburse the public
employee for:
(1) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into on behalf of the
employee and approved prior to settlement by the Township. The
Township shall not be obliged to pay any settlement agreements
unless the Township has approved the settlement.
§ 5-64 FRANKLIN CODE § 5-67
1:56
§ 5-68. Costs attributed to counteractions.
If the public employee files a counteraction in the legal proceedings, the
municipality shall not be obligated to reimburse him/her for any attorney's
fees or court costs attributed to such counteraction.
§ 5-69. Precedence of statute.
To the extent that N.J.S.A. 40A:14-155 provides broader indemnification
to members of the municipality's Police Department, that statute shall
supersedes this article.
§ 5-70. Effect on prior actions.
Any legal action which may be covered by this article which has not been
reduced to final judgment as of the date of passage shall be covered by the
terms of the article.
(2) Any judgments entered against the employee.
B. In addition, in any case where the Township would be required to
provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the Township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance.
C. The amount of indemnification shall be reduced by the amounts paid by
any insurance coverage and/or any amounts received by the public
employee in any counteraction against the person or person bringing
the action against him/her.
D. The Township shall not indemnify the public employee for exemplary
damages and punitive damages.
E. This article shall not abrogate the exceptions set forth in § 5-64.
F. If the acts alleged in the action ultimately are determined to constitute
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong,
the public employee shall be required to reimburse the Township for
any costs and fees expended by the Township in defense of the public
employee.
§ 5-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-70
1:57
Chapter 8
ALLIANCE AGAINST SUBSTANCE ABUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 13.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 166.
§ 8-1. Authorization.
There is hereby established an Alliance Against Substance Abuse under the
authority of P.L. 1989, c. 51 (N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8 et seq.), and the Guidelines
of the Somerset County Municipal Alliance Plan Steering Subcommittee.
§ 8-2. Purpose.
In accord with the above authorization, the purpose of the Alliance is
to address the symptoms and root causes of alcoholism and drug abuse
problems by developing:
§ 8-3. Membership.
A. Organized and coordinated efforts with local schools, law enforcement,
business groups, and other community organizations for the purpose of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
B. In cooperation with local school districts, comprehensive and effective
alcohol and drug abuse education programs in grades kindergarten
through 12.
C. In cooperation with local school districts, procedures for the
intervention, treatment, referral and discipline of students abusing
alcohol and/or drugs.
D. Comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education support and
outreach efforts for parents in the community.
E. Comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community awareness
programs.
A. The Municipal Alliance of Franklin Township shall be appointed by the
Township Council for one year terms and shall include as its
membership a broad representation from the local community.
Membership may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Mayoral representative;
(2) The Chief of Police or his designee; [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 1889]
§ 5-70 FRANKLIN CODE § 8-3
1:58
§ 8-4. Meetings.
§ 8-5. Funding.16
The Municipal Alliance of Franklin Township shall develop a comprehensive
plan to provide matching funds equivalent to the amount of monies received
from the Municipal Alliance for Prevention of Substance Abuse grant
agreement with Somerset County Department of Human Services. These
matching funds shall be a minimum of 25% cash or in-kind services.
(3) The President of the School Board;
(4) The Superintendent of Schools;
(5) A student assistance coordinator;
(6) A representative of the Parent-Teacher Association;
(7) A representative of the Local Bargaining Unit for teachers;
(8) A representative of the Chamber of Commerce including but
limited to local business and industry representatives;
(9) A representative of organized labor;
(10) A Municipal Court Judge or representative of the court system;
(11) Representatives of local civic associations;
(12) Representatives of local mental health agencies, local treatment
and prevention providers;
(13) Representatives of local religious groups; and
(14) Private citizens to include youth representatives and youth and
adults recovering from drug and/or alcohol abuse.
B. The Alliance may expand its membership from the local community
beyond the above listing if it desires.
C. Members shall be appointed for one-year terms of office which shall
commence January 1 of each year and expire December 31 of each year.
[Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2025]
A. Meetings should be held regularly with a calendar of meetings
established in advance.
B. A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be selected by the members of the
Alliance.
C. A quorum shall be required for all decisions of the Alliance. Minutes
shall be taken to serve as public record.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:59
Chapter 13
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Alliance Against Substance Abuse — See Ch.
8.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 26.
Redevelopment Agency — See Ch. 58.
§ 8-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 8-5
1:60
ARTICLE I
Advisory Board of Health
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1847 (§ 3-50 of the 1990 Code);
amended in its entirety 12-11-2014 by Ord. No. 4090-14]
§ 13-1. Members appointed.
§ 13-2. Duties.
The Board shall consult with the Health Officer on matters of public health
and shall also study the health needs of the Township and make reports and
recommendations to the Council for local legislative actions.
§ 13-3. (Reserved)
A. The Council shall appoint the members of the Advisory Board of Health,
who shall serve without compensation for the terms prescribed by local
ordinance. It shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions,
powers and duties as provided by municipal ordinance as set forth
below.
B. There shall be an Advisory Board of Health which shall consist of the
following members appointed by the Township Council:
(1) Seven regular members for terms of three years;
(2) Two alternate members for terms of two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years
for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2, so that the
term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one
year;
(3) One nonvoting student member for a term of one year;
(4) One member of the Township Council who shall serve as liaison to
the Township Council, and who shall be appointed for a period of
one year.
C. Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their
successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified.
D. In the event of a vacancy in the membership of the Advisory Board of
Health occurring during the unexpired term of office, a person shall be
appointed as a member of said body to serve for such unexpired term.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:61

ARTICLE II
Advisory Recreation Council
[Adopted 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2053; amended 3-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 2063 (§ 3-60 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-4. Membership.17
§ 13-5. (Reserved)18
A. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be assisted by an Advisory
Recreation Council consisting of 12 citizen members. All appointments
shall be for a term of three years and until their successors have been
duly appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy on the Advisory
Recreation Council occurring during an unexpired term of office, a
person shall be appointed as a member of said body to serve for such
unexpired term. The members shall receive no compensation for their
services. Of the aforementioned citizen members, Council shall appoint
one member to serve as liaison to the Board of Education for a term of
one year. Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their
successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified. [Amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816]
B. In addition to the aforementioned citizen members, Council shall
appoint two members, one male and one female to serve as
representative to the student body of Franklin High School and two
members who reside in the Township of Franklin and attends a private
or parochial high school for a term of one year. The Township Council
shall appoint from its membership one Councilperson to serve as liaison
to the Advisory Recreation Council for a term of one year.
17.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 730, adopted 4-24-1975, provided for a nine-member
Advisory Recreation Council with one member being from a private or parochial school.
18.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-5, Removal of members, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:63

ARTICLE III
Agricultural Advisory Committee
[Adopted 6-15-2000 by Ord. No. 3136 (§ 3-31 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-6. Establishment of Committee.
Within the Department of Community Development, and in accordance
with Public law 1999, Chapter 180 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-43.1), there is hereby
established an Agricultural Advisory Committee which shall be appointed
by the Township Council and shall report to the Municipal Planning Board.
§ 13-7. Membership. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591;
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 4132-16]
§ 13-8. Duties.
The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall exercise those duties and
responsibilities provided for in Public Law 1999, Chapter 180, and shall
act as an advisory committee and report directly to the Franklin Township
Planning Board.
A. The Agricultural Advisory Committee established by this article shall be
composed of five regular members and one alternate member who shall
be residents of the municipality, with a majority of the members actively
engaged in farming and owning a portion of the land they farm.
B. The members of the Municipal Agricultural Advisory Committee shall
be appointed for a one-year term, which term shall expire on December
31 of each year. Members shall serve for their respective terms and
until their successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified.
C. There shall be a Council Liaison who shall be appointed for a one-year
term, which term shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 13-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-8
1:65

ARTICLE IV
Board of Health
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319 (§ 3-51 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-9. Township Council to serve as Board of Health.
The Township Council shall serve as the Board of Health, and the Township
Manager shall be this Board's administrative authority.
§ 13-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-9
1:67

ARTICLE V
Cultural Arts Council
[Adopted 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 4073-1419]
§ 13-10. Creation and appointment authority.
The Township Cultural Arts Council, heretofore created by ordinance
pursuant to general law, is continued with functions, powers and duties
prescribed by general law and ordinance. The Township Council shall
appoint the members of the Council, who shall serve without compensation.
§ 13-11. Mission statement.
The Cultural Arts Council (hereafter known as "Council") shall promote
and encourage the expression and appreciation of the visual, literary and
performing arts in Franklin Township by utilizing and cultivating the rich
diversity of talent available both within and to Franklin Township.
§ 13-12. Purpose and function.
The purpose and function of the Cultural Arts Council are:
§ 13-13. Committee structure.
A. To investigate, develop and recommend community initiatives
encouraging expression and appreciation of the arts in Franklin
Township.
B. To promote initiatives and events encouraging expression and
appreciation of the arts in Franklin Township.
C. To establish relationships with private and nonprofit organizations to
further the expression and appreciation of the arts.
D. To leverage arts expression and appreciation to foster economic
development and growth.
E. To maximize utilization of Franklin Township's indigenous arts
resources, both institutional and individual.
F. To recommend public policy and legislative positions that serve to
achieve the mission.
A. The Committee will be made up of a Steering Committee and various
subcommittees as named and designated by the Steering Committee.
B. The Steering Committee shall consist of up to 11 members appointed by
the Township Council. The membership makeup of the Committee and
the subcommittees shall be determined by the bylaws.
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Business and Industrial
Advisory Board, adopted 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 3122, as amended.
§ 13-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-13
1:69
§ 13-14. Term of Committee members.
§ 13-15. Frequency of meetings.
§ 13-16. Procedures.
Procedural questions will be managed according Robert's Rules unless
Committee bylaws are adopted which will supersede the use of Robert's
Rules.
§ 13-17. through § 13-19. (Reserved)
C. The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Recording and Corresponding
Secretary of the Steering Committee will be selected from one of its
members in a process outlined in the bylaws.
A. Committee members will serve for a term of three years with the
exception of the appointments made in the first year.
(1) Three members will be appointed for a one-year term.
(2) Four members will be appointed for a two-year term.
(3) Four members will be appointed for a three-year term.
B. After the initial terms have expired, each Committee member will be
appointed for a three-year term.
C. Subcommittee terms will be outlined in the bylaws.
A. Steering Committee meetings will be held monthly or more frequently
as determined by the Steering Committee.
B. Subcommittee meeting dates and times will be determined by each
subcommittee.
§ 13-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-17
1:70
ARTICLE VI
Cable Television Advisory Committee20
[Adopted 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 303121 (Ch. 9 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-20. Definitions.
All definitions shall be the same as set forth in Chapter A402, Cable
Television Franchise, of the Code of the Township of Franklin.
§ 13-21. Creation and duties.
There shall be created a Cable Television Advisory Committee whose
purpose shall be to:
§ 13-22. Membership. [Amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 3342]
A. Survey the needs of the community in relation to cable telephone, FiOS,
internet and any other related needs and desires and make
recommendation to the Township Council of survey results in
conjunction with these services provided by all companies licensed to
operate in the Township; [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836]
B. Participate in the franchise process in conjunction with the Township
Council;
C. Monitor progress of the cable provider and any other franchise to
ensure compliance with franchise requirements and state regulations;
and [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836]
D. Compile and forward complaints to the Office of Cable Television as per
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 or applicable office. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 3836]
A. The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall consist of:
(1) One Board of Education representative.
(2) One Township Library representative.
(3) One Township staff representative.
(4) Five general public members.
B. In addition to the above members, there shall be one Council liaison
member to be appointed by the Township Council for a one-year term
expiring December 31 of each year. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3816; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836]
20.Editor's Note: The title of this article was revised from “Cable Television Committee” to
“Cable Television Advisory Committee” 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836.
21.Editor's Note: The Cable Television Advisory Committee was established by Ord. No. 1020
in conjunction with Ord. No. 996 which established the cable television franchise. (See Ch.
A402 of this Code.) Ordinance No. 996 was replaced by Ord. No. 1731 which did not
provide for this Committee; therefore the Committee was recreated by Ord. No. 3031.
§ 13-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-22
1:71
§ 13-23. Appointment of members.
The Township Council shall appoint all members of the Committee.
§ 13-24. Term of office. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836]
Membership of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be appointed
for two-year terms, with the initial appointments to provide staggered
expiration dates.
§ 13-25. Officers.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall elect, out of its own number,
a Chairperson and Secretary.
C. All members listed above shall each have one equal vote on all policy
decisions. [Added 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3836]
§ 13-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-25
1:72
ARTICLE VII
Emergency Life Support Delivery Committee
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1517 (Ch. 16 of the 1990 Code);
amended in its entirety 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3830]
§ 13-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing a Committee for Emergency Life Support Delivery
for Franklin Township.
§ 13-27. Membership.
§ 13-28. Meetings.
§ 13-29. Coordinator.
A. A Committee for Emergency Life Support Delivery for Franklin
Township (hereinafter the "Committee") is hereby established.
Membership shall consist of the following:
(1) Township Manager or designee.
(2) The Chief of Police or designee.
(3) One to three Council representatives selected by the Township
Council.
(4) A representative and alternate of any first aid or rescue squad
which services Franklin Township that wishes to participate in
formulating EMS policy and procedure for Franklin Township.
B. Each first aid/rescue chief officer shall appoint a representative and
alternate prior to the January ELS meeting. The Township Manager's
and Chief of Police's designee can be the same person, as well as ELS
Committee Coordinator. Their term shall run for the calendar year.
A. Meetings of the Committee for Emergency Life Support Delivery for
Franklin Township shall be held four times a year. Additional meetings
may be scheduled by the membership based upon need, and the
Coordinator shall be empowered to call special meetings should he/she
perceive a need for same. [Amended 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 4112-15]
B. The location of each meeting shall be at the Public Safety/Municipal
Building. [Amended 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 4112-15]
C. (Reserved)22
D. Attendance will be in compliance with the Franklin Township Municipal
Code Absenteeism Policy, Chapter 13, Article XXII.
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning waiver by the host squad of its location,
was repealed 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 4112-15.
§ 13-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-29
1:73
§ 13-30. Reports.
§ 13-31. Votes.
Each representative or alternate of the Committee shall have one vote,
with the exception of Township Council members, who will not vote. In
cases where the same member represents one or more positions within the
A. The Committee for Emergency Life Support Delivery for the Township
shall have a Coordinator. The Coordinator shall be designated by the
Township Manager and shall be a staff member of the Township. The
Coordinator shall have the responsibility of reporting to the Council
representatives. This may be accomplished via the meeting minutes.
B. An Assistant Coordinator may be elected by a majority vote of said
Committee. The term of said offices shall be for one year or terminate at
the completion of his or her term of membership in the Committee,
whichever occurs first. The term shall run from January 1 of the year in
which the appointments are made. If a vacancy occurs in the office of
the Assistant Coordinator, it shall be filled by a majority vote of the said
Committee as mentioned above. [Amended 6-9-2015 by Ord. No.
4112-15]
A. Written reports shall be required to be presented to said Coordinator at
intervals prescribed in this section from each first aid squad/rescue
squad. Written reports from the Police Department shall be presented
to the first aid/rescue squad at the January ELS meeting. First aid
squad/rescue squad annual reports must be submitted on or before
March 1 of the new year.
(1) Squad personnel report. The squad personnel report shall
encompass active members as well as the current status of the
training of each active member.
(2) Squad call breakdown, yearly.
(a) The call breakdown shall encompass the number of calls and
man hours within Franklin Township.
(b) The call breakdown shall encompass the number of calls and
man hours outside of Franklin Township.
(3) The annual police report, yearly.
(a) The total number of dispatches for all first aid/rescue squads
dispatched by Franklin Township.
(b) Franklin Township's record of mutual aid calls performed by
each individual first aid/rescue squad.
B. Failure to render reports may result in a delay of an individual first aid/
rescue squad receiving their annual donation/stipend from Franklin
Township.
§ 13-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-31
1:74
Committee, only one vote shall be cast by that member for the respective
Committee positions held. A quorum for a vote shall consist of a minimum
of four members of the Committee.
§ 13-32. Powers and duties.
§ 13-33. Procedures.
A. The Committee is authorized to receive, review and make
recommendations to the Township Council. It shall also have the
following powers and duties:
(1) Make recommendations to the Township Council regarding the
distribution formula for annual budget contributions to first aid/
rescue squads;
(2) Receive and make recommendations to the Township Council upon
request for capital appropriations for first aid/rescue squads;
(3) Receive and make recommendations to the Township Council upon
requests for policy changes for said first aid/rescue squads;
(4) Receive and make recommendations to the Township Council upon
resolutions for said first aid/rescue squads;
(5) Receive and make recommendations to the Township Council upon
any and all such other requests as may be deemed properly made
to the Committee by a majority vote of said Committee;
(6) The Committee, with input from all participating first aid/rescue
squads and the Franklin Township Police Department, will develop
a set of dispatch protocols, including recordkeeping, mutual aid
assignment and response times, for regular review;
(7) The Committee will act on and formulate recommendations upon
intersquad complaints based on given standards of care and
acceptable protocols.
A. In order to solicit support to receive municipal funds as aforesaid, a first
aid/rescue squad shall submit to the Committee a written request.
Attached to the request shall be any and all supporting information and
documentation necessary to evaluate said request. Upon receipt of the
request, the Committee shall have 30 days to review the same. The
Committee may require additional information or documentation. If
additional information or documentation is required, the requesting
first aid/rescue squad shall be notified and shall respond by meeting
with the Committee at its next scheduled meeting.
B. Notice of approval or denial of a request by the Committee shall be in
writing to the representative member as defined hereunder.
C. (Reserved)
§ 13-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-33
1:75
§ 13-34. (Reserved)
D. The aforesaid time period may be extended by agreement between the
first aid/rescue squad and the Committee.
E. If a request by the first aid/rescue squad is approved by the Committee
as aforesaid, it shall be presented to the Township Council and
recommended for approval. The Township Council may then act on the
request by either granting the request by a majority vote and directing
that the appropriate monies be provided or it may deny same with or
without a request that further information and documentation be
furnished. The Township Council shall place any such recommendation
by the Committee on a Township Council agenda within 90 days of its
receipt. In the event of an emergency, the ELS Committee can request
an emergency Township Council meeting as soon as feasible.
§ 13-33 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-34
1:76
ARTICLE VIII
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 8-29-1974 by Ord. No. 676 (Ch. 18 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-35. Creation.
There is hereby created an Environmental Commission for the protection,
development or use of the natural resources located within the territorial
limits of the Township, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-2 et
seq., Chapter 35 of the laws of New Jersey, 1972.
§ 13-36. Appointment of members.
§ 13-37. (Reserved)23
§ 13-38. Assignment of staff.
The Director of Community Development shall assign staff as necessary to
provide support to said Commission.
A. The Township Council shall appoint the members of the Environmental
Commission which shall consist of seven persons, citizens and residents
of the Township, one of who shall also be a member of the Municipal
Planning Board. Of the citizen Commissioners first appointed, three
members shall be appointed for a term of three years, and three
members shall be appointed for a term of two years, respectfully from
the date in the year in which such appointments are made and until
their successors are duly appointed and have qualified. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for a term of three years. The term of the
Commissioner who is also a member of the Municipal Planning Board
shall run concurrently with his/her term on the Planning Board. In the
event of a vacancy on the Environmental Commission occurring during
an unexpired term of office, a person shall be appointed as a member of
said body to serve for such unexpired term. The members shall receive
no compensation for their services. [Amended 4-24-1975 by Ord. No.
728]
B. There shall also be appointed to the Environmental Commission two
alternate members who shall be designated by the Township Council as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Each alternate shall serve in
rotation during the absences or disqualification of any regular member
or members. After the initial appointments, the term of each alternate
member shall be two years. The initial appointment of the Alternate No.
1 member of the Environmental Commission shall be for a term
expiring December 31, 1998, and Alternate No. 2 shall be for a term
expiring December 31, 1999. [Added 4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2070]
23.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-37, Removal of Commissioner, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-39
1:77
§ 13-39. Powers.
The Commission shall have the following powers:
§ 13-40. (Reserved)24
§ 13-41. Records and annual report.
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before the first day of April and submit the
same to the Council of the Township, which report shall be comprehensive
and detailed covering operations, receipts, disbursements and expenditures
for the full year.
§ 13-42. Organization.
The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Commission. The Commission is authorized to adopt
laws governing its procedural operation.
A. Promote conservation and development of the natural resources of the
Township.
B. Plan, implement and inform the public about local conservation
programs.
C. Compile and keep an index of all open area, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands.
D. Conduct research into the possible use of the open areas of the
Township.
E. Recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for inclusion in
a Municipal Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
F. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes.
G. Subject to the approval of the governing body, acquire property, both
real and personal, in the name of the municipality by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any
lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas in the municipality. [Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1579]
24.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-40, Absenteeism policy, added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1976, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-39 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-43
1:78
§ 13-43. Appropriations.
The Council of the Township may annually fix, determine and appropriate a
sum sufficient for the expenses of the Commission which shall be raised by
taxation in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 13-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-43
1:79

ARTICLE IX
Fire Prevention Board
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319 (§ 3-65 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-44. Establishment.
There shall be a Fire Prevention Board in accordance with the definition of
the same in Chapter 132 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, Somerset
County.
§ 13-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-44
1:81

ARTICLE X
Historic Preservation Advisory Commission
[Amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 3352; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No.
3490(§ 3-30 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-45. Creation. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816]
The Township Historic Preservation Advisory Commission, heretofore
created by ordinance, is continued with the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by ordinance. [See § 112-200.] The Council shall appoint the
members of the Commission, who shall serve without compensation for
terms prescribed by law. Members shall serve for their respective terms and
until their successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified.
§ 13-46. (Reserved)25
§ 13-47. Assignment of staff.
The Director of Community Development shall assign staff as necessary to
provide support to said Commission.
§ 13-48. (Reserved)26
25.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-46, Removal of members, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
26.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-48, Absenteeism policy, added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1976, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-48
1:83

ARTICLE XI
Housing Authority
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319 (§ 3-67 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-49. Creation.
The Township Housing Authority, as heretofore created and constituted
pursuant to law, shall be continued. (See Chapter 26, Housing Authority, of
the Code of the Township of Franklin.)
§ 13-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-49
1:85

ARTICLE XII
Human Relations Commission
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1990 (§ 3-62 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-50. Creation and appointment authority.
The Township Human Relations Commission, heretofore created by
ordinance pursuant to general law, is continued with the functions, powers
and duties prescribed by general law and ordinance. The Council shall
appoint the members of the Commission, who shall serve without
compensation.
§ 13-51. Purpose.
The Human Relations Commission shall attempt to foster, through
community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation
among the groups and elements of the inhabitants of the community.
§ 13-52. Membership. [Amended 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3664]
There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A.
10:5-10, consisting of 12 citizen members to be appointed by the Township
Council for a term of three years and until their successors have been duly
appointed and have qualified. In the event of a vacancy during an unexpired
term of office, a person shall be appointed as a member of said body to serve
for such unexpired term. In addition, the Township Council shall appoint
from its membership one Councilman to serve as liaison to the Human
Relations Commission for a term of one year.
§ 13-53. (Reserved)27
27.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-53, Removal of members, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-53
1:87

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)28
§ 13-54. (Reserved)
§ 13-55. (Reserved)
28.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Insurance Commission, adopted 12-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1866 (§ 3-72 of the 1990 Code), was repealed 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3868.
§ 13-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-55
1:89

ARTICLE XIV
Joint Advisory Committee/Village of Kingston
[Adopted 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 3270 (Ch. 29 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-56. Establishment.
A Joint Township Advisory Committee for the Designated Village Center of
Kingston is hereby established by ordinance by the Council of the Township
of Franklin and the Council of the Township of South Brunswick.
§ 13-57. Purpose.
The purpose of the Joint Township Advisory Committee is to:
§ 13-58. Composition and appointment; officers; terms.
A. Make recommendations to the respective Township Councils to ensure
that the planning and implementation agenda (PIA) for the Designated
Village Center and its environs is actively pursued by all relevant
parties.
B. Recommend to the Township Councils modifications or additions to the
PIA when warranted by changing circumstances.
C. Act as a conduit for communications between the Townships, the
residents of the Designated Village Center and the Office of State
Planning (OSP). It shall also keep the OSP informed of progress of the
PIA, with advance approval of the Township Councils.
D. Advise and assist the Councils, Planning Boards, other committees,
boards, commissions, and task forces, and the administrations of both
the Township of Franklin and the Township of South Brunswick on
matters related to the Designated Village Center of Kingston and its
environs.
A. Composition and appointment. The Joint Township Advisory Committee
shall consist of:
(1) All members will be jointly appointed by the Township Councils of
both the Townships of Franklin and South Brunswick. At least six of
the members must reside or work within the state-approved
boundaries of the Designated Village Center and its environs. Of
these members, at least two shall reside or work within the
boundaries of the Township of Franklin, and at least two shall
reside or work within the boundaries of South Brunswick. For the
initial appointments, the first six members appointed shall
recommend a person to be appointed as the seventh member.
(2) There shall be two Township liaisons, one from each Township
Council. Liaisons are nonvoting members of the Committee.
§ 13-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-58
1:91
§ 13-59. Vacancies.
(3) The Planning Directors, or their designees, from each Township
shall be ex-officio technical staff.
B. Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson shall be elected annually by the Joint Township Advisory
Committee from among the seven voting members at the first meeting
of each calendar year.
C. Terms.
(1) Voting members shall serve on the Advisory Committee for terms of
three years. Liaisons serve terms of one year. Planning Directors
shall serve for the period of time they hold such positions in their
respective Townships.
(2) The terms of the first members of the Committee shall be as
follows:
(a) Three members for a term of office to expire on December 31,
2002;
(b) One member from the Township of Franklin and one member
from the Township of South Brunswick for a term of office to
expire on December 31, 2003;
(c) One member from the Township of Franklin and one member
from the Township of South Brunswick for a term of office to
expire on December 31, 2004.
(3) The successors of the first members of the Committee shall be
appointed by both Township Councils for terms of three years.
(4) The terms of the Township liaisons to the Committee will expire on
December 31 of each year.
(5) Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their
successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified. [Added
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816]
A. (Reserved)29
B. (Reserved)30
C. In the event of vacancy occurring on the Committee, other than by the
expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment.
29.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, pertaining to removal of members, was repealed
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
30.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to removal from office for absenteeism,
was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-58 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-60
1:92
§ 13-60. Meetings; rules; quorum.
§ 13-61. Powers and duties.
A. The Joint Township Advisory Committee shall meet quarterly, but more
frequent meetings may be arranged, if necessary. All meetings will be
publicly noticed at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting.
B. The meeting place shall be at either of the two Township's Municipal
Buildings or at a suitable site within the Kingston Designated Village
Center or its environs. If the Municipal Buildings are used, the
Committee should alternate meeting sites between the two Townships.
C. The Committee shall have the power to establish bylaws and rules for
the conduct of its meetings.
D. A simple majority of the voting members of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote
by a majority of the voting members present.
A. Powers. The Joint Township Advisory Committee shall serve as part of
the governments of the Township of Franklin and Township of South
Brunswick in support of and consistent with the purposes contained in
§ 13-57.
B. Duties. The specific duties of the Joint Township Advisory Committee
include but are not limited to the following areas:
(1) To monitor and encourage progress on the PIA and to communicate
with OSP on such matters, with advance approval of the Township
Councils.
(2) To assist the Townships, the counties, the state, and the federal
government in their efforts to achieve the stated objectives of the
PIA.
(3) To serve as a communication link between residents and businesses
located within the boundaries of the Kingston Village Center and its
environs and municipal, county, and state governments and
independent agencies.
(4) To assist in the application for grants and other fund-raising
activities to achieve the objectives outlined in the PIA.
(5) To recommend to the Township Councils modifications or additions
to the PIA when warranted by changing circumstances.
(6) To keep records of its meetings and activities and issue an annual
progress report to the two Township Councils and the OSP.
(7) To submit to the Planning Departments of the Townships no later
than the month of October an estimate of its financial needs for the
coming year.
§ 13-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-62
1:93
§ 13-62. Staffing and funding.
§ 13-63. Amendments.
Any amendments to this ordinance must be enacted in exactly the same
form by the Councils of both Townships.
A. The Joint Township Advisory Committee may make a recommendation
to both Township Managers for the appointment of a recording
secretary, the appointment to be made and compensation set by the
Township Managers.
B. Other staffing needs approved by the Township Councils shall be met by
the Township Planning Departments.
C. Any such staffing expenses shall be within the limits of the funds
appropriated by the Township Councils to their respective Planning
Departments for purposes of funding the Committee.
§ 13-62 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-63
1:94
ARTICLE XV
Library Board of Trustees
[Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162 (§ 3-69 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-64. Establishment.
There shall be a Library Board of Trustees with the powers and duties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.
§ 13-65. Membership. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816;
3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3868]
The Library Board of Trustees shall consist of seven members:
§ 13-66. Vacancies.
§ 13-67. (Reserved)32
A. Five members shall be citizens, at least four of whom shall be residents
of the municipality, and shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve fiveyear
terms expiring on December 31. Members shall serve for their
respective terms and until their successors thereafter have been
appointed and qualified.
B. One member shall be the Mayor or other chief executive officer of the
municipality.
C. One member shall be the local superintendents of schools, or in the
event there be no such official, the principal with power of supervision
over the local school system.
A. Vacancies on the Board of Trustees shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointments and shall be for the unexpired term only.31
31.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to removal of members, was repealed
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
32.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-67, Absenteeism policy, added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1976, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-67
1:95

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)33
§ 13-68. through § 13-71. (Reserved)
33.Editor’s Note: Former Article XVI, Municipal Ethics Board, amended 4-9-1991 by Ord. No.
1631 (§ 3-73 of the 1990 Code), was repealed 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 4047-13. This
ordinance also repealed former Addendum A, Code of Ethics, adopted by the Municipal
Board of Ethics 6-16-1992, as amended. Ordinance No. 4047-13 also stated: "The
Township of Franklin hereby transfers the responsibility of ethics complaints to the State
of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Local Finance Board as pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:35 – Local Government Ethics Law."
§ 13-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-68
1:97

ARTICLE XVII
Rent Leveling Board
[Adopted 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 3352; amended 9-28-2004 by Ord.
No. 3490 (§ 3-32 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-72. Creation and appointment.
The Rent Leveling Board, heretofore created by ordinance, is continued
with the functions, powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 294, Rent
Control. The Council shall appoint the members of the Board, who shall
serve without compensation for terms prescribed by law.
§ 13-73. (Reserved)34
§ 13-74. Assignment of staff.
The Director of Community Development shall assign staff as necessary to
provide support to the Board.
§ 13-75. (Reserved)35
34.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-73, Removal of members, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
35.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-75, Absenteeism policy, added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1976, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-75
1:99

ARTICLE XVIII
Senior Citizen Advisory Committee
[Adopted 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2025; amended 3-28-2000 by Ord.
No. 3116 (§ 3-71 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-76. Creation and appointment.
The Township Senior Citizen Advisory Committee, heretofore created by
resolution, is continued with the functions and duties as prescribed. The
Council shall appoint the members of the Committee, who shall serve
without compensation.
§ 13-77. (Reserved)36
§ 13-78. Membership.
A. Members of the organizations below shall select one representative and
one alternate:
(1) Parkside Senior Citizens Club;
(2) Franklin Park Senior Citizens Club;
(3) Franklin Township Senior Citizens Club;
(4) United Seniors of Franklin;
(5) Somerset Residence.
B. The Mayor and Township Council shall appoint the following
representatives:
(1) A senior citizen who is not a member of any senior citizen club;
(2) A nonsenior resident of the Township (under age 60);
(3) A member of the Township Council; the Township Manager shall
serve as alternate for the Township Council representative.
C. The following shall be ex officio. The employee of the Franklin Township
Parks and Recreation Department responsible for senior citizen
programming shall be its representative. The Parks and Recreation
Department Program Coordinator shall serve as alternate.
D. Each representative shall be entitled to one vote; alternates may vote
only when the person whom they represent is absent.
E. Each representative and alternate shall serve for a term of one year
beginning February 1. Members shall serve for their respective terms
36.Editor’s Note: Former § 13-77, Removal of members, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 13-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-78
1:101
§ 13-79. Officers.
The following officers shall be selected from among Committee members by
a committee of the whole for a term ending the following December 31:
§ 13-80. Rules of procedure.
§ 13-81. Functions.
and until their successors thereafter have been appointed and qualified.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3816]
F. Mayor and Council appointees shall serve for a term of one year
beginning January 1.
A. A Chair.
B. A Secretary.
C. A Vice Chair shall be selected by the Chair for a term coinciding with
the above.
A. A quorum shall be a simple majority of all members.
B. (Reserved)37
C. Copies of all correspondence, agendas and minutes shall be submitted
to the Township Clerk.
D. The Mayor/Council appointee shall keep the Mayor and Council
informed.
E. The favorable vote of a majority of the members present shall be
required to carry a motion.
A. The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall have the following
functions:
(1) To advise the governing body and make recommendations on
matters relating to senior citizens;
(2) To participate in the planning and administration of senior citizen
activities and services;
(3) To provide liaison between the municipal government and senior
citizens.
B. In pursuing these functions, the Committee may investigate and
research:
37.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, which prohibited officers from serving more than two
consecutive terms in any one office, was repealed 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 3928.
§ 13-78 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-81
1:102
(1) Subsidies, grants and/or other aid available from the federal
government, the State of New Jersey, the County of Somerset, and
nongovernmental sources such as private individuals, corporations,
foundations, etc.
(2) Programs, services, facilities and activities of benefit to Franklin
Township senior citizens.
§ 13-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-81
1:103

ARTICLE XIX
Sewerage Authority
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1319 (§ 3-68 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-82. Creation.
The Sewerage Authority, as heretofore created and constituted pursuant to
law, is continued. (See Chapter 70.)
§ 13-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-82
1:105

ARTICLE XX
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 3005 (Ch. 19 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 13-83. Establishment.
There shall be a Shade Tree Commission of the Township of Franklin.
§ 13-84. Membership appointment; terms. [Amended 2-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 3816; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4100-15]
The Shade Tree Commission shall consist of seven members and two
alternates who are residents of the Township appointed by the Township
Manager, and they shall serve for staggered five-year terms. One member
shall also be a member of the Environmental Commission. One member
shall be an employee of the Township Public Works and Engineering
Department. To the extent possible, a member should be employed as a tree
surgeon or involved in a tree-related business, and a member should have
an academic horticultural or landscape architecture background. Members
shall serve for their respective terms and until their successors thereafter
have been appointed and qualified.
§ 13-85. Authority.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power and authority for the
regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery upon or in the highways, parks or parkways within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Franklin and shall exercise all powers and
rights provided in N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., Shade Tree Commission, as
amended and supplemented.
§ 13-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-85
1:107

ARTICLE XXI
Trails Advisory Committee
[Adopted 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3513]
§ 13-86. Purpose.
A Township of Franklin Trails Advisory Committee is hereby established
to involve trail users and Township residents in advising Township
departments, the Township Manager and Township Council on issues
related to trail acquisition, design, maintenance and use.
§ 13-87. Mission and duties.
§ 13-88. Composition. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3682]
The Township of Franklin Trails Committee shall be composed of nine
members appointed by the Township Council and confirmed by the vote of a
majority of the members of Council. At least one member shall be appointed
from the Open Space Advisory Committee.
A. The Township of Franklin Trails Advisory Committee is advisory to the
Mayor, Township Manager and Township Council and makes
recommendations to promote, protect and assist in development of
enjoyable, safe, convenient trail opportunities for pedestrians,
bicyclists, and equestrians throughout the Township of Franklin
planning area.
B. Duties of the Trails Advisory Committee include:
(1) Identifying current and future trail interests and needs of the
community;
(2) Identifying trail opportunities and options during development
review and analyzing alternatives for maximum potential benefit;
(3) Making recommendations to the Township Council on trail policies
and design issues;
(4) Making recommendations on acquisition and development of trail
facilities and trail use;
(5) Conducting trail surveys for maintenance and safety
recommendations;
(6) Reviewing and commenting on public and private development
actions to promote trail interest; and
(7) Other related duties.
C. The Committee shall maintain regular communications with the
Township Manager and Council to share information and pursue joint
interests. The Committee shall report annually to the Township Council
on accomplishments and issues for the future.
§ 13-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-89
1:109
§ 13-89. Term of office. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3682]
The regular term of office for Committee positions shall be for four years.
Each member shall hold office until a successor is appointed and confirmed.
Terms shall commence on January 1. Initial terms shall be staggered with
two members appointed for two years, two members appointed for three
years and three members appointed for four years. The two additional
members shall be appointed so that one term ends December 31, 2007, and
one term ends December 31, 2010.
§ 13-90. Appointments and qualifications.
Committee members shall be appointed upon the basis of demonstrated
interest in, knowledge of, and support for trails for recreation and
transportation purposes. Members shall serve without salary or other
compensation. Prior to appointing initial members and filling each vacancy
in the membership of the Committee, public notice of available positions
shall be provided to the news media at least two weeks in advance of
appointment. Applicants for vacant positions shall apply to the Township
Manager. Consideration should be given to appointments that result in
a broad geographic and demographic representation of interested and
knowledgeable people. Appointments should also strive to reflect the
diverse trail use interests of the community, such as walking, jogging,
skating, bicycling and horseback riding.
§ 13-91. Rules of procedure.
The Committee shall adopt procedural rules governing the transaction of
its business. The rules shall include provision of the date, time and place
of regular meetings of the Committee. Provisions shall be made for
maintaining minutes of Committee meetings and records of all Committee
reports, conclusions and recommendations. The Rules of Procedure shall
provide for election of Committee officers, which shall include a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson who shall serve for at least one year.
The Rules of Procedure shall provide that all Committee meetings shall be
open to the public and that notice of meetings shall comply with the New
Jersey Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). The procedures
shall address receipt and processing of citizen proposals and requests.
§ 13-89 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-91
1:110
ARTICLE XXII
Removal Policy
[Adopted 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656]
§ 13-92. Removal of board, commission or committee members not
subject to state statute guidelines for the removal of such members.
[Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 4288-1938]
A. A member of any board, commission or committee not subject to state
statute guidelines for the removal of such members may be removed for
absenteeism or for just cause, and the vacancy created by such removal
shall be filled in the same manner as originally appointed.
B. For the purposes of this article, a member of any board, commission or
committee not subject to state statute guidelines for the removal of
such members, without being excused by a majority of the authorized
members of such board, commission or committee, who fails to attend
50% of such board, commission or committee meetings within a oneyear
period may be removed from such board, commission or
committee by the Township Council.
C. For the purposes of this article, a member of any board, commission or
committee not subject to state statute guidelines for the removal of
such members may be removed by the Township Council for cause
following notice to the member of the charges authorized by the
Township Council by resolution. The member shall have the right to a
hearing which will be before the Council Administration Standing
Committee which shall make a recommendation to the Township
Council. The Council may accept or reject the Administration Standing
Committee's recommendation. The removal of a member shall require
the affirmative vote from six members of the Council.
D. The boards, commissions and committees subject to this section include
(includes boards, commissions and committees either not covered by
the state statute or under a state statute that does not address the issue
of removal of members):
(1) Advisory Board of Health.
(2) Advisory Recreation Council.
(3) Agricultural Advisory Committee.
(4) Cable Television Advisory Committee.
(5) Cultural Arts Council.
(6) Emergency Life Support Delivery Committee.
(7) Fire Prevention Board.
38.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly
Absenteeism Policy.
§ 13-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-92
1:111
§ 13-93. Removal of board, commission or committee members
subject to state statute guidelines for the removal of such members.
(8) Hamilton Street Advisory Board.
(9) Human Relations Commission.
(10) Joint Advisory Committee/Village of Kingston.
(11) Open Space Advisory Committee.
(12) Rent Leveling Board.
(13) Senior Citizen Advisory Committee.
(14) Shade Tree Commission.
(15) Trails Advisory Committee.
(16) Youth Services Commission/Alliance Against Substance Abuse.
A. A member of any board, commission or committee subject to state
statute guidelines for the removal of such members, without being
excused by a majority of the authorized members of such board,
commission or committee, who fails to attend 50% of such board,
commission or committee meetings within a one-year period may be
removed from such board, commission or committee by the Township
Council under the following conditions:
(1) Failure of a board, commission or committee member to attend
50% of board, commission or committee meetings within a oneyear
period shall be grounds for a "for cause" or "neglect of duty"
justification for the removal of a board, commission or committee
member under applicable state statute.
(2) If a member of a board, commission or committee subject to state
statute guidelines for such removal of such members is entitled to a
hearing under state statute, then such a hearing shall be held
under conditions set forth in the applicable state statute.
(3) The boards, commissions and committees subject to this section
include:
(a) Board of Adjustment (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69), ["for cause"].
(b) Environmental Commission (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1), ["for cause"].
(c) Historic Preservation Advisory Commission [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-107(e)], ["for cause"].
(d) Housing Authority [N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17(e)], except where
subject to § 13-94B, ["neglect of duty"].
(e) Planning Board (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23b), except where subject to
§ 5-27C(2), ["for cause"].
§ 13-92 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-93
1:112
§ 13-94. Board, commission or committee members who may not be
removed by the Township Council under this article.
§ 13-95. Repeal of sections of ordinances.
(f) Redevelopment Agency [N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11(c)], ["neglect of
duty"].
(g) Sewerage Authority [N.J.S.A. 40:14A-5 (c)], ["neglect of duty"].
A. No member of the Municipal Ethics Board formed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.22 and codified under § 13-68 et seq. and Addendum A of this
chapter shall be removed by the Township Council under this
ordinance.39
B. Any member of the Housing Authority appointed by state authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17 shall not be removed by the Township
Council pursuant to this article. Any member of the Housing Authority
appointed by the Township Manager pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17
may only be removed pursuant to this article by the Township Manager.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances regarding absenteeism as grounds
for the removal of board, commission or committee members adopted
and in force on the date of the adoption of this article which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed.
B. The following sections are repealed (these are existing sections
specifically addressing absenteeism as grounds for removal):
(1) Section 13-3.
(2) Section 13-40.
(3) Section 13-48.
(4) Section 26-4.
(5) Section 13-59B.
(6) Section 13-67.
(7) Section 13-75.
(8) Section 70-5.
(9) Section 5-27E.
C. The following sections are repealed (these are existing sections
specifically addressing removal of a member for cause and with a
hearing):
(1) Section 13-2.
39.Editor’s Note: Sections 13-68 through 13-71 and Addendum A were repealed 12-10-2013
by Ord. No. 4047-13.
§ 13-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-95
1:113
(2) Section 13-5.
(3) Sections 112-286 and § 5-27D(2) (Board of Adjustment - still
requires for cause and a hearing under statute).
(4) Section 13-37 [Environmental Commission - still requires for cause
and a hearing under statute].
(5) Section 13-46 [Historic Preservation Commission - still requires for
cause and a hearing under statute].
(6) Section 13-53.
(7) Section § 13-59A.
(8) Section 13-66B.
(9) Section 74-14C.
(10) Section 13-73.
(11) Section 13-77.
(12) Section 5-27C(2).
§ 13-95 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-95
1:114
ARTICLE XXIII
Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission
[Adopted 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3955]
§ 13-96. Preamble.
§ 13-97. Participation in Commission.
The Township of Franklin in the County of Somerset, State of New Jersey,
agrees to participate in the creation of and operations of the Raritan and
Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission, pursuant to Chapter 316, P.L.
1971, as follows:
A. There exists along the Raritan and Millstone Rivers and their
tributaries certain problems of flooding and flood prevention which
concern several municipalities and Somerset County, as well as other
governmental bodies.
B. The various governmental units affected by such drainage basin
recognize the need for cooperation efforts to prevent future floods and
to alleviate flooding and flood hazards.
C. Chapter 316, P.L. 1971, authorizes the establishment of a joint Flood
Control Commission and provides that the participating municipalities
and counties may enter into such a Commission and may define and
limit the areas of responsibility and authority of such a Commission,
and may set forth the terms under which appropriations shall be made
by the participating municipalities and counties. (1973 Code § 1:6).
A. The municipalities and counties invited to participate in the
Commission are: Bridgewater Township, Franklin Township,
Hillsborough Township, the Borough of Manville, the Borough of
Millstone, Montgomery Township, Raritan Borough, the Borough of
Rocky Hill, the Borough of Somerville, the Borough of South Bound
Brook and the County of Somerset. [Amended 9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
4073-14]
B. The Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission shall be
established in accordance with Chapter 316, P.L. 1971 of the State of
New Jersey.
C. The Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area;
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the Division of Water Policy and Supply, the Army Corps of
Engineers, local and county planning boards and officials
concerned with subdivisions and development of properties within
the floodway and drainage areas;
§ 13-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-97
1:115
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants, and the procedures for applying therefor, and shall
make such information available to participating members;
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas by appropriate County Park Commissions, counties or
participating municipalities;
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
(7) Encourage its participating members and others to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to flood control;
(8) Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding;
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by the members, subject to the
limitations in this agreement and subject to the limitations as set
forth in Chapter 316, P.L. 1971.
D. Appropriations.
(1) The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be funded among the
members as follows:
(a) From the County of Somerset: $5,000. [Amended 9-9-2014
by Ord. No. 4073-14]
(b) From each municipal member: $500. [Amended 9-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 4073-14]
(2) Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken, involving less than
the interest of all of the participating members, or of special benefit
to less than all of the participating members, the apportionment of
the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the participating
members specially benefited thereby in advance of authorization of
such project.
(3) The initial funding requirements set forth herein may be changed
by agreement among the participating municipalities and Somerset
County, which additional funding is subject to the consent of the
governing body of each participating municipal member and the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of Somerset County.
E. Budget.
(1) The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be adopted
by the Commission no later than January 15 of each year, and such
adoption shall be by a vote of a Somerset County representative
§ 13-97 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-97
1:116
§ 13-98. Representatives.
and a representative from each municipality. A copy of such
tentative budget shall be sent to the governing body of each of
the County and municipalities within one week of the adoption
thereof. Such notice shall include notification of the date fixed by
the Commission for final adoption of such budget, which shall be
at least three weeks after the date of tentative adoption by the
Commission.
(2) Expenditures outside the regular budget for special projects
involving Somerset County or the participating municipalities (but
less than the entire Commission) shall be negotiated and arranged
separately among the involved participating members and the
Commission.
F. Quorum. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the
right to meet at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken
involving the expenditure of funds, other than clerical and mailing
connected with the usual business of the Commission, shall be adopted
only at a meeting at which there are at least one county representative
and at least nine municipal representatives (regardless of the total
number of municipalities represented thereby).
G. Withdrawal. Each member municipality and county reserves the right,
pursuant to Section 2d of Chapter 316, Laws of 1971, to withdraw from
the Commission provided, however, that at least 90 days' notice of such
intention is given to the Commission, and provided further, that such
withdrawal after the adoption of the Commission budget for a given
year shall not abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or county
to meet its obligations under the budget for such year (1973 Code
§ 1:6-1).
A. The Township Council shall appoint two representatives to the
Commission; either or both of the representatives may be a member of
the Township Council or hold other elective or appointive office in the
Township.
B. In addition to such representatives, the Township Council may appoint
two alternate representatives to the Commission, who shall serve for
the terms of one year each, or until the appointment and qualification of
their successors. Such alternates shall have the right to attend all
meetings of the Commission and take part in all discussions. The
alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate
and in such order may represent the Township and vote in the event or
the absence or disability of one or both of the regular representatives.
C. Each regular representative shall serve for a term of five years, or until
his successor has been appointed and has qualified, except that any
appointed representative who holds another elected or appointed
public office shall serve as such representative for the term of his
§ 13-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-98
1:117
elected or appointed office and only so long as he shall hold such
elected or appointed public office, notwithstanding his term of
appointment as such representative. Appointments to vacancies caused
by the death, resignation or other inability to serve of a representative
shall be filled for the balance of the term only. No alternate
representative shall automatically succeed to a regular representative
position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position. (1973 Code
§ 1:6-2).
§ 13-98 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-98
1:118
ARTICLE XXIV
Franklin Youth Initiative
[Adopted 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 4073-14]
§ 13-99. Creation and appointment authority.
The Franklin youth Initiative, heretofore created by ordinance pursuant to
general law, is continued with the functions, powers and duties prescribed
by general law and ordinance. The Township Council shall appoint the
subcommittee chairs of the Franklin Youth Initiative, who shall serve
without compensation.
§ 13-100. Purpose.
The Franklin Youth Initiative is a partnership between Franklin Township
teens and adults. Its mission is to make the Township better for teens by
developing and organizing safety, social services, and prevention programs,
teen trips and events, creating recreational and educational programs, and
creating employment opportunities.
§ 13-101. Subcommittee goals and objectives.
A. The Franklin Youth Initiative consists of seven subcommittees as
follows:
(1) Education.
(2) Business.
(3) Outreach.
(4) Safety.
(5) Social Services.
(6) Youth and Recreation.
(7) Faith-Based.
B. The goals and objectives for each subcommittee are as follows:
(1) Education.
(a) Provide a greater presence of the GREAT program at the
middle schools.
(b) Increase business interaction with the schools and facilitate
business working with the school systems to result in better
job-preparedness skills and career education for Franklin High
School graduates.
(2) Business.
§ 13-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-101
1:119
(a) Provide readiness programs, employment, and internship
programs for teenagers.
(b) Provide employment training and employment opportunities
for the Township's young adults.
(c) Provide funding sponsorships for the Franklin Youth Initiative
programs.
(3) Outreach.
(a) Ensure communications are available to the community to
inform about services and programs that are available.
(b) Ensure all connections are made through networking to
prevent duplication of services and programs and to capitalize
on synergies.
(4) Safety.
(a) Expand community policing.
(b) Implement neighborhood watch programs.
(c) Implement a police mentoring program.
(5) Social Services.
(a) Provide mental health counseling.
(b) Provide probation services.
(c) Provide a full-time counselor to support the teen recreation
program and families in need.
(d) Provide parental mentoring programs.
(6) Youth and Recreation. The Youth and Recreation Subcommittee
encourages partnerships with families, schools, local business,
local government agencies, the interfaith community, civic
organizations and the entire community to help provide a bright
future for young people. The subcommittee will promote the
development of relevant, diversified, educational, recreational and
other services within a safe and positive learning environment. This
committee will support and promote programs that:
(a) Encourage cultural diversity awareness.
(b) Increase participants' ability to make positive choices about
different issues.
(c) Increase trust and respect for other teens, adult mentors, and
other authority figures.
(d) Motivate youth to stay in school and maintain passing grades.
§ 13-101 FRANKLIN CODE § 13-101
1:120
§ 13-102. Membership.
There is hereby created a Franklin Township Initiative consisting of seven
subcommittee chairs to be appointed by the Township Council for a term of
three years and until their successors have been duly appointed and have
qualified. In the event of a vacancy during an unexpired term of office,
a person shall be appointed as a member of said body to serve for such
unexpired term.
(e) Provide opportunities for teens to get help with difficult
personal and family issues.
(f) Provide a setting where youth can feel a sense of belonging
and be off the streets in a positive, supportive environment.
(g) Teach youth positive means for resolving conflicts.
(h) Provide opportunities for new experiences in order to increase
participants' recreation and job repertoires.
(i) Contribute to participants' personal growth and job readiness.
(7) Faith-Based. Rooted in the values of our faith communities, and
working collaboratively, we create opportunities that support,
nurture, and guide the youth of Franklin Township to lead healthy
and productive lives, supporting and promoting activities
sponsored, toward this goal, by our individual houses of worship.
§ 13-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102
1:121
Chapter 20
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 20-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referenced to as the
"Emergency Management Ordinance."
§ 20-2. Intent and purpose.
§ 20-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an emergency
management organization that will allow the local government and the
community to coordinate their activities during emergency operations.
B. The Emergency Management Council will be the coordinating unit for
all activity in connection with local emergencies and as required by
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41 et seq. The Emergency Management Council will
provide planning guidance to the departments and agencies of the
Township.
C. This chapter does not relieve any Township department or agency of the
responsibilities or authority given by state statute or by local ordinance,
nor is it intended to adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency
organized for relief in emergencies.
D. This chapter is based on the Civil Defense and Disaster Control Act,
copies of which are on file with the Township Clerk and available for
public inspection.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretations of this
chapter.
APP. A:9-41 — Includes plans and preparations for protection from and
relief, recovery and rehabilitation from the effects at any emergency.
DECLARATION OF A STATE OF LOCAL EMERGENCY — A
determination by the Emergency Management Coordinator or his/her
authorized deputy, upon consultation with Township Manager or
designee that an emergency has occurred or is imminent requiring
activation of all or part of the Township's emergency management
services, from which determination a proclamation of a state of local
disaster emergency shall be issued, signed by the Emergency
Management Coordinator and Township Manager or designee.
EMERGENCY — Any unusual set of circumstances which endangers the
health, safety or resources of the residents of the Township of Franklin
and which is or may become too large in scope or is unusual in type
to be handled in its entirety by the Township and its related service
agencies.
§ 13-102 FRANKLIN CODE § 20-3
1:122
§ 20-4. Organization.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR — The Township
Manager or the person appointed by the Township Manager to plan,
activate, coordinate and conduct the emergency operations of the
Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.4.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL — The emergency service
unit of the local government formed to help carry out the basic
governmental functions of maintaining the public peace, health and
safety during an emergency in accordance with the New Jersey Revised
Statutes.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCE — The employees, equipment
and facilities of all Township departments, boards, commissions and
agencies, and, in addition, all volunteer persons, entities or agencies
organized by the Council to assist in supervising and coordinating the
emergency control activities of the municipality.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — Any emergency or the imminence thereof
which affects the Township but is not so severe as to require action
by the Governor of New Jersey or the County Emergency Management
Coordinator as described in the Emergency Management Act (N.J.S.A.
App. A:9-43 et seq.)
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures promulgated in accordance with this chapter.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Chief Executive of the Township, as
outlined by the Faulkner Act (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.), or his/her
designee.
VOLUNTEER — Any person duly appointed by the Township Manager
and/or the Emergency Management Coordinator with the assistance
of the Emergency Management Council and assigned to participate in
emergency management activities.
A. The Mayor and Township Council are hereby authorized to create an
organization for emergency control utilizing, to the fullest extent, the
existing agencies within the Township.
B. The organization shall consist of the following:
(1) The Emergency Management Coordinator or the Township
Manager or an individual who shall be appointed by the Township
Manager. The Emergency Management Coordinator, subject to
fulfilling the requirements herein, shall serve for a term of three
years. As a condition of his/her appointment and his/her right to
continue for the full term of his/her appointment, each Emergency
Management Coordinator shall have successfully completed, at the
time of his/her appointment or within one year immediately
following appointment, the current approved Civil Defense
Director/Coordinator course. The failure of any Emergency
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:123
§ 20-5. Powers and duties.
Management Coordinator to fulfill such requirement within the
time period prescribed shall disqualify the Director from
continuing in the office of Director, and, thereupon, a vacancy in
said office shall be deemed to have been created. The Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Township Manager.
(2) Persons and/or organizations violating the order, rules and
regulations issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.5 shall
be subject to penalties in accordance with § 20-8. The Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Township Manager.
A. The powers and duties of the Emergency Management Coordinator
shall be as follows:
(1) The Emergency Management Coordinator shall issue a written
proclamation approved and signed by the Township Manager and
Emergency Management Coordinator that a state of local
emergency exists in accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.5. The
proclamation, duly witnessed, will be filed with the Township Clerk.
(2) During the period that the emergency proclamation remains in
force, the Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance
with regulations promulgated by the State Emergency
Management Director, shall be empowered to issue and enforce
such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary to
implement and carry out emergency control operations and to
protect the health, safety and resources of the residents of the
municipality in accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.5. Persons
and/or Organizations violating the order, rules and regulations
issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.5 shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with § 20-8.
(3) The Township Manager shall, within 24 hours of a declared
emergency, notify the Mayor to convene a meeting of the Township
Council. The Township Manager in conjunction with the
Coordinator shall provide to the Township Council an explanation
of the event, the activities ongoing to address community needs
and an estimate of anticipated unusual expenses to be made on
behalf of the Township to meet the needs of same.
(4) The Emergency Management Coordinator may request aid in
accordance with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.6. The state statute and
mutual aid agreements shall govern such request for aid outside of
local resources.
(5) During the emergency, the Emergency Management Coordinator
shall recommend expenditures to the Township Manager of
§ 20-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 20-5
1:124
Township funds and resources in order to obtain vital supplies,
equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the
protection of health, life and property of the people.
(6) The Township Manager may, during the emergency, require the
services of any Township officer, employee or official to assist him/
her or the Emergency Management Coordinator. All such duly
authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled
to the privileges and immunities as may be provided by state law
for other registered and identified emergency management
workers.
(7) The Emergency Management Coordinator shall cause to be
prepared the emergency operating plan (EOP).
(8) The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a person well
versed and trained in planning operations involving the activities of
many different agencies which will operate to protect the public
health, safety and welfare in the event of an emergency. The
Coordinator shall be responsible to the Township Manager in
regard to all phases of emergency control activity. He/she shall be
responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the
emergency control activity in the Township. He/she shall maintain
liaison with state and federal authorities and the authorities of
other nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most
effective operation of the plan. Additional duties shall include but
not be limited to the following:
(a) Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer
personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities
of the Township.
(b) Development of an emergency operating center (EOC) and
coordination of plans for the immediate use of all the facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources of the Township for
the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons
and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness
governmental services and public utilities necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Keeping a file of the resources available within the Township,
both public and private.
(d) Overseeing any agreement by which owners, agencies, boards
or organizations of buildings may allow the use for sheltering
persons in an emergency.
(e) Conducting practice operations to determine if emergency
plans are efficient and adequate.
(f) Coordinating all public and volunteer private agencies, boards
or organizations in their planning for emergency operations.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:125
§ 20-6. Emergency operations plan.
A comprehensive emergency operations plan (EOP) shall be adopted and
maintained by directive of the Township Manager. The EOP shall be
prepared by the Director and submitted for approval by the Township
Manager and will outline the duties and responsibilities under this chapter
and all other applicable regulatory requirements. In preparation of the
EOP, the Director will consult with all municipal department heads whose
departments will be assigned duties and responsibilities under the plan,
and said department heads will assist the Director in preparation or
modification of the plan. In the preparation or any modification of the plan
as it pertains to the Township organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies
shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When the plan is approved, it shall be
the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions
assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current
state of readiness at all times. The plan shall be considered supplementary
to and an implementation of this chapter and N.J.S.A. App. A:9-30 et seq.
§ 20-7. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter is an exercise by the Township of its governmental function for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety. During an emergency,
neither the Township nor agents and representatives of said Township
nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
trustee nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying
with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage
sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity.
§ 20-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or cooperation violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof,
may be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 20-9. Interpretation.
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith. This chapter is adopted to complement the New
(g) Assuming such authority and responsibilities as permitted by
law and as may be required to promote and develop the plan.
(h) During any emergency, the Emergency Management
Coordinator may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other
properties found lacking and needed for the protection of
health, life and property of the people and bind the Township
for the fair value thereof.
§ 20-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 20-9
1:126
Jersey Emergency Management Act (N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.) and
regulations promulgated thereunder and must be read and interpreted in
conjunction therewith.
Chapter 23
HAMILTON STREET BUSINESS COMMUNITY SPECIAL
IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 23-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION — The Township Council of the
Township of Franklin.
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (sometimes also referred to as the
"district" or as "business improvement district") — An area within the
Township of Franklin designated by this chapter as an area in which a
special assessment on property within the district shall be imposed for the
purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and
the Township.
§ 23-2. Findings.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. ("the Act"), the Township Council of
the Township of Franklin hereby determines the following:
A. That the areas within the Township of Franklin that are described by
block and lot and by street address as set forth in Schedule A of this
chapter,40 and the property owners, tenants and inhabitants therein,
benefit from being designated as a special improvement district and
will benefit the whole of the Township of Franklin, with the exception of
the following properties that will not be assessed members of the
special improvement district:
(1) Any property owned and operated by the municipal, county and
state governments; and
(2) One hundred percent of residential structures four units or under;
B. That a district management corporation would provide administrative
and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents, and
consumers in the Township of Franklin, the Hamilton Street Business
Improvement District, and will also assist the Township of Franklin in
promoting economic growth and employment;
C. That a special assessment may be imposed and collected by the
Township of Franklin either with the regular property tax payment (or
40.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 20-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:127
§ 23-3. Creation of district.
§ 23-4. Assessments.
All costs of improvements and maintenance, other than the costs of
improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred by the Township of
Franklin out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 as determined by the district management corporation.
The formula for the assessment is as follows: Each property's current
assessed value, as determined by the Township of Franklin Tax Assessor
for real estate tax purposes, will be multiplied by the appropriate factored
amount to sustain the approved annual budget to determine the amount
of the special improvement district assessment. The foregoing assessment
shall be collected as a special assessment against properties that are within
the district as defined in Schedule A, and in additional schedules as
delineated by the budget resolution, which may assign all or any part of the
budget, including no part of the budget, to any schedule.
payment in lieu of taxes) or otherwise on properties located within the
Township's limits designated in the attached Schedule A and that these
payments shall be transferred to the district management corporation
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to exercise the powers
given to it pursuant to this chapter;
D. That it is in the best interests of the Township of Franklin, Hamilton
Street Business District, and its inhabitants to create a special
improvement district and to designate the Township Council of the
Township of Franklin as the district management corporation in the
special improvement district; and
E. That the business community should be encouraged to provide self-help
and self-financing programs to meet local needs, goals and objectives
and should be encouraged to supplement any of the authorized services
and improvements through the district management corporation.
A. There is hereby created and designated within the Township of Franklin
a special improvement district authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65
et seq., to be known as the "Hamilton Street Business Improvement
District" ("district"), consisting of the properties designated and listed
on Schedule A,41 annexed hereto, by tax block and lot numbers and
street addresses. The special improvement district will be governed by
a district management corporation.
B. Schedule A of this chapter may be amended by ordinance to add and
delete particular properties which have a change in use affecting the
appropriateness of including them as part of the special improvement
district. Any change in the classes of properties to be considered part of
the special improvement district will require an ordinance.
41.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 23-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 23-5
1:128
§ 23-5. Designated district management corporation.
A. The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby designates
the Township Council of the Township of Franklin as the district
management corporation for the district.
B. The district management corporation shall also have all powers
necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this chapter,
including but not limited to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties;
(2) Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the corporation;
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money;
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including contracts with any person, firm, government
agency or entity;
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations;
(6) Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180
days and government entities for that or longer periods;
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants and loans;
(8) Fund rehabilitation of properties in the district;
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease, or manage property in
the district;
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation;
(11) Review and recommend security, sanitation, and other services in
the district supplemental to those normally supplied by the
Township of Franklin;
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may locate there
or visitors to the district, including but not limited to parking, litter
cleanup and control, landscaping, signage, and those
improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., pursuant to pertinent regulations of the
Township Council;
§ 23-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-5
1:129
§ 23-6. Business plan and budget; fiscal year.
(13) Publicize, promote, and plan for the district and businesses
included within the district boundaries;
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the
business mix of, the district;
(15) Organize special events in the district;
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district;
(17) Design and enforce environmental and building design criteria
under N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., as amended;
(18) Regulate vending;
(19) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district; and
(20) Effectuate the purposes and intents of N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., as
amended.
C. The district management corporation shall utilize affirmative action
goals and guidelines in its hirings and expenditures whenever possible.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 17:27-5.2, the district management corporation
will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of age, race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital
status, or sex. The district management corporation will take
affirmative action to ensure that such applicants are recruited and
employed, and that employees are treated during employment without
regard to their race, creed, national original, ancestry, marital status or
sex.
D. Upon further written agreement, the Township of Franklin may
delegate to the district management corporation the contracting work
to be done on any street, or on other municipal property, included in the
special improvement district. In that event, the corporation shall be a
contracting unit within the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.). The plans and specifications shall be
approved by the Township Engineer prior to initiation of any action for
the award of a contract under the act.
A. The district management corporation shall submit a business plan and
budget for each upcoming year, no later than November 15 of the
current fiscal year, for the approval by resolution of the Township
Council, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-84. The budget
shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget
contributes to the goals and objectives for the special improvement
district.
B. The fiscal year of the district management corporation shall be January
1 to December 31.
§ 23-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 23-7
1:130
§ 23-7. Annual audit of district management corporation.
The district management corporation shall also cause an audit of its books,
accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the Township
Council. This audit shall be completed and filed with the Township Council
within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the corporation.
A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the County of
Somerset Tax Assessor and the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services in the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs within
five days of the filing of the audit with the Township Council.
§ 23-8. Annual report to Township Council.
The district management corporation shall submit an annual report to the
Township Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 within 60 days of the close
of the fiscal year. This report shall consist of a narrative covering the
previous year's operations and detailed financial statements.
§ 23-9. Retention of municipal powers.
Notwithstanding the creation of the business improvement district, the
Township of Franklin expressly retains all its powers and authority over the
area designated as the Hamilton Street Business District.
§ 23-10. Hamilton Street Advisory Board. [Amended 5-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 4060-14; 7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 4289-19]
A. Membership.
(1) The Hamilton Street Advisory Board shall consist of the following
members:
(a) Voting members:
[1] Four owners of properties within the special improvement
district;
[2] Four owners/operators of businesses located within the
special improvement district;
[3] Two owners of 100% residential property located within
the special improvement district;
[4] One at-large member;
[5] President of the Franklin Township Chamber of Commerce
or designee.
(b) Nonvoting members:
[1] Three members of the Franklin Township Council, two of
whom shall be Ward 4 and 5 Franklin Township
Councilmembers;
§ 23-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:131
§ 23-11. Biannual report.
On or before December 31, 2015, a report shall be prepared by the
Hamilton Street Advisory Board outlining progress made with respect to
[2] Mayor of Franklin Township;
[3] Township Manager of Franklin Township;
[4] Police Chief (or designee) of Franklin Township;
[5] Township Engineer (or designee) of Franklin Township;
[6] Township Director of Planning of Franklin Township;
[7] Township Special Projects Manager.
(2) Each lot within the special improvement district shall only by
represented by one voting member.
B. Terms. The regular term of office for Hamilton Street Advisory Board
positions shall be for three years, except that of the at-large member
and President of the Franklin Township Chamber of Commerce or
designee which shall be for one year. Each member shall hold office
until a successor is appointed and confirmed. Terms shall commence on
January 1. Initial terms shall be staggered as follows:
(1) One-year terms: one property owner, one business owner/operator,
one residential owner, one at-large member.
(2) Two-year terms: one property owner, two business owners/
operators, one residential owner.
(3) Three-year terms: two property owners, one business owner/
operator.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Hamilton Street Advisory Board shall
have the ability to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Advise the district management corporation on any matters related
to the special improvement district, including, but not limited to,
matters related to the powers granted to the district management
corporation in § 23-5B above.
(3) Prepare and recommend the annual budget and business plan for
review and approval by the district management corporation.
(4) Prepare and submit an annual report to the district management
corporation. This report shall consist of a narrative covering the
previous year's operations and detailed financial statements.
§ 23-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 23-11
1:132
the Hamilton Street Business Community Special Improvement District
over the preceding two-year period. This report shall be forwarded for
review by the Township Council. Upon review of said report, the Township
Council will render a decision regarding the future disposition of the special
improvement district.
Chapter 26
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes - See Ch. 146.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 210.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Rent control - See Ch. 294.
§ 26-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law of the
state, a body corporate and politic, to be known as the "Housing Authority
of the Township of Franklin, County of Somerset," is hereby created and
established.
§ 26-2. Composition; terms of office; appointment. [Amended
3-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1081; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1478; 3-9-2010
by Ord. No. 3868]
The Housing Authority shall consist of seven members as provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17. The Council shall appoint five Commissioners of the
Housing Authority, and the Commissioners shall hold office for terms of
five years from the date of appointment, except that all vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired term. All Commissioners shall hold office until
their successors have been appointed and qualified. One member of the
Housing Authority shall be appointed by such state authority as is by law
designated to make such appointment, and such member shall hold office
at the pleasure of the state authority appointing him. The Commissioner
appointed by the state authority shall be entitled to vote as a member
of the Housing Authority and shall be entitled to all other privileges of
membership on such Housing Authority. Not more than one Commissioner
may be an officer or employee of the Township. The Township Manager shall
appoint one member of the Commission, who shall hold office for a term of
five years. The Township Council shall appoint a Council Liaison, who shall
hold office for a term of one year.
§ 23-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:133
§ 26-3. Powers.
The Housing Authority shall have such powers as are prescribed under
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., except that no project shall be undertaken by
the Housing Authority until the Council shall have concluded an agreement
with the Housing Authority respecting the payments, in lieu of taxes, to be
made to the Township on such project.42
§ 26-4. (Reserved)43
Chapter 41
NOTARIES
§ 41-1. Purpose.
The Township of Franklin has had in the past and will continue to have
among its employees persons who are notaries public in the State of New
Jersey. There is a need to establish a uniform policy in the Township on what
fees, if any, such notaries public are entitled to charge for the performance
of notary services while employed by the municipality during municipal
work hours and on municipal property. There is also a need to establish
a policy as to the fees that are to be paid by the Township of Franklin
in connection with an employee becoming or renewing his or her notary
commission.
§ 41-2. Designation and approval of municipal notaries.
The Township Manager shall designate and approve those employees of
Franklin Township who shall be termed "municipal notaries."
§ 41-3. Reimbursement for expenses.
A. Any employee who has been designated by the Township Manager as a
"municipal notary" shall be reimbursed the following costs associated
with obtaining or renewing a notary commission:
(1) Any fees charged by the State of New Jersey;
(2) Any fees necessary to obtain a stamp;
(3) Any fees necessary to obtain a seal; and
(4) Any fees associated with registration of signature with the County
Clerk.
42.Editor's Note: Original § 25-4, Redevelopment projects, was repealed 2-8-2000 by Ord. No.
3103.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 26-4, Absenteeism policy, added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1980, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 26-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 41-3
1:134
§ 41-4. Fees for services.
When any such municipal notary shall perform notary services during
municipal business hours on municipal property, the Township of Franklin
shall charge for such notary services in accordance with applicable New
Jersey statutes, and all proceeds therefrom shall be placed within the
general Township fund. Any such municipal notary may not retain a fee or
any portion thereof for services rendered during municipal business hours
at municipally owned or leased facilities.
§ 41-5. Unapproved notaries performing services prohibited.
No Township employee who has not been designated as a municipal notary
shall perform notary services during Township business hours from a
municipally owned or leased facility.
Chapter 46
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
§ 46-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the policy of Franklin Township
regarding personnel practices and establish a personnel system to
administer such practices under the direction of the Township Manager.
§ 46-2. Policy declaration.
Franklin Township's personnel policy shall consist of a system of rules:
B. With respect to the fees associated with obtaining seal, the Township
shall pay such fees upon the employee becoming a notary and shall not
be obligated thereafter for any fees associated with replacement of
such seal.
A. That complies with all applicable state and federal laws governing
employment practices
B. That develops an effective Township organization by establishing a
work environment that encourages employee productivity and
maximizes individual employee capability and potential
C. That provides equal opportunity and advancement for all qualified
persons based on work performance, competencies, education and
experience
§ 41-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:135
§ 46-3. Guiding merit principles.
The Township's personnel system shall center around merit principles
designed to:
§ 46-4. Nondiscrimination.
Franklin Township provides equal employment opportunity (EEO) to all
employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, sex, color,
religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, martial
status, political affiliation or status as a Vietnam veteran in accordance with
applicable federal, state laws. This policy applies to all terms and conditions
of employment, including but not limited to hiring, placement, promotion,
termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and
training. Franklin Township expressly prohibits any form of unlawful
employee harassment based on race, color, religion, gender, national origin,
age, disability or veteran status. A complaint procedure shall be provided
for in the Township's Personnel Policy Manual.
§ 46-5. Scope and applicability. [Amended 6-10-2003 by Ord. No.
3380]
D. That ensures employees receive adequate incentives in the form of
adequate salaries, the recognition of exceptional performance, the
reward of long service and the availability of retirement benefits
E. That establish an equitable method for administering discipline.
A. Recruit, hire, and advance employees on the basis of ability, knowledge
and skill.
B. Base personnel actions on merit and performance principles such as:
(1) Tests (written, performance, interview, skills or other).
(2) Experience, education, employment and performance records; or
observable on-the-job performance.
(3) Provide equitable and adequate compensation.
(4) Train employees on the job to assure high quality performance.
(5) Retain employees on the basis of adequate performance and
separate employees whose inadequate performance cannot be
corrected.
(6) Assure fair treatment and equal employment opportunity for
applicants for employment as well as employees in all aspects of
personnel administration without regard to political affiliation,
race, religion, age, national origin, color, sex or disability.
(7) Assure that every employee complies with the spirit and intent of
this personnel system.
§ 46-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-5
1:136
§ 46-6. Administration.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all employees
except as provided below:
(1) Elected officials shall be exempt from these provisions except as
specifically provided for in this chapter.
(2) The Township Clerk and Tax Assessor shall be exempt from those
provisions governing appointment and dismissal.
(3) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay.
(4) Consultants and counsel providing temporary professional
services.
(5) Seasonal, temporary or part-time employees unless specifically
indicated.
(6) Except where a provision of a negotiated collective bargaining
agreement states otherwise.
B. The Chief of Police may prepare and enforce, with the approval of the
Township Manager, police personnel policies and procedures. Such
policies and procedures shall be in addition to and supplement the
personnel policies established in this chapter.
A. Personnel rules. Based on the established policy guidance set forth in
this chapter, the Township Manager shall be authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations to administer the Township's personnel system.
The Township Manager shall also be authorized to establish a personnel
policy manual to assist managers with the administration of the
personnel system.
B. Council review of proposed rules. The Township Manager shall forward
proposed rules to the Township Council for adoption by resolution.
These rules shall have the effect of law. Amendments to the rules shall
also be made by the adoption of a resolution.
C. Establishment of Personnel Office. The Township Manager shall ensure
the establishment and operation of a Personnel Office. The Personnel
Office shall be under the supervision of the Personnel Officer, who shall
perform the functions as designated by the Township Manager in
accordance with this chapter, state and federal laws.
D. Maintenance of personnel records. The Personnel Office shall maintain
such personnel records as are necessary for the proper administration
of the personnel system. The Township shall maintain only information
that is necessary and relevant to accomplishing legitimate personnel
administration needs. Personnel files at a minimum shall maintain the
following: [Amended 12-13-2002 by Ord. No. 3341]
(1) Original employment application.
§ 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-6
1:137
§ 46-7. Classification system.
(2) Notes from any preemployment interview.
(3) Written performance evaluations.
(4) Disciplinary actions.
E. Responsibility of the Township Manager. The Township Manager shall
be responsible for the administration of the personnel policies, rules
and provisions of ordinances. The Township Manager shall have final
authority in the administration and interpretation of the provision of
this chapter. The Township Manager shall be authorized to contract
with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such
technical services as may be desired to the establishment and operation
of the personnel program. The services may include the contracting for
a broker of record who shall market the Township's hospital and
medical insurance.
F. Responsibility of the Personnel Officer. The Township Manager may
designate a Personnel Officer who shall assist in the preparation and
maintenance of the position classification plan, pay plan compensation
plan and perform such other duties in connection with a modern
personnel program as the Township Manager shall require including
written job descriptions. [Amended 12-13-2002 by Ord. No. 3341]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the classification plan shall be to assist in the
efficient conduct of the Township's personnel management; to establish
a system of identifying and describing the varied kinds of work in the
administrative organization; to group similar positions under common
job titles; to provide efficient, effective and economical service to
Township residents through recruitment and the retention of
competent personnel.
B. Functions. The functions of the plan shall be to:
(1) Aid in Township planning and budgeting processes;
(2) Provide a systematic system for recruiting, selection and
placement of personnel;
(3) Maintain the principle of "equal pay for equal work;"
(4) Assure professional and systematic approaches to promotion,
transfer, demotion, reassignment, and to detail individual duties
and supervisory relationships.
C. Administration. The Township Manager shall have primary
responsibility for the administration of this classification plan. The
Township Manager may delegate to the Personnel Officer the
responsibility to conduct the detail administration of this classification
plan which may include:
§ 46-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-7
1:138
§ 46-8. Compensation plan.
(1) Conduct necessary classification surveys;
(2) Develop job description forms;
(3) Conduct position questionnaire reviews;
(4) Conduct job audits;
(5) Determine job classes;
(6) Relate the classification plan to the compensation plan;
(7) Write class specifications;
(8) Establish allocation lists; and
(9) Otherwise maintain the plan.
D. Maintenance of the classification plan. The elements of the plan are not
static, but are subject to periodic changes. Thus, the classification plan
must receive periodic reviews and require periodic amendment. The
Personnel Officer shall prepare manuals covering:
(1) Factors requiring plan changes;
(2) Details of plan maintenance;
(3) General maintenance principles and responsibilities;
(4) Methods of classification maintenance;
(5) Procedures for classification study;
(6) Consideration of employee status;
(7) Suggested files and records;
(8) Re-surveys; and
(9) Standards for evaluation of the maintenance program.
A. Compensation plan preparation. The Township Manager or the
Personnel Officer under the direction of the Township Manager shall
prepare a compensation plan. The rate or range for each class shall be
such as to reflect fairly the differences in duties and responsibilities and
shall be related to compensation for comparable positions in other
places of public employment.
B. Adoption. The Township Manager or Personnel Officer shall submit the
compensation plan to the Council for adoption by ordinance. Before the
compensation plan is adopted by the Council, the Township Manager or
the Personnel Officer shall assign each job class to one of the pay
ranges provided in the compensation plan.
§ 46-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:139
§ 46-9. Recruitment, selection and appointment.
C. Amendment. The compensation plan may be amended by ordinance of
the Township Council from time to time as circumstances require,
either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of job classes to
different pay ranges. All modifications shall apply uniformly to all
positions within the same class.
A. Vacancy announcements. An employment bulletin board shall be
established for the posting of all position vacancies. Additional
recruiting publicity may be carried out as requested by the department
or recommended by the Personnel Officer. Position vacancy
announcements shall contain at a minimum:
(1) The title of position.
(2) A summary of the duties of the position.
(3) A summary of the minimum qualifications.
B. Application for employment.
(1) Applicants for Township employment shall apply on forms provided
by the Township and designed to obtain pertinent information
concerning the applicant's education, training, experience,
character and other factors necessary to determine fitness and
qualifications for service in the Township. All applicants shall file
their applications with the Personnel Office.
(2) An official Township application form shall be made available to
applicants for all position listings. No applications may be accepted
by a department; all applications must be made through the
Personnel Office.
C. Responsibility of Police Department. The Police Department
Administrative Division shall be responsible for the distribution of
vacancy announcements, the acceptance of applications and tracking of
applicants for appointment or promotion to a position in the Police
Department excluding police civilian.
D. Qualification standards. All applicants considered for employment or
promotion shall meet the essential qualifications standards established
by the class specification for the position to which the appointment is
being made. Applicants who knowingly make any material false
statement concerning their application for appointment or promotion to
a position shall forfeit their right to be considered for or to occupy the
position.
E. Selection.
(1) The Department/Division Director shall document on a consistent
basis their selection process. The Department/Division shall review
applications and determine which applicants have the minimum
§ 46-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-9
1:140
qualifications. These applicants shall become candidates for the job
opening.
(2) Applications may be rejected where the candidate:
(a) Lacks any of the established qualifications and requirements
for appointment to the position.
(b) Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position.
(c) Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or
intoxicants.
(d) Has been convicted of any crime or offenses, including
disorderly persons offenses, involving moral turpitude or
disgraceful conduct.
(e) Has been dishonorably discharged from Armed Services of the
United States and has not received presidential pardon.
(f) Has been dismissed from previous employment for
delinquency, insubordination or misconduct.
F. Appointments.
(1) Appointment to Township employment shall be made on the basis
of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination and/or other
evidence of competence without regard to race, sex, color, national
origin, religion, age, gender, sexual orientation, marital status,
political affiliation, disability or status as a Vietnam era veteran in
accordance with applicable federal and state laws. The Personnel
Officer shall be responsible for assisting departments in recruiting
and selecting such employees as are authorized by the
classification plan and by the budget.
(2) The appointing authority for the Township is the Township
Manager. The Department/Division Director shall recommend
appointments for departmental positions to the Township Manager.
(3) The Township Manager shall require any job applicant to submit to
a physical examination by the Township Physician before
appointment. The physical examination may include
preemployment drug testing. All appointments are subject to
satisfactory physical examinations.
G. Residency requirement.
(1) No employee of the Township need be a resident of the Township at
the time of appointment but shall establish residence in the
Township within one year after the date of appointment, with the
exception that the employee may reside outside the Township:
(a) Where there is a lack of adequate rental facilities or residential
housing;
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:141
(b) Where available housing of any type is beyond the employee's
income level or is substandard; or
(c) Where undue financial, transportation or health hardship
would result from enforcing Township residency.
(2) Subject, however, to the following conditions:
(a) The employee's place of residence is within 20 minutes driving
time from the main municipal office of the Township or within
five air miles from any boundary line of the Township and
within the county; and
(b) The employee is married and the head of a family, is an
unmarried head of the household as defined by the Internal
Revenue Service; or is not the head of a family but is
contributing 20% or more to the family income annually.
(3) Nonresidency is a privilege and not a right and must be approved at
the Township Manager's sole discretion pursuant to an application
filed by the employee with the Township Manager, which
application shall contain information revealing the employee's
income, and information indicating that the requisite conditions
exist which would entitle such employee to reside outside the
Township in accordance with the provisions herein. Any false
statement in such application shall be grounds for immediate
dismissal. Present employees desiring to move outside the
Township must comply with the provisions contained herein. If,
following approval of nonresidency, any of the above conditions
upon which nonresidency was approved changes, the nonresident
employee, at the Township Manager's discretion, shall be required
to establish residency in the Township within such period of time as
shall be determined by the Township Manager. The Township
Manager may not reside outside of the Township.
H. Probationary/evaluation period established.
(1) All employees hired or promoted shall serve a probationary/
evaluation period of six months with option to extend six months
from date of hire or promotion. During this probationary period,
the Township reserves the right to terminate an employee for any
reason.
(2) During the probationary/evaluation period an employee shall be
evaluated twice during any six-month probationary/evaluation
period.
I. Promotion.
(1) Vacancies in positions above the entrance level shall be filled by
promotion whenever in the judgment of the Township Manager or
Personnel Officer it is in the best interests of the Township to do so.
§ 46-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-9
1:142
Promotions shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's
qualifications, record of performance, and seniority.
(2) An advancement in rank or grade or an increase in salary beyond
the limits defined in the rules for the administration of the
compensation plan shall constitute a promotion.
(3) Any person who is appointed to a vacancy by promotion shall serve
a probationary/evaluation period of six months, which may be
extended to one year upon recommendation of the department
head and approval of the Township Manager.
J. Reduction in force.
(1) Whenever there is a lack of work or lack of funds requiring
reductions in the number of employees in a department or division
of the Township government, the required reduction shall be made
in such job class or classes as the Township Manager may
designate, provided that employees shall be laid off in inverse order
of their relative length and quality of service.
(2) Within each affected job class, all temporary employees shall be
laid off before probationary employees, and all probationary
employees shall be laid off before any regular employees.
K. Resignation. An employee may resign by filing his reason with the
Township Manager or Personnel Officer. An employee resigning in good
standing may be reinstated to any position in the same class if there is a
need for his/her services within two years of the date of resignation.
L. Separation. Employment shall be conditioned on good behavior and the
satisfactory performance of duty. Any employee may be temporarily
separated by layoff or suspension, or permanently separated by
resignation or dismissal.
M. Discipline. Disciplinary action or measures shall include oral
reprimand, written reprimand, suspension (nature to be given in
writing, and removal/discharge:
(1) Oral reprimand. Oral statement administered by Supervisor to an
employee.
(2) Written reprimand. A formal statement delivered in writing by a
supervisor to an employee.
(3) Suspension. The temporary separation of an employee from
employment for a defined period of time with or without pay (at the
discretion of the Township Manager).
(4) Removal/discharge. The permanent separation of an employee
from employment.
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:143
§ 46-10. Periodic objective employee evaluations. [Added
12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 3341]
The Township recognizes the importance of conducting periodic evaluations
of employee performance to assist in the growth and development of all
employees. Such evaluations shall identify employee strengths as well as
weaknesses, and will become the basis for creating a personal improvement
or development program for the employee.
§ 46-11. Employment benefits. [Amended 11-27-2001 by Ord. No.
3253; 2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 3267; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3764]
N. Occasions for disciplinary action. Some infractions may include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Sleeping while on duty.
(3) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(4) Intoxication while on duty; drinking or substance abuse during
work hours.
(5) Chronic or excessive absenteeism/tardiness.
(6) Neglect of or willful damage of public property or waste of public
supplies.
(7) The use or attempt to use one's authority or official influence to
control or modify the political action of any person in the service or
engagement in any form of political activities during working
hours.
(8) Conduct unbecoming as an employee of the Township.
(9) Commission of a criminal act.
(10) Violation of the drug and alcohol policy adopted by the Township, in
which case disciplinary action will conform to the policy guidelines.
A. Confidential and senior management employees.
(1) Confidential employees eligible for benefits under this chapter
shall receive benefits not less than those authorized for employees
of the same grade classifications.
(2) Senior managers, including the Township Clerk and Tax Assessor,
eligible for benefits under this chapter shall receive benefits not
less than those authorized for employees of the senior managers'
collective bargaining unit.
B. Vacation leave.
§ 46-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-11
1:144
(1) Exempt managerial staff vacation leave is an accrued benefit based
on the following schedule. Vacation leave will accrue but may not
be used until after six-month probationary period is completed.
Years of Service Completed
in PERS
Annual Vacation Leave
Credit1
(days)
5 15
10 20
15 25
20 30
(2) Confidential staff vacation leave is an accrued benefit based on the
following schedule: Vacation leave will accrue but may not be used
until after six-month probationary period is completed.
Years of Service
Annual Vacation Leave Credit1
(days per year)
Beginning 2 through 5 12
Beginning 6 through 10 15
Beginning 11 through 15 20
Beginning 16 through 20 25
21 and over 30
1NOTE: Year one: one day per full month of service, not to exceed
10 days.
C. Granting vacation. Employees shall be granted the use of earned
vacation leave upon request to their respective supervisor, subject to
the operational needs of the respective department as determined by
the Department/Division Director. The Department/Division Director
shall ensure all employees are given the opportunity to utilize earned
vacation. Vacation time will be credited and may be used by the
employee as of January 1 of the year in which it will be earned.
Vacations may be taken anytime between January 1 and December 31.
Half days are permissible.
D. Vacation leave accumulations.
(1) Exempt managerial staff may accumulate up to three years of
earned vacation.
(2) Confidential staff may accumulate up to two years of earned
vacation.
E. Vacation leave upon termination.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-11
1:145
(1) Exempt managerial staff separated in good standing who have no
more than three years of permissible leave to their credit at the
time of separation shall be paid the salary equivalent to accrued
vacation leave.
(2) Confidential staff separated in good standing who have no more
than two years of permissible leave to their credit at the time of
separation shall be paid the salary equivalent to accrued vacation
leave.
(3) Any exempt managerial or confidential staff who leave the
employment of the Township for any reason, and who has taken
vacation before it have been earned, shall reimburse, in full, the
Township the cash value of the amounts paid to them for all
unearned vacation.
(4) Vacation time accumulated is forfeited if at least 10 working days'
notice of intention to terminate employment is not given, in writing,
by the employee to the appropriate Department/Division Director.
All or part of this requirement may be waived by the Township upon
approval of the Department/Division Director and Township
Manager.
F. Holidays. Employees shall receive the following holidays with full pay
for the employee's regular daily rate of pay, although no work is
performed on such days, and that said employees are in a paid status
the day next preceding and next following such holiday:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Martin Luther King's Birthday.
(3) President's Birthday (Washington).
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) General Election Day (first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November).
(9) Veteran's Day.
(10) Thanksgiving Day.
(11) Friday after Thanksgiving Day.
(12) One half day Christmas Eve (afternoon).
(13) Christmas Day.
§ 46-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-11
1:146
G. Personal leave. Employees are permitted three personal days per year.
A personal day is provided to recognize that there may be days when
time off is required to conduct personal business. Unused personal days
cannot be carried over from year to year and are forfeited December
31.
H. Paid sick leave. One day of paid sick leave per month shall be
authorized to full-time employees and same shall be cumulative from
year to year to a maximum of 110 days. To obtain payment for sick leave
next preceding or next following a holiday or vacation, sickness must be
substantiated by a doctor's certificate.
(1) Criteria for use of sick leave.
(a) Personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes
beyond the employee's control. Whenever deemed necessary,
an employee using sick leave may be required to present
medical verification of the cause for use of such sick leave.
(b) The illness of a member of the employee's household that
requires the employee's personal care and attention (not to
exceed three days).
I. Extended sick leave. Upon exhaustion of sick leave benefits, an
employee shall automatically be placed on a leave of absence without
pay. The employee shall furnish the Personnel Officer with a medical
statement at least every 30 calendar days. The Township may cause the
employee to establish continued leave at any time through medical
examination by a Township-appointed physician.
J. Bereavement leave. Employees may be granted, not to exceed five days
off with pay at the employee's straight time rate, in the event of the
death of the employee's spouse or child. Employees shall be granted,
not to exceed three days off, for any other member of the immediate
family defined as parent, parent-in-law, sister or brother. Employees
shall be granted one day off, the day of the funeral, without loss of pay,
for the funeral of a sister-in-law, brother-in-law, grandparent or
grandchild. The Township reserves the right to verify the legal
relationship of the family member to the employee.
K. Leave of absence without pay.
(1) By making application 30 calendar days prior to the effective date,
employees may apply to the Township Manager for a leave of
absence without pay. Employees may be granted up to 90 days of
approved absence without loss or adjustment to seniority rights. If
the employee desires to continue benefits through the leave of
absence without pay, the employee shall deposit with the Township
funds to cover continuation of health, disability and pension
benefits.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-11
1:147
(2) Sick and vacation days will not accrue after 30 days of absence
without pay. In addition, the employee's anniversary date shall be
adjusted.
(3) Maternity leave, paternity leave, leave for the adoption of a child
and leave necessary for the illness of a member of an employee's
household which require the employee's personal care and
attention shall be in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave
Act.
L. Military leave.
(1) Granting of military leave shall be in accordance with federal and
state laws.
(2) Compensation for military leave during an emergency. Members of
the United States Army Reserves and National Guard who
voluntarily or involuntarily enter active duty in an emergency as
defined by N.J.S.A. 38:23-4.1 shall receive compensation equal to
the differential between their current Township salary and any
military pay received. This compensation shall continue as long as
the employee meets the requirement for military leave under
N.J.S.A. 38:23-4.
(3) Compensation for military leave for active duty for training.
Members of the United States Army Reserves and National Guard
shall be compensated for active duty for training in accordance
with state and federal law.
M. Jury duty. An employee who is called for jury duty shall be paid the
employee's regular rate of pay for jury service, upon presentation of
proper evidence of jury service and the amount of compensation
received. However, the employee shall be required to give prior notice
to the immediate supervisor of the call for jury duty.
N. Crossing guards and permanent part-time employees.
(1) After completion of one year of service, school crossing guards are
entitled to:
(a) Two days paid sick leave during the school year;
(b) Funeral leave per ordinance;
(c) Enrollment in the public employee retirement system.
(2) After completion of one year of service, permanent part-time
employees [defined as working a minimum of 260 hours in each of
the four calendar quarters (1040 hours annually) and earning in
excess of $500 annually] are entitled to:
(a) Two days paid sick leave per year; and
(b) Funeral leave per ordinance.
§ 46-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-11
1:148
O. Donated leave program. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3798]
(1) A full-time employee shall be eligible to receive donated sick or
vacation leave if the employee:
(a) Has completed at least one year of continuous service;
(b) Has exhausted all accrued sick, vacation and administrative
leave, all sick leave injury benefits, if any, and all compensatory
time off;
(c) Has not, in the two-year period immediately preceding the
employee's need for donated leave, been disciplined for
chronic or excessive absenteeism, chronic or excessive
lateness or abuse of leave; and
(d) Either:
[1] Suffers from a catastrophic health condition or injury;
[2] Is needed to provide care to a member of the employee's
immediate family who is suffering from a catastrophic
health condition or injury; or
[3] Requires absence from work due to the donation of an
organ (which shall include, for example, the donation of
bone marrow).
(2) For purposes of this Subsection O, a "catastrophic health condition
or injury" shall be defined as follows:
(a) With respect to an employee, a catastrophic health condition or
injury is a life-threatening condition or combination of
conditions or a period of disability required by his or her
mental or physical health or the health of the employee's fetus
and requiring the care of a physician who provides a medical
verification of the need for the employee's absence from work
for 60 or more work days.
(b) With respect to an employee's immediate family member, a
catastrophic health condition or injury is a life-threatening
condition or combination of conditions or a period of disability
required by his or her mental or physical health and requiring
the care of a physician who provides a medical verification of
the need for the family member's care by the employee for 60
or more work days.
(3) An employee may request that the Township Manager/Assistant
Township Manager approve his or her participation in the program
as a leave recipient or leave donor. The employee's supervisor may
make such a request on behalf of the employee for his or her
participation in the program as a leave recipient.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-11
1:149
(a) The employee or supervisor requesting the employee's
acceptance as a leave recipient shall submit to the Township
Manager/Assistant Township Manager medical verification
from a physician or other licensed health care provider
concerning the nature and anticipated duration of the
disability resulting from either the catastrophic health
condition or injury, or the donation of an organ, as the case
may be.
(b) When the Township Manager/Assistant Township Manager has
approved an employee as a leave recipient, the Department
Head or Supervisor shall, with the employee's consent, post or
circulate the employee's name along with those of other
eligible employees in a conspicuous manner to encourage the
donation of leave time. If the employee is unable to consent to
this posting or circulation, the employee's family many consent
on his or her behalf.
(4) A leave recipient must receive at least five sick days or vacation
days or a combination thereof from one or more leave donors to
participate in the donated leave program. A leave donor shall
donate only whole sick days or whole vacation days and may not
donate more than 10 such days to any one recipient.
(a) A leave recipient shall receive no more than 180 sick days or
vacation days, and shall not receive any such days on a
retroactive basis.
(b) A leave donor shall have remaining at least 20 days of accrued
sick leave, if donating sick leave, and at least 12 days of
accrued vacation leave, if donating vacation leave.
(c) A leave donor shall not revoke the leave donation.
(5) While using donated leave time, the leave recipient shall accrue
sick leave and vacation leave and be entitled to retain such leave
upon his or her return to work.
(a) Any unused, donated leave shall be returned to the leave
donors on a prorated basis upon the leave recipient's return to
work, except that, if the proration of leave days results in less
than one day per donor to be returned, the leave time shall not
be returned.
(b) Upon retirement, the leave recipient shall not be granted
supplemental compensation on retirement for any unused sick
days which he or she had received through the leave donation
program.
(6) An employee shall be prohibited from threatening or coercing or
attempting to threaten or coerce another employee for the purpose
of interfering with rights involving donating, receiving or using
§ 46-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-11
1:150
§ 46-12. Medical insurance coverage. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord.
No. 3591; 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 3721; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
3764; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3774]
donated leave time. Such prohibited acts shall include, but not
be limited to, promising to confer or conferring a benefit such as
an appointment or promotion or making a threat to engage in, or
engaging in, an act of retaliation against an employee.
(a) Those employees wishing to donate time shall complete the
donor transfer form and submit it to the Finance Department.
(b) The Finance Department will verify that the donor is eligible to
donate time and will deduct appropriate time from the donor.
(c) An employee must donate a minimum of one sick/vacation day.
Donations not meeting this requirement will be denied.
(d) The Finance Department will be the official recordkeeper of
donated time as well as any time that is to be returned.
A. The Township shall provide the following medical coverage: [Amended
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4169-17]
(1) Effective February 1, 2017:
(a) Medical:
[1] Horizon BCBS New Jersey Direct Access Plan - New Jersey
State Defector Plan.
[2] Horizon BCBS New Jersey PPO One Plan.
[3] Horizon BCBS New Jersey PPO Two Plan.
[4] Horizon BCBS New Jersey OMNIA Plan.
[5] Horizon BCBS New Jersey EPO Plan - Design 1.
(b) Dental:
[1] Horizon BCBS New Jersey Dental Option Plan.
[a] Deductible: $50 single /$150 family.
[b] Preventative: 100%.
[c] Basic: 70%.
[d] Major: 50%.
[e] Calendar year max: $1,200.
[f] Orthodontia: 50% up to $1,500.
[2] Horizon BCBS New Jersey Dental Choice Plan.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-12
1:151
[a] Deductible: none.
[b] Preventative: 100%.
[c] Basic: 50%.
[d] Major: 50%.
[e] Calendar year max: none.
[f] Orthodontia: 50% of treatment plan.
(c) Prescription:
[1] Horizon BCBS New Jersey Option 1: nonformulary, $0
copay for generic, $4 copay for brand name.
[2] Horizon BCBS New Jersey Option 2: nonformulary, $10
copay for generic, $20 copay for brand name.
B. Medical coverage cost and eligibility. [Amended 3-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3867; 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4169-17]
(1) Employees eligible for health insurance benefits through the
Township shall contribute to the cost of their benefits as dictated by
New Jersey Chapter 78. Contributions shall be made via payroll
deduction.
(2) Full-time employees covered under collective bargaining
agreements shall be eligible for medical benefits for the employee
and eligible dependent(s) in accordance with their respective
agreements.
(3) Municipal Court Judges and elected officials shall be eligible for
health care coverage for the official and eligible dependent(s) by
paying 15% of the medical, dental and prescription premiums.
(4) School crossing guards.
(a) The Township will provide medical and prescription insurance
coverage for school crossing guards appointed prior to January
1, 1992. These school crossing guards shall contribute to the
cost of their benefits as dictated by New Jersey Chapter 78.
Contributions shall be made via payroll deductions.
(b) School crossing guards appointed after January 1, 1992, may
join a medical plan by paying the entire annual premium.
C. Flexible spending accounts. [Amended 5-13-2014 by Ord. No.
4059-14]
(1) The Township will allow employees to establish flexible spending
accounts to which they may contribute to pay for health and other
expenses as allowed under the Internal Revenue Code. Up to the
amounts allowed annually under the Internal Revenue Code,
§ 46-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-12
1:152
§ 46-13. Retirement benefits. [Amended 2-10-2004 by Ord. No.
3427; 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 3550; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591;
10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 3721; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3764]
employees may pay into these flexible spending accounts from
their salary or wages or additionally from their stipend under this
chapter.
D. Cash stipend in lieu of health insurance coverage. In the event that any
full-time employee or full-time appointed official, school crossing guard
or full-time retired employee with 25 years of service who receives
hospitalization and medical, dental and/or prescription coverage
through a source other than the Township, said individual may apply for
a cash stipend in lieu of municipal hospital, medical, dental and/or
prescription coverage. The following provisions shall apply: [Amended
5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 4059-14]
(1) Said individual must apply to the Human Resources office for the
cash stipend in lieu of health insurance coverage during the first
week of June. Said individual will be required to provide proof of
the aforesaid health insurance coverage and must sign an
agreement releasing the Township from any and all liability.
(2) The Township shall make two equal payments to the individual, one
in January and the second in July following the accrual of the
stipend.
(3) The annual cash stipend in lieu of health insurance coverage shall
not exceed 25% of the amount saved by the Township or $5,000,
whichever is less.
A. Current retirees currently receiving retirement benefits as of the
effective date of this chapter shall continue to receive benefits as
prescribed on the effective date of their retirement.
B. Benefits based on date of hire. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3831; 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 4040-13; 10-23-2018 by Ord. No.
4249-18]
(1) Employees hired prior to November 12, 2018, retiring with 25
years of service in the New Jersey pension system under service
retirement, early retirement, disability retirement or veteran
retirement and who have 20 years of service with the Township will
receive the medical, prescription and dental benefits for which they
are eligible under § 46-12B of this chapter.
(2) Employees hired after November 12, 2018, will receive retiree
health benefits until age 65. Upon attaining age 65, retirees will be
required to enroll in Medicare Part A and B at the retiree's expense
and health benefits through the Township will cease.
C. (Reserved)44
§ 46-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-13
1:153
§ 46-14. Temporary disability income protection.
D. Hospital and medical care benefits for spouse/domestic/estate partner
of retirees. In the event an employee retiring under the provisions of
this chapter dies leaving an eligible spouse/domestic/estate partner, the
eligible spouse/domestic/estate partner may opt to continue coverage
previously received, provided that the spouse/domestic/estate partner
was covered prior to the death of the retiree and is not otherwise
eligible for medical benefits from his/her employers.
E. Sick leave/vacation accumulation at retirement. [Amended
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 4249-18]
(1) Employees hired prior to November 12, 2018, upon retirement or
death after 10 years of service, the employee or his/her spouse/
domestic/estate partner will receive full payment for any unused
accumulated sick leave, computed on the basis of final wages, in an
amount not to exceed $16,500 for confidential staff and in an
amount not to exceed $30,000 for exempt managerial staff. For the
purpose of this section, the retirement date shall be the date
established by the Public Employees Retirement System. Deferred
retirement benefits shall not count as retirement for purposes of
this section. Any employee who is eligible to retire shall give at
least 12 months' notice to the employer if they desire a lump-sum
payment for accumulated sick leave. Otherwise, payment will be
paid in 12 equal monthly installments. The employer shall have 45
days from the receipt of the employee's formal notice of retirement
approval to make final computations of the amount due. No
payment under this section shall affect, either by increasing or
decreasing, any pension or retirement benefit due the employee.
(2) Employees hired after November 12, 2018, will not receive payout
of unused sick or vacation time at the time of retirement.
F. Employees who retire on a disability retirement based upon a disability
that resulted from the lawful use of deadly force in the performance of
their law enforcement duties shall receive the medical, prescription and
dental benefits for which they are eligible under § 46-12B of this
chapter.
A. The cost of temporary disability income protection plan as for all fulltime
employees shall be shared equally by the Township and the
individual.
B. Those full-time employees in a no-pay status with less than two years of
Township service shall be entitled to medical, dental and prescription
benefits for which the employee is eligible for the first 30 calendar days
of a temporary disability-insurance-covered leave.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Hospital and medical care benefits for retirees and
their dependents with less than 20 years of service, was repealed at the direction of the
Township. See now Subsection B.
§ 46-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-14
1:154
§ 46-15. Training.
§ 46-16. Benefits for members and survivors of volunteer
organizations. [Amended 6-27-2002 by Ord. No. 3300]
C. Those full-time employees in a no-pay status with two years or more of
Township service shall be entitled to medical, dental and prescription
benefits for which the employee is eligible for the first 180 calendar
days of a temporary disability-insurance-covered leave.
D. On the 31st or 181st calendar day, respectively, of a temporary
disability leave in a no-pay status, the employee shall be responsible for
the Township share as well as the employee share for those benefits to
which the Township contributes in part or wholly.
A. Reserve military training. Absences for military training are to be paid
in accordance with federal and State of New Jersey statutes as
applicable to a municipal employee.
B. Job training.
(1) Training deemed essential by the department/division director and
approved by the Personnel Officer will be normally taken on
Township time, and such course will be fully funded by the
responsible department to include travel expenses. Such essential
training and education must be directly related to the position
currently occupied for more effective performance rather than
another job or new or additional skill.
(2) The Township shall reimburse the employees for tuition costs for
training courses taken by the employees at their request when such
courses are approved by the department/division director and the
Personnel Officer in advance of enrollment and are determined by
the department/division director and the Personnel Officer to be of
benefit to the Township. Such training courses shall be taken on the
employee's own time unless otherwise authorized by the Township
Manager, and reimbursement of 50% shall be made to employees
after proof of enrollment and 50% after proof of successful
completion of such approved course.
A. Pensions to certain survivors of volunteer fire fighters, first aid squad or
rescue squad members.
(1) Provision; amount; when effective. Pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1, there is hereby provided a pension in the
amount of $5,000 annually to the spouse, minor children or
qualified dependent of volunteer fire fighters, first aid squad or
rescue squad members who shall die as the result of injuries
sustained out of and in the course of performance of duties as a
member of such volunteer company or squad. Such pension shall
be paid in accordance with the statutes in such cases and in the
§ 46-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-16
1:155
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 5, Art.
VIII.
same manner as municipal employees are paid, but only for any
death occurring after the date of this section, except as provided
by law.
(2) Payment; termination. Such pension shall be paid to the spouse or
qualified dependent during his or her unmarried status, or the
minor child or children of such volunteer if no spouse is surviving,
or to such minor child or children after the death of such spouse.
Such pension shall terminate if the spouse or qualified dependent
remarries. The minor child shall be a child who has not reached his
or her 18th birthday and has never married.
(3) Determination of eligibility. The Township governing body and a
committee from the Fire Chiefs' Association shall make such
investigations as it shall deem necessary to determine eligibility for
benefits.
(4) Volunteer fire company, first aid squad, etc., to be officially
sanctioned; other eligibility requirements. A volunteer fire
company, first aid squad or rescue squad must be officially
sanctioned by resolution of the Township Council of the Township
to be eligible for pension benefits. The death of such volunteer
must be out of and in the course of his volunteer duties, and he
must have been eligible for workers' compensation benefits as
provided by the Township.
B. Recognizing that Franklin Township's volunteer fire, rescue and first
aid organizations play a critical role in the essential mission to provide
public safety for the Township, it is the policy of Franklin Township to
support employees who volunteer for these services. Consequently, the
Township encourages employees to respond to emergency call during
business hours. The Township shall work with volunteers to develop
mechanisms that will address the conflict between Township's
manpower needs and its support for fire and rescue volunteers.
Further, the Township is committed to exploring new ways to encourage
volunteerism among its employees.
§ 46-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 46-16
1:156
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1894 (Ch. 38 of the 1990 Code);
amended in its entirety 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3587]
§ 50-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DIVISION COMMANDERS — The members of the Police Department
designated by the Director of Public Safety to oversee a division of the
Police Department.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — As constituted by § 50-6.
PATROL OFFICER — Any duly appointed member of the Police Department
below the rank of Sergeant.
REGULAR POLICE OFFICER — A duly appointed full-time policeman/
woman within the Police Department who has successfully completed his/
her probationary employment period.
SCHOOL GUARDS — As constituted by § 50-23.
SPECIAL POLICE — As constituted by § 50-22.
SUPERIOR OFFICERS — The members of the Police Department holding
the rank of Sergeant and above.
§ 50-2. Creation of Police Department. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 4291-19]
There shall be within the Department of Public Safety a Division of Police
(also known as the "Police Department"), the executive head of which shall
be the Director of Public Safety.
§ 50-3. Powers and duties of Department. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 4291-19]
The Department shall have all the functions, powers, duties and
responsibilities prescribed by law for a municipal Police Department
generally and by any provisions of the chapter and ordinances relating to
the Township Police Department, Director of Public Safety and the officers
and personnel of the Department.
§ 50-4. Composition and titles. [Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
3887; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 4154-16; 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
4204-17; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 4257-18; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
4291-19]
A. The following titles and positions shall exist within the Police
Department: three Captains, five Lieutenants, 18 Sergeants and 82
Patrol Officers.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:157
§ 50-5. Divisions and bureaus. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
4291-19]
§ 50-6. Office of Emergency Management; Emergency Management
Coordinator. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
§ 50-7. Ranking officers; applicable regulations. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
B. The Township Council may create other titles as may be necessary for
the welfare and protection of persons and property in the Township
upon recommendation of the Director of Public Safety and the Township
Manager.
C. There shall exist a position entitled "Police Chaplain" to be appointed by
the Director of Public Safety for a three-year term. The Police Chaplain
must reside within Franklin Township. The Police Chaplain must
perform such functions as shall be assigned by the Director of Public
Safety without remuneration.
A. Within the Police Department, there shall be three separate Divisions,
including:
(1) Administration.
(2) Investigations.
(3) Uniformed.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall be empowered to create subordinate
bureaus within each division as may be necessary with the approval of
the Township Manager.
A. Within the Police Department, there shall be an Officer of Emergency
Management, the head of which shall be the Emergency Management
Coordinator.
B. The Township Manager shall appoint an Emergency Management
Coordinator in accordance with state statute.
A. The officer in charge, designated by the Director of Public Safety, shall
be the highest ranking law enforcement officer of the Police
Department and shall be subject to such rules, regulations and
directives as may be prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
B. In the event that the officer in charge is absent from his/her office, the
Director of Public Safety shall designate an acting officer in charge.
C. Rules and regulations. The Police Department shall be governed by the
Police Department rules and regulations which shall be adopted and
promulgated by the Director of Public Safety with the approval of the
Township Manager. It shall be the responsibility of the Director of
Public Safety to execute the Police Department rules and regulations.
§ 50-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-8
1:158
§ 50-8. Requirements for appointment to force. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
A. Persons appointed to the Police Department as a regular or
probationary police officer shall be high school graduates, and shall
meet all other requirements as set forth by the New Jersey State Police
for appointments as a state police officer.
B. The following tests and screening processes shall be utilized with
regard to applicants who meet the standards set forth in Subsection A
above:
Police Department Township of Franklin Table 1
Test Components for Appointment as Probationary or Regular
Police Officer
Exam Written
Minimum Score
Passing Score as
Recommended by
Testing Agency Weight 40%
Physical agility Pass/Fail N/A
Group psychological Pass/Fail N/A
Individual
psychological
Pass/Fail N/A
Medical evaluation Pass/Fail N/A
Drug and alcohol
testing
Pass/Fail N/A
Oral interview and
background
evaluation
N/A 60%
NOTE: Failure of any one of the above steps shall eliminate a
candidate from further consideration.
(1) Each applicant for appointment shall take a written examination
administered by the New Jersey Chiefs of Police Association or
other organization designed by the Township Manager. The results
of any such test shall be accepted for a period of two years from the
date of such test. The cost for such test shall be paid prior to taking
such test by each individual applicant, and the Township Council
shall establish said fee prior to the official announcement and
advertisement of the written examination test date through the
adoption of a resolution fixing and determining the cost to be paid
by each applicant for such test based upon the actual costs
incurred by the Township for the procurement and administration
of such test. An applicant must receive a minimum passing score as
recommended by the testing agency to be considered further.
§ 50-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-8
1:159
(2) Applicants receiving a passing score may be required to take a
physical agility examination. Said physical agility examination shall
be scored on a pass/fail basis.
(3) With regard to applicants who have passed the written examination
and physical agility examination (if given), the Township may, but
shall not be required to, conduct a group psychological screening
by a licensed psychologist.
(4) Upon receiving passing scores on the written examination and
physical agility examination (if given), the Township Manager shall
determine the appropriate cutoff or cutoffs. The remaining
applicants shall then receive individual psychological analysis and
assessment to determine suitability for employment as a police
officer.
(5) A background investigation shall be conducted by the Police
Department on all applicants prior to appointment as probationary
patrol officer.
(6) Upon successfully completing and passing the above-listed
requirements, the applicant shall participate in an oral interview
conducted by such other person or persons designated by the
Township Manager.
(7) Upon review of all test results and evaluations as listed above, the
Township Manager shall then select those applicants suitable for
employment. Said applicants shall undergo a medical examination
and drug and alcohol testing to determine suitability for
appointment.
C. As an alternative, the Township may also consider persons who are PTC
(Police Training Commission) certified or who are presently attending a
certified police training school at the time the applications are being
accepted. These applicants must meet the standards set forth in
§ 50-8B, in which case the following screening process shall be utilized:
(1) All applicants will be required to participate in an oral interview as
set forth in § 50-8B(6) hereof. The lowest ranked individual shall
receive a ranking of one. Said ranking shall progress to the highest
ranked candidate. Candidates with equal performance shall be
ranked equally.
(2) A background investigation shall be conducted by the Police
Department on all candidates. Any candidate who fails the
background investigations shall cease to be a candidate.
(3) Hiring shall be done in accordance with the order of the highest
rank on the oral interview. The successful candidate(s) shall
thereupon be tendered conditional offer(s) of employment.
§ 50-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-8
1:160
§ 50-9. Probationary period for patrolmen/women. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
§ 50-10. Eligibility for promotion. [Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3711; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3887; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 4154-16;
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
(4) The person(s) accepting the conditional offer of employment shall
undergo a medical examination, together with drug and alcohol
testing and a psychological examination which shall be conducted
by a licensed physician and licensed psychologist selected and paid
for by the Township.
(5) The candidate(s) passing the aforesaid examinations shall be
selected to fill police officer vacancies.
A. No person shall be given or accept a permanent appointment as a police
officer in the Township unless such person has first been given a
probationary/temporary appointment to such office for a period of one
year after successful completion of a police training course at a school
approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission and
Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey. In the
event that the police training course is not taken by the police officer at
the start of the probationary period, the probationary period shall be
extended so that a full year of probation shall follow successful
completion of the training course. Upon the expiration of such
probationary period, the appointment shall become permanent unless,
at any time prior thereto, the probationary appointment has been
revoked by the Township Manager.
B. The Township Manager retains the right to terminate a probationary
police officer upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety.
A. A list of eligible candidates for promotion to an available position shall
be compiled by the Township Manager (hereinafter "Manager") or his/
her designee and shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the
Department no less than six weeks in advance of the promotional
examination. The Manager shall also advise candidates of
recommended study materials relevant to the promotional
examinations.
B. Eligibility criteria shall be as follows:
(1) Sergeant: a minimum of five years of service as a regular Franklin
Township Patrol Officer.
(2) Lieutenant: a minimum of two years of service at the rank of
Sergeant.
(3) Captain: a minimum of two years of service at the rank of
Lieutenant.
§ 50-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-10
1:161
§ 50-11. Promotion to Sergeant and Lieutenant. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
C. Written examination results shall be accepted for a period of one year.
After one year from the availability of said results, same shall not be
acceptable for the promotion process except at the discretion of the
Township Manager.
A. The selection process for the promotion of candidates to the position of
Sergeant and Lieutenant shall be comprised of the following
components:
(1) Seniority.
(2) Education.
(3) A promotional evaluation.
(4) A written examination.
(5) A medical evaluation certifying the candidate's fitness for duty
(pass/fail).
(6) A psychological screening (pass/fail) if no such evaluation of the
candidate has occurred within a three-year period.
B. The above-stated components shall be defined and ranked as follows:
(1) Seniority. Candidates shall be ranked against competing
candidates based upon seniority. The most senior candidate shall
receive the highest ranking, while the least senior candidate shall
receive a ranking of one. Candidates with equal seniority shall be
equally ranked.
(2) Education. Candidates shall be competitively ranked based upon
the level of education attained. Ranking shall be as follows:
(a) High school diploma: one.
(b) Associate degree or in excess of 60 credits accumulated
towards a bachelor's degree: two.
(c) Bachelor's degree: three.
(d) Master's degree: four.
(e) PhD or J.D. degree: five.
(3) Promotional evaluation.
(a) Candidates shall be competitively ranked based upon their
performance in a promotional evaluation process consisting of
the following:
§ 50-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-11
1:162
[1] The personnel file, including but not limited to job
evaluations, disciplinary record, commendations and
attendance.
[2] An oral interview conducted by the Township Manager
and/or his/her designees, which shall consider the
following:
[a] Comprehensive and presentation skills in oral
communications.
[b] Maturity in judgment.
[c] Interest in law enforcement.
[d] Evidence of supervisory and administrative ability.
[e] Demonstrated knowledge and understanding of the
Township, including the physical and demographics
thereof, as well as an understanding of the operations
of the Township government, including the interaction
of the various departments thereof.
[f] Knowledge and understanding of management
practices, departmental rules, regulations, policies
and procedure.
(b) The lowest ranked individual shall receive a ranking of one.
Said rankings shall progress to the highest ranked candidate.
Candidates with equal performance shall be ranked equally.
(c) In order to qualify for participation in the promotional
evaluation component, a candidate must pass the medical and
psychological components (if required). Eligibility to
participate in the promotional evaluation component shall also
be based upon a candidate's competitive ranking on the
written examination. [See Subsection B(4) below.]
(4) Written examination.
(a) Candidates shall be competitively ranked based upon their
performance on a written examination administered by the
New Jersey Chiefs of Police Association or other organization
designated by the Township Manager.
(b) The candidate with the lowest score shall receive a ranking of
one. Said rankings shall progress to the candidate with the
highest score. Candidates with equal scores shall be ranked
equally.
(c) The following formula shall be applied to determine the
number of qualified candidates eligible to participate in the
promotional evaluation component:
§ 50-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-11
1:163
§ 50-12. Promotion to Captain. [Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
3887; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 4154-16; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
4291-19]
Number of Openings
Number of Candidates
Receiving the Highest
Rankings on Written
Examination
1 6
2 9
3 12
NOTE: Two additional candidates will qualify for each
opening in excess of three, i.e. four openings: 14 candidates;
five openings: 16 candidates; six openings: 18 candidates,
etc.
C. The components for the selection process for promotion to the levels of
Sergeant and Lieutenant shall be weighted in accordance with the
below-stated formula and the following table:
(1) Formula: ranking times weight equals value.
(2) Table.
Component Weight
Seniority 1
Education 2
Written examination 3
Promotional evaluation 4
Medical evaluation NA; pass/fail
Psychological screening (if
required)
NA; pass/fail
(3) Promotions shall be granted in the order of the highest cumulative
value of all components. In the promotion of members of the Police
Department who have completed the competitive components set
forth herein, a resident of Franklin Township, Somerset County,
shall be appointed rather than a nonresident in any instance in
which the resident and nonresident achieve the same total value.
A. The selection process for the managerial position of Captain shall be
comprised of the following components:
(1) A promotional evaluation which shall consist of the following:
§ 50-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-12
1:164
§ 50-13. Benefits and conditions of employment. [Amended
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3887; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 4154-16;
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
(a) The personnel file, including but not limited to job evaluations,
disciplinary record, commendations and attendance.
(b) An oral interview conducted by the Township Manager and/or
his/her designees, which shall consider the following:
[1] Comprehension and presentation skills in oral
communications.
[2] Maturity in judgment.
[3] General knowledge of current departmental operation.
[4] Management capabilities.
[5] Ability to solve problems through creative concepts.
(c) A written set of essays to be evaluated by the Township
Manager and/or his/her designees based upon the following
criteria:
[1] Ability to communicate concepts.
[2] Presentation of ideas and values.
[3] Conceptual understanding of departmental needs and
goals, both current and future.
[4] Demonstration of conceptual ability to pursue goals
through the exercise of managerial skills.
(2) Medical and psychological testing consisting of the following:
(a) A medical examination.
(b) A psychological screening.
B. The Township Manager shall promote those employees demonstrating
the greatest overall strength and ability to function in a managerial
capacity.
A. For employee benefits and conditions of employment generally, see
pertinent bargaining unit contracts and departmental general orders,
the Personnel Chapter of this Code.45
B. Patrol Officers, Sergeants, Lieutenants, and Captain, shall be enrolled
in the Police and Fire Retirement System (PFRS).
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Personal Policies.
§ 50-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-13
1:165
§ 50-14. Discipline, suspension and removal of members. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
The following shall represent Township policy on the discipline, suspension
or removal of police officers:
§ 50-15. Hearing officer. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
§ 50-16. Hearing procedure; decision. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 4291-19]
C. Scheduling and compensation. The Director of Public Safety or his/her
designee shall arrange a schedule based upon federal labor standards
governing law enforcement officers within the calendar year, providing
for all shifts to be adequately covered; but, in the case of any
emergency, the Director of Public Safety or his/her designee shall have
full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such members
during the period of emergency.
A. The Franklin Township Council supports and reaffirms the authority of
the Director of Public Safety to discipline, suspend or remove members
of the Police Department with or without pay under N.J.S.A. 40A:147.
B. If the Director of Public Safety, in his/her discretion, decides to
discipline, suspend or remove an officer, the officer will have a right to a
hearing before the Township Manager or his/her designee within 30
days of suspension.
A. The Township Manager may appoint a hearing officer(s) to hear
complaints. The hearing officer shall have law enforcement experience
or shall be an attorney at law admitted to practice in the State of New
Jersey. The Director of Public Safety shall notify the officer so charged
by serving him/her, by personal delivery or certified mail, with a copy of
the resolution setting forth the name of the hearing officer and date of
hearing.
B. The Township Manager or hearing officer(s) shall have the authority to
issue subpoenas for testimony of witnesses of fact and shall serve in his/
her capacity for the time necessary to hear and determine the charges
against the member or officer.
C. The hearing shall be scheduled in accordance with state statute.
A. In any such proceeding, the charging party shall prosecute the case
through an attorney and shall have the burden of proving the
allegations of the complaint by a preponderance of the evidence. The
member or officer so charged shall have the right to be represented by
counsel at the hearing. All such proceedings shall be transcribed by a
certified shorthand reporter.
§ 50-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-16
1:166
§ 50-17. Nondisciplinary suspension of police officers. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
§ 50-18. Officer to be provided with means for defense. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
Whenever a member or officer of the Police Department or a Police
Department is a defendant in any action or legal proceeding arising out of or
directly relating to the lawful exercise of police powers in the furtherance of
his/her official duties, the governing body of the municipality shall provide
said member or officer with necessary means for the defense of such action
or proceeding. The Township Manager shall select for the officer one of the
following three methods of defense:
B. The Township Manager may reprimand, suspend, reduce in rank, fine
or dismiss said member or employee of the Police Department from the
service of the Township or exonerate him/her from such charges.
C. The decision of the Township Manager shall be final, subject to review
in the Superior Court, Law Division, or by way of arbitration in
accordance with New Jersey statute.
A. The Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to suspend police
officers with or without pay pending a hearing on disciplinary charges
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-149.1.
B. A police officer suspended without pay shall have a right to a hearing
before the Township Manager or his/her designee, within 30 days of his/
her suspension.
C. In reviewing the Director's decision, the Township Manager will
consider whether the decision by the Director was arbitrary, capricious,
unreasonable or creates an undue hardship when balancing the public
interest versus private interest.
D. If, after the hearing, the Township Manager finds that the Director's
decision to suspend without pay was arbitrary, capricious,
unreasonable or creates an undue hardship when balancing the public
interest versus private interest, the Council may reinstate the officer to
suspension with pay.
A. Assignment of an attorney to represent the officer;
B. Permitting the officer to select an attorney designated by the
municipality to defend officers in such actions; or
C. Payment to an attorney of the officer's own choice, at a rate not to
exceed $90 per hour, but not for his/her defense in a disciplinary
proceeding instituted against him/her in the proceeding phase by the
municipality or in a criminal proceeding instituted as a result of a
complaint on behalf of the municipality. If any such disciplinary or
criminal proceeding instituted by or on complaint of the municipality
§ 50-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-18
1:167
§ 50-19. Annual physical examination. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 4291-19]
Every member of the Police Department may be required to have one
physical examination by a reputable physician approved by the Township
Manager in a calendar year. Such examination shall be conducted at such
time as the Director of Public Safety may designate. A full record of such
physical examination shall be filed with the Township.
§ 50-20. Drug screening. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 4291-19]
See New Jersey State Attorney General's drug screening guidelines.
§ 50-21. Special law enforcement officers (Class III, Class II and
Class I). [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 4227-18; 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 4291-19]
shall be dismissed or finally determined in favor of the member or
officer, he/she shall be reimbursed for the expense of his/her defense at
a rate not to exceed $90 for the reasonable number of hours expended
by his/her attorney in his/her behalf.
A. The positions of special law enforcement officers Class III, special law
enforcement officers Class II and special law enforcement officers Class
I are hereby created as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.
B. Term. The term of special law enforcement officers Class III, special law
enforcement officers Class II and special law enforcement officers Class
I shall expire at the end of the calendar year during which said
individuals are appointed.
C. Special law enforcement officers shall be appointed by the Township
Manager on recommendation of the Director of Public Safety.
D. Criteria for the appointment, training, general procedures,
organization and operations of special law enforcement officers Class
III, special law enforcement officers Class II and special law
enforcement officers Class I shall be promulgated by the Director of
Public Safety and approved by the Township Manager.
E. The assignment of duties for special law enforcement officers Class III,
special law enforcement officers Class II and special law enforcement
officers Class I shall be in accordance with appropriate state statutes.
F. While performing police duties, special law enforcement officers Class
III, special law enforcement officers Class II and special law
enforcement officers Class I shall be under the jurisdiction of and
subject to all rules, regulations and directives of the Police Department
of Franklin Township.
G. All special law enforcement officers Class III, special law enforcement
officers Class II and special law enforcement officers Class I shall be
§ 50-18 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-21
1:168
§ 50-22. School crossing guards.
§ 50-23. Compensation for special police and school crossing
guards.
All special law enforcement officers and school crossing guards shall be
compensated on an hourly basis at the rates established by ordinances of
the Council.
required to complete training courses as required by the Police
Training Commission of the State of New Jersey.
H. Special law enforcement officers Class III and special law enforcement
officers Class II, while engaged in the actual performance of their
official duties, are hereby authorized to carry weapons approved by the
Director of Public Safety or his/her designee.
A. School crossing guards are appointed by the Township Manager on
recommendation of the Chief of Police as part-time employees.
B. The Township Manager may appoint school crossing guards for terms
not exceeding one year and revoke such appointments at will. No
person shall be appointed as a school crossing guard unless he/she:
(1) Is a citizen of this state.
(2) Is sound in body and of good health.
(3) Is of good moral character.
(4) Has not been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude.
C. A school crossing guard shall not be a member of the Police Department
of the Township and his/her powers and duties shall cease at the
expiration of the term for which he/she was appointed. Every school
crossing guard shall be under the supervision and direction of the Chief
of Police and shall perform his/her duties only in the Township. He/she
shall comply with the rules and regulations applicable to the conduct
and decorum of the regular police officers of the Township. Before any
school crossing guard is appointed, the Chief of Police shall ascertain
the eligibility of the applicant and make a recommendation to the
Township Manager.
D. Every school crossing guard shall be trained for the proper
performance of his/her duties and responsibilities.
E. The Chief of Police shall have the right to position school crossing
guards on any street or highway within the Township: provided,
however, that such guards may be stationed only when it is necessary to
control or direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic during those time
periods of a school day as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 50-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-24
1:169
§ 50-24. Police outside work/special police services. [Amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3763; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3814;
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 4119-15]
A. The Chief of Police or his/her designee, at his/her discretion, may assign
members of the Department not on regular duty and who may volunteer
for police outside work/special police services. While on outside work/
special police service, the members of the Department shall be subject
to all provisions of Police rules, regulations and directives.
B. Parties contracting for police outside work/police special services shall
contact the Administrative Services Division at least two weeks prior to
the job/function. A description of job duties shall be provided at that
time so an appropriate posting can be accomplished at police
headquarters.
C. Parties requesting police outside work/police special services may be
required to submit full payment in advance of the work to be
performed.
D. The rate of pay for police outside work/police special services excluding
traffic services shall be $61.20 per hour. The rate of pay for police
outside work/police special services for traffic services shall be $81.20
an hour. These hourly rates shall increase 2% per year beginning on
January 1, 2017. All traffic control services will be contracted for a
minimum of four hours other than for long-term assignments. The
Township, as an administrative fee, shall retain 10% of these hourly
rates. An additional $2.50 per hour gasoline surcharge fee will be
charged for all traffic services over and above the rates of pay
whenever the Township cost for unleaded gasoline equals or exceeds
$2.50 per gallon. The above notwithstanding, the hourly rate for police
outside work/police special services, excluding traffic, to be charged on
projects undertaken or funded by the Township of Franklin or the
Franklin Township Board of Education shall be $50 per hour and the
hourly rate of pay for traffic services on projects undertaken or funded
by the Township of Franklin or the Franklin Board of Education shall be
$70 per hour.
E. The 10% administrative fee and $2.50 per hour gasoline surcharge
provided by Subsection D above shall be waived for programs
sponsored by the Franklin Township Municipal Departments.
F. All vendors shall be required to make all payments for police outside
work/police special services assignments payable to the Township of
Franklin. All payments for police outside work/police special services
assignments shall be forwarded to the Township of Franklin Police
Department and forwarded to the Finance Department. The Finance
Department shall deposit all funds earmarked for the payment of police
outside work/police special services officers, collected from vendors,
into a special escrow fund. The escrow fund shall be established for
payment to members of the Police Department performing the police
§ 50-24 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-24
1:170
outside work/police special services. All police officers shall be required
to submit pay slips to the Chief of Police. The pay slip shall be in a form
approved by the Chief of Police. Upon receipt of a properly executed
pay slip verified by the vendor, the Finance Department will process
the pay slips for disbursement. Officers performing police outside work/
police special services shall be paid on a timely basis.
G. If a party contracting for outside work/police special services must
cancel said services, the party shall be required to give notice at least
two hours prior to the start for traffic control and at least eight hours
for all other services. A four-hour minimum charge will be levied for
failure to adhere to the above cancellation policy.
H. If after an officer arrives at an assignment for outside work/police
special services and all or part of that work is cancelled, the contracting
party shall pay a minimum charge equal to the hours booked to a
maximum of four hours.
I. All security details other than those undertaken by or funded by the
Township of Franklin or the Franklin Township Board of Education that
require staffing of five or more officers will require an additional
assignment of one supervisor, paid at 10% above the prevailing security
rate. The hourly rate for off-duty police security services for six months
or more shall be $45 per hour.
§ 50-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-24
1:171
Chapter 54
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 50-24 FRANKLIN CODE § 50-24
1:172
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)46
§ 54-1. through § 54-5. (Reserved)
46.Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Prohibition of Awarding Contracts to Certain Contributors,
adopted 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 3405, was repealed 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 4222-18. This
ordinance also provided for the adoption of N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., the New Jersey
Campaign Contributions and Expenditures Reporting Act, by reference.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:173

ARTICLE II
Prohibition of Redevelopment Agreements with Certain
Contributors
§ 54-6. Prohibition of entering into or amending redevelopment
agreements with certain contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township of Franklin (hereinafter "Township") or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies or those of its independent authorities, as the case
may be, shall not enter into an agreement, amend an agreement, or
otherwise contract with any redeveloper for the planning, replanning,
construction or undertaking of any redevelopment project, including
the acquisition or leasing of any public property in conjunction with the
redevelopment of any area within the Township pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, during the applicable time period as specified below, to a
campaign committee of any Township candidate or holder of public
office within the Township having responsibility for arranging, entering
into, or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing
those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township, or to any
municipal political campaign committee, or to any Somerset County
party committee, or to any political action committee which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of Township municipal campaigns
(PAC). For purposes of this section, the "applicable time period" shall be
defined as the time period between the date that the property which is
the subject of the redevelopment project has been included in a
memorializing resolution adopted by the governing body directing the
Planning Board to conduct a preliminary investigation to determine if
the site is in need of redevelopment pursuant to and in accordance with
the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq., and the date of entering into the redevelopment
agreement.
B. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Township shall contain a provision prohibiting redevelopers as
defined in Subsection C to solicit or make any contribution of money or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any
Township candidate or holder of public office within the Township
having responsibility for arranging, entering into, or approving the
redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the
agreement on behalf of the Township, or to any Township political
campaign committee, or to any Township or Somerset County party
committee, or to any political action committee which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of Township municipal campaigns
(PAC), between the time of first communication between that
redeveloper and the municipality regarding a redevelopment project
§ 54-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-6
1:175
§ 54-7. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to any Township candidate for Mayor
or Township Council or Township political campaign committee shall be
and the later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of all
matters specified in the redevelopment agreement.
C. As defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, a "redeveloper" means any person,
firm, corporation or public body that shall enter into or propose to enter
into a contract with a municipality or other redevelopment entity for the
redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area in need of redevelopment, or
an area in need of rehabilitation, or any part thereof, under the
provisions of this Act, or for any construction or other work forming
part of a redevelopment or rehabilitation project. For the purposes of
this article, the definition of a "redeveloper" includes all principals who
own 10% or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust,
partners, and officers in the aggregate employed by the provider as well
as any affiliates or subsidiaries directly controlled by the redeveloper.
Spouses and adult children at home shall also be included. For the
purposes of this article the definition of "redeveloper" shall exclude any
person, firm, or corporation that is the owner of the real property that is
the subject of the redevelopment agreement. In order to qualify for this
exclusion, the owner of the real property must be the sole owner of all
the real property which is the subject of the redevelopment contract or
agreement on the date they were designated the redeveloper, and no
provision of the redevelopment contract or agreement shall:
(1) Require or in any way authorize the use of the powers of eminent
domain by the redevelopment entity or the Township;
(2) Provide for any tax abatement, tax exemption;
(3) Require the expenditure or contribution of any public funds;
(4) Provide for redevelopment area bond financing;
(5) Provide for the establishment of a revenue allocation district; or
(6) Provide for an Urban Enterprise Zone grant.
D. For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
responsibility for arranging and entering into the redevelopment
agreement under the Act shall be:
(1) The Township Council, if the redevelopment agreement requires
approval or appropriation from the Council, or a public officer who
is responsible for arranging and entering into the redevelopment
agreement, if that public officer is appointed by Council; or
(2) The Franklin Township Redevelopment Agency, if it is the
designated redevelopment entity.
§ 54-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 54-7
1:176
deemed a violation of this section nor shall an agreement for redevelopment
projects of any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby if that contribution
or agreement was made by the redeveloper prior to the effective date of this
section.
§ 54-8. Notice given by municipality; sworn statement of
redeveloper.
§ 54-9. Contribution restrictions and disclosure requirement
applicability to consultants.
A. It shall be the municipality's continuing responsibility to give notice of
this section when the municipality gives notice of redevelopment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and when the municipality adopts a
resolution directing the Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment
plan and at the time that the municipality adopts the ordinance to
implement the redevelopment plan.
B. Prior to arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement with
any redeveloper, the Township or any of its purchasing agents or
agencies or independent authorities, as the case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the redeveloper that the redeveloper has not
made any contribution in violation of § 54-6A above. Furthermore, the
redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of this
article that may occur while arranging and entering into the
redevelopment agreement, and until all specified terms of the
agreement have been completed. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the agreement with the
municipality and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
A. The contribution and disclosure requirements in this article shall apply
to all redevelopers as well as professionals, consultants or lobbyists
contracted or employed by the business entity ultimately designated as
the redeveloper to provide services related to:
(1) Lobbying of government officials in connection with the
examination of an area and its designation as an area in need of
redevelopment or in connection with the preparation, consultation
and adoption of the redevelopment plan;
(2) Obtaining the designation or appointment as redeveloper;
(3) Negotiating the terms of a redevelopment agreement or any
amendments or modifications thereto; and
(4) Performing the terms of a redevelopment agreement.
B. It shall be a breach of the consultant's contract, and shall require
immediate termination, for a consultant to violate the contribution
limits and disclosure requirements in this article.
§ 54-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-9
1:177
§ 54-10. Return of excess contributions.
A redeveloper or municipal candidate or officeholder or municipal or county
party committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a violation of
§ 54-6 of this Act, if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable
ELEC Report is published, the redeveloper notifies the Municipal Council
in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from
the municipal candidate or municipal or county political party or PAC
referenced in this article.
§ 54-11. Violations and penalties.
C. A redeveloper who participates in, or facilitates, the circumvention of
the contribution restrictions through consultants or professionals shall
be deemed to be in breach.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Township redevelopment
agreement for a redeveloper to: a) make or solicit a contribution in
violation of this article; b) knowingly conceal or misrepresent a
contribution given or received; c) make or solicit contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution; d) make or solicit any contribution on the
condition or with the agreement that it will be contributed to a
campaign committee of any candidate or holder of the public office of
Township; e) engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent
or understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit
any contribution which if made or solicited by the redeveloper itself
would subject that entity to the restrictions of this article; f) fund
contributions made by third parties, including consultants, attorneys,
family members, and employees; g) engage in any exchange of
contributions to circumvent the intent of this article; or h) directly or
indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do any act which
would subject that entity to the restrictions of this article.
B. Furthermore, any redeveloper who violates Subsection A shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future Township redevelopment
agreements for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
§ 54-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 54-11
1:178
Chapter 58
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 58-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1
et. seq., the Township hereby creates a body corporate and politic to be
known as the "Franklin Township Redevelopment Agency" which shall
constitute a redevelopment agency contemplated and provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11, as an agency or instrumentality of the Township of
Franklin. The Redevelopment Agency shall have all the powers vested in
redevelopment agencies in the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A-12A-1 et. seq., with regards to redevelopment projects
assigned to the Redevelopment Agency from time to time by the Township
Council.
§ 58-2. Appointment of Commissioners; terms of office.
Pursuant to the N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11, there shall be seven Commissioners
of the Redevelopment Agency to be appointed by the Township Council,
two of whom shall be members of the Township Council. The terms of
the Commissioners shall be five years, except that the terms of the initial
members shall be staggered in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11. The
term of any Commissioner who is also a member of the Township Council
shall be one year.
§ 58-3. Executive Director. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3997]
The Executive Director of the Redevelopment Agency shall be the Township
Manager of the Township of Franklin or his/her designee.
§ 58-4. Filing ordinance.
Copies of this chapter, certified by the Township Clerk, shall be filed in the
office of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey after the effective date of this
chapter.
Chapter 60
RETIREMENT PROGRAMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Personnel policies — See Ch. 46.
§ 54-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-4
1:179

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3780]
§ 60-1. Required participation positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 60-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
A. Township Manager;
B. Assistant Township Manager;
C. Director of Community Development;
D. Director of Revenue and Finance;
E. Director of Economic Development;
F. Director of Fire Prevention/Fire Prevention Official;
G. Director of Recreation;
H. Grants Coordinator;
I. Director of Social Services;
J. Court Administrator;
K. Township Attorney (only if employed as an employee);
L. Director of Engineering and Public Works;
M. Municipal Prosecutor (only if employed as an employee);
N. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-2
1:181
§ 60-3. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 60-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 60-3
1:182
Chapter 62
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 66
SEAL AND MISSION/VISION STATEMENT
§ 60-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:183

ARTICLE I
Seal
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 55 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 66-1. Township Seal.
The Seal of the Township shall be as follows:
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-1
1:185

ARTICLE II
Mission and Vision Statements
[Adopted 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 3118(Ch. 55 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 66-2. Adoption.
The following Mission and Vision Statements are hereby adopted by the
Township Council of the Township of Franklin.
§ 66-3. Mission Statement.
The Township of Franklin shall, through the democratic process, evaluate
the needs of the public and shall provide quality, cost effective services to
the community.
§ 66-4. Vision Statement.
Residents of the Township of Franklin will live and thrive in a community
that values its pride and spirit, and pulls from the strengths found in the
diversity of our town's various sections and peoples. This community will
provide opportunities and promote quality of life for all so that each resident
can become a healthy, caring, positive, educated and responsible member
of the community.
§ 66-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-4
1:187
Chapter 70
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 201.
§ 70-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law, Chapter 138 of
the Laws of 1946, as amended and supplemented (Chapter 14A of Title 40
of the New Jersey Revised Statutes), there is hereby created a public body
corporate and politic under the name and style of the Township of "Franklin
Sewerage Authority."
§ 70-2. Composition; terms; reimbursement of expenses.
The Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority shall consist of five members
who shall be residents of the Township and shall be appointed by resolution
of the Council in accordance with the provisions of the Sewerage Authority
Laws and for the terms therein specified; and the Township of Franklin
Sewerage Authority may reimburse its members for necessary expenses
incurred in the discharge of their duties.
§ 70-3. Alternate members. [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2008]
In addition to the regular members of the Franklin Township Sewerage
Authority, there may be appointed two alternate members. If alternate
members are appointed, the following shall apply. Alternate members shall
be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," which members
shall serve during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or
members. The order in which such alternates shall serve shall be Alternate
No. 1 and then Alternate No. 2. The initial terms of the alternates shall be
Alternate No. 1, five years, and Alternate No. 2, four years. The terms of
said alternate members shall commence on the day of their appointment
and shall expire on the fourth or fifth January 31 next ensuing after the
date of their appointment, as the case may be. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed
in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
§ 70-4. Powers and duties.
The Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority created by § 70-1 is a
Sewerage Authority as contemplated and provided for by the Sewerage
Authorities Laws and shall have and exercise all of the powers and perform
all the duties provided for by the Sewerage Authorities Law and all other
statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 66-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 70-5
1:188
§ 70-5. (Reserved)47
Chapter 74
TRUST FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 70-5, Absenteeism policy, added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1980, as
amended, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:189

ARTICLE I
Historic Structures
[Adopted 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1532 (Ch. 62, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 74-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to Chapter 112, Land Development, and more specifically the
natural resources preservation cluster option ("NRPC"), a developer may
obtain a density bonus when certain parcels of land are designated as
preservation areas and dedicated to the Township. Certain of those lands so
dedicated may contain historic structures. The Township is of the opinion
that the purposes of said ordinance may be best served by the sale of
such structures subject to appropriate deed restrictions to insure their
preservation and maintenance. The Township desires to create a
mechanism whereby the proceeds from such sales will be placed into an
account to be used solely for purposes consistent with the natural resources
preservation cluster option for the purchase and maintenance of parcels of
land and historic structures.
§ 74-2. Establishment of fund.
All cash realized pursuant to the NRPC option or any similar ordinance
which may be adopted in the future or any voluntary cash gifts given for
the purpose of the preservation of historic structures and all proceeds
from sales of property or lands contributed or dedicated to the Township
by developers pursuant to the NRPC option or similar ordinance which
may be adopted in the future, which lands may contain historic structures,
shall be deposited in a municipal account to be known as "Trust Fund
for Contributions Towards the Cost of the Acquisition and Preservation of
Historic Structures."
§ 74-3. Purposes for which expenditures may be made.
Any expenditures made from the above-mentioned municipal account shall
be used solely for the following purposes of the acquisition and maintenance
of parcels of land containing or protecting historic villages, historic
districts, historic structures or sites; and the acquisition and maintenance
of historic structures within the confines of Franklin Township.
§ 74-4. Mechanism for decision on expenditures.
The final determination as to the expenditure of funds for the capital
purposes aforesaid shall be made by the Township Council of the Township
of Franklin. The decision shall be by majority vote of the full authorized
membership of the Township Council.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-4
1:191

ARTICLE II
Natural Resources
[Adopted 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1533 (Ch. 62, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 74-5. Purpose.
Pursuant to Chapter 112, Land Development, and more specifically the
natural resources preservation cluster option ("NRPC"), a developer may
obtain a density bonus when certain parcels of land are designated as
preservation areas and dedicated to the Township. The Township is of the
opinion that the purposes of said ordinance may be best served by the sale
of such lands to appropriate agencies subject to restrictions to insure their
preservation and use consistent with the purposes of said ordinance. The
Township desires to create a mechanism whereby the proceeds from such
sales will be placed into an account to be used solely for purposes consistent
with the natural resources preservation cluster option for the purchase of
land.
§ 74-6. Establishment of fund.
All proceeds from sales of property or lands realized or dedicated to the
Township by developers pursuant to the NRPC option or any similar
ordinance which may be adopted in the future shall be deposited in a
municipal account to be known as "Trust Fund for Contributions Towards
the Cost of the Acquisition and Preservation of Natural Resources."
§ 74-7. Purposes for which expenditures may be made.
Any expenditures made from the above-mentioned municipal account shall
be used solely for the acquisition and maintenance of parcels of land
containing one or more of the following characteristics:
A. Significant portions of such lands contain, or are in proximity to,
natural resource features which should be preserved from
development;
B. Such lands contain or protect historic villages, historic districts and
historic structures or sites;
C. Such lands contain or protect aesthetically significant ridgelines and
viewsheds from the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park and Canal
Road;
D. Such lands contain or protect frontage along any existing or proposed
reservoir, as well as along all reservoir owned property;
E. Such lands contain or protect forests, significant stands of trees and
individual trees of significant size;
F. Such lands contain or protect stream corridors, headwaters of streams,
wetlands, floodplains, flood hazard areas, ponds or lakes;
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-7
1:193
§ 74-8. Mechanism for decision on expenditures.
The final determination as to the expenditure of funds for the capital
purposes aforesaid shall be made by the Township Council of the Township
of Franklin. The decision shall be by majority vote of the full authorized
membership of the Township Council.
G. Such lands contain or protect farmland and recently cultivated farm
fields, including typical farm features such as hedgerows and individual
tree stands; and
H. Such lands contain or protect rock outcroppings, including the bluffs
and cliffs along Canal Road and the Delaware and Raritan Canal State
Park.
§ 74-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 74-8
1:194
ARTICLE III
Open Space
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 3026 (Ch. 39 of the 1990 Code);
revised 11-7-2000 by referendum]
§ 74-9. Fund for open space.
There is hereby established a reserve in the general capital fund which
shall be noted and designated as the "Municipal Open Space, Recreation,
and Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Fund" commonly known as
the "Open Space Trust Fund." "Open space" means any land acquired,
developed, maintained, or utilized for recreation and/or conservation
purposes, for farmland or farmland preservation purposes, or for historic
preservation purposes. A separate bank account shall be established and
maintained therefor entitled "Franklin Township Municipal Open Space,
Recreation, and Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Account." As
directed by the Township Council, in accordance with the purposes of
N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7-15.9 and the definitions at N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1 as
amended from time to time, funds from the Open Space Trust Fund may
be utilized to acquire all types of interests in real property, including,
not by way of limitation, fee simple acquisitions, easements, development
rights, or any other lesser property interests which will further the goal of
open space acquisition and preservation including all purposes delineated
at N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7(a)(1)(a) through (f) and including the preparation
and periodic revision of a Township inventory of open space, recreation,
farmland, conservation and historic resources. The lands in which such
interests may be acquired shall include undeveloped land as well as land
containing improvements at the time of acquisition, provided the principal
purpose of the acquisition is to preserve open space for conservation and
recreation, preserve farmland for farmland purposes, and to preserve
historic properties. The Township Council shall have the option of paying
for land acquisitions with improvements upon them either solely through
the Open Space Trust Fund or by apportioning the cost thereof by charging
the Open Space Trust Fund for the land portion and the capital account
for the improvement portion. It is understood that such acquisition may
occur through gift, purchase or by eminent domain proceedings pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq. In addition, the Township Council may authorize
the disbursement of monies from the Open Space Trust Fund to assist the
County of Somerset, the State of New Jersey, the United States government,
private not-for-profit organizations, or charitable conservancies in acquiring
interests in real property, located within the Township, and for the purposes
stated herein, provided that suitable arrangements are made to assure that
such lands are made subject to restrictions substantially similar to those
imposed by this article and that in the event such interests subsequently
are sold as delineated and restricted by § 74-12, the net proceeds of such
disposition will be paid over to the Township's Open Space Trust Fund in
the same proportion that the Township's contribution bore to the original
purchase price.
§ 74-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-10
1:195
§ 74-10. Funding of Open Space Trust Fund.
Beginning on January 1, 1999, a special tax rate shall be added to the total
Township tax rate in the amount of $0.03 per $100 of the annual assessed
valuations and tax rate, the revenue from which shall be deposited into the
Open Space Trust Fund. Revised by referendum adopted by the voters on
November 7, 2000, to an amount of $0.05. The Township Council may, in
its discretion, deposit additional monies into the Open Space Trust Fund,
which deposits shall then be subject to all of the provisions governing the
Open Space Trust Fund. The Open Space Trust Fund shall also be permitted
to accept donations and testamentary bequests. The funds accumulated
within the Open Space Trust Fund shall be utilized for the acquisition of
real property and interests in real property as more fully delineated in
§ 74-9. In connection with such acquisition, the funds may be utilized for
appraisals and other items of expense permitted by law in connection with
the acquisition or as a down payment for the issuance of bonds or for debt
service for the same purpose at the discretion of the Township Council. Any
and all interest accruing shall remain in the Open Space Trust Fund and
may be utilized for the above-described purposes. In no eventuality shall the
Township pay more than fair market value for the land to be acquired. The
Township shall obtain a minimum of one appraisal from a certified appraiser
plus the appraisal of the Tax Assessor, as a guide to the fair market value.
The cost of such appraisal may be paid out of the Open Space Trust Fund.
§ 74-11. Utilization of land and buildings acquired through fund.
The land and buildings acquired under the Open Space Trust Fund shall be
utilized for all categories of open space including parks, recreation areas,
natural areas, greenways, wildlife habitats, forests, ecological preserves,
preservation of farm land, preservation of historic properties and such
other uses consistent with the concept of open space. The deed of any
property acquired with funds from the Trust Fund shall contain specific
notation reflecting that the property was acquired with funds from the Open
Space Trust Fund and is subject to all conditions and restrictions of such
designation.
§ 74-12. Sale of property or buildings.
No building, real property or interest therein acquired with these funds
from the Open Space Trust Fund shall be sold, conveyed, leased or
otherwise alienated unless it is needed for another public use or otherwise
furthers the purposes of the trust. Before any sale, conveyance or lease is
made, the Township Council shall seek the recommendation of the Open
Space Advisory Committee that such proposed action is in the public
interest. The Township Council shall pass an ordinance approving any sale
or conveyance as required by N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.9. If such a sale, lease or
conveyance is made, the Township Council shall be required to 1) place
the monies received into the Open Space Trust Fund and 2) in due course,
replace such property or interest with property or an interest of at least
equal fair market value and of reasonably equivalent usefulness, size,
§ 74-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 74-12
1:196
quality, and location. In satisfying the requirements of Clause 2 of the
preceding sentence, the Township Council shall not be required to expend
the entire proceeds of the sale, lease, or conveyance at a single time or
on a single acquisition, or to expend the proceeds within a specific time
following the sale, lease or conveyance, and may, in its discretion, combine
all or a portion of the proceeds with other monies from within or outside the
Open Space Trust Fund toward any acquisition which is permissible under
§ 74-9 of this article, provided that the property or interest so acquired is
made subject to all of the restrictions of §§ 74-11 and 74-12 of this article.
The deed of any real property acquired wholly or partly with funds from the
Open Space Trust Fund shall contain a specific notation reflecting that the
property was acquired with funds from the Open Space Trust Fund.
§ 74-13. Establishment of Open Space Advisory Committee.
There is hereby established an Open Space Advisory Committee to review
and recommend historic properties, open space lands, conservation lands,
recreational lands, farmlands and various interests therein including, but
not limited to, acquisition, acquisition of development rights, easements and
parcels of land and interests therein for acquisition and preservation as
open space within the Township of Franklin. The word "Committee," when
used by itself in this article, refers to the Open Space Advisory Committee.
§ 74-14. Appointment, membership, term. [Amended 4-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 3207; amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 3454]
A. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall consist of:
(1) The Township Manager.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
(3) The Township Planner.
(4) A member of the Board of Education.
(5) The Director of Recreation or the Assistant Recreation Director.
(6) Eleven additional regular members to be appointed by the
Township Council, drawn from among the following:
(a) One member of the Historic Preservation Commission.
(b) One member of Planning Board of Franklin Township who shall
not be an elected official.
(c) One member of the Franklin Township Environmental
Commission.
(d) One member of the Franklin Township Recreation Council.
(e) One member of the Agricultural Committee.
(f) One member of the Shade Tree Commission
§ 74-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-14
1:197
§ 74-15. Duties and functions.
(g) Six citizens of Franklin Township.
B. Members listed in Subsection A(1) to (5) shall serve in an ex officio
capacity.48
A. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall prepare and submit to the
Township Council an Open Space Plan for the Township of Franklin. It
shall develop an inventory of open space properties, farmland,
conservation, recreation and historic sites within the Township and
evaluate and prioritize such open space properties through the
development of appropriate criteria. Such plan shall consist of a parcel
ranking as well as recommendations concerning the nature of the
interests in such real property to be acquired and the purposes for
which such land should be utilized. The Committee shall periodically
review its initial list of properties and projects, adding or deleting
properties or projects as necessary.
B. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall assist the Township Council
in the establishment of an Open Space Tracing Program to catalog the
state of privately owned open space in the Township and record the
Township's progress with respect to open space preservation.
C. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall provide guidance and
support to the Township Council, Planning Board, Environmental
Commission, Historic Preservation Commission, and Recreation
Council on issues and matters of open space.
D. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall periodically review its
functions and submit a recommendation to the Township Council as to
whether additional duties should be assigned or delegated to the
Advisory Committee.
E. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall annually select from among
its members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson to serve as the
presiding officer in the absence of the Chairperson. The Committee
shall also select from among its members a Secretary whose function
shall be to maintain minutes of the Committee's meetings and records
of the proceedings of the Committee. The Committee may appoint such
clerks and other employees and professional consultants as it may from
time to time require and as may be within the limits of funds
appropriated to it for that purpose out of the Open Space Trust Fund or
out of general revenues.
F. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall have such other duties as
the Township Council may assign to it from time to time.
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, pertaining to appointments and removals, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3656. See now
Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 74-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 74-15
1:198
§ 74-16. Open space acquisitions. [Added 5-9-2000 by Ord. No.
3132]
Prior to the acquisition by the Township of real property, or any interest
therein, for the purpose of open space conservation, the Township Council
shall request that the acquisition be reviewed by the Open Space Advisory
Committee. The Committee shall provide the Council with their comments
no later than 60 days after the transmittal of the request by the Township
Council. In the event that a report of the Committee is not received by
the Township Council within the sixty-day comment period established by
this article, the Township Council may proceed with the acquisition without
further comment by the Committee. The report of the Committee shall be
advisory only, and the final determination concerning any acquisition shall
rest with the Township Council.
G. The Open Space Advisory Committee, with the direction and approval
of the Township Council, shall prepare grant and other applications to
Somerset County, the State of New Jersey, the United States
government, private organizations and charitable conservancies for
financial and other matching support for land acquisition and other
interests in property and historic projects in the Township.
H. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall encourage public and
private contributions of land, interests in land and financial donations
to the township and the Open Space Fund. The Committee shall be
authorized to receive inquiries from landowners seeking information
about the Open Space Trust Fund and shall also have the authority to
solicit information from owners of properties that might be potential
candidates for acquisition or other easements under the Open Space
Trust Fund.
I. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall develop an application and
grant program to fund publicly held properties and projects which are
determined to be of direct benefit to the public and the Township. The
Committee shall periodically recommend the award of grant monies
from the Open Space Trust Fund to specific projects with Township
Council review and approval.
J. Review and comment upon proposed acquisition by the Township of
real property or any interests therein for open space or conservation
purposes as referred to them pursuant to § 74-16 of this article. [Added
5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 3132]
§ 74-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-16
1:199
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 81
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Rent control — See Ch. 294.
§ 74-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 74-16
1:200
ARTICLE I
Fair Share Housing Obligation
[Amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3760; 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3893]
§ 81-1. Affordable housing obligation.
A. This chapter is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time
and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This chapter shall apply except where inconsistent with
applicable law.
B. The Township of Franklin Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by
the governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways the
Township of Franklin shall address its fair share for low- and moderateincome
housing as in the Housing Element. [Amended 10-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 4246-18]
C. This chapter implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
D. On the first anniversary of the Court's approval of the Settlement
Agreement, and every anniversary thereafter through the end of term
of repose, the Township shall provide annual reporting of the status of
all affordable housing activity within the municipality through posting
on the municipal website, with a copy of such posting provided to Fair
Share Housing Center (FSHC), using forms previously developed for
this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the Special
Master and FSHC. [Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
E. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be
taken by the Township during the ten-year period of protection
provided in the Settlement Agreement. The Township shall comply with
those provisions as follows: [Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
(1) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township will post
on its municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status
report as to its implementation of its plan and an analysis of
whether any unbuilt sites or unfilled mechanisms continue to
present a realistic opportunity and whether any mechanisms to
meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Any
interested party may by motion request a hearing before the court
regarding these issues.
(2) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of
the Court's approval of the Settlement Agreement, and every third
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:201
§ 81-2. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this chapter, N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C.
5:97 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9; in the case of an
ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the standards
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented,
and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and
supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a portion of
which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
year thereafter, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction
of its very-low-income requirements, including the family very-lowincome
requirements referenced in the Fair Share Plan approved
by the Court.
§ 81-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-2
1:202
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population, such that all the residents of the development where the unit
is situated are 62 years or older; or at least 80% of the units are occupied
by one person that is 55 years or older; or the development has been
designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2)
of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.). Since the New Jersey Supreme Court stripped COAH of its
administrative duties relating to the affordable housing, any and all
references to COAH review or approval shall mean the Court, as may be
required by the Court.[Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division: Somerset
County.[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-2
1:203
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
FAIR SHARE HOUSING CENTER (FSHC) — A New Jersey Supreme Courtdesignated
interested party in the affordable housing litigation described in
the HEFSP with whom the Township entered into a Settlement Agreement
dated November 3, 2017.[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
HOUSING ELEMENT AND FAIR SHARE PLAN (HEFSP) — The plan
adopted by the Township Planning Board, endorsed by the Township
Council and approved by the Court, that demonstrates the manner in which
Franklin Township adequately addresses its obligation to provide affordable
housing.[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
§ 81-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-2
1:204
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by COAH's adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted-living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit
financed under UHORP or MONI.
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT — The document dated November 3, 2017,
which sets forth the manner in which the Township will meet its 1999-2025
affordable housing obligations in a manner agreeable to FSHC and
agreeable to the Township for the purpose of settling the litigation.[Added
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
SPECIAL MASTER — An expert in affordable housing designated by the
Court to perform various functions related to the Court's consideration
of affordable housing litigation matters, including but not limited to the
review of Settlement Agreements, HEFSPs, Affordable Housing Trust Fund
Spending Plans, as well as implementing resolutions and
ordinances.[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very
low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:205
§ 81-3. Affordable housing programs.
The Township of Franklin has determined that it will use the following
mechanisms to satisfy its affordable housing obligations: rehabilitation and
new construction.
A. Rehabilitation program.
(1) The Township of Franklin's rehabilitation program shall be
designed to renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and
moderate-income households such that, after rehabilitation, these
units will comply with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(2) Both owner-occupied and renter-occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
(3) All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of 10 years (the control
period). For owner-occupied units the control period will be
enforced with a lien and for renter-occupied units the control
period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
(4) The Township of Franklin shall dedicate a minimum of $10,000 for
each unit to be rehabilitated through this program, reflecting the
minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each unit.
(5) The Township of Franklin shall adopt a resolution committing to
fund any shortfall in the rehabilitation programs for the Township
of Franklin.
(6) The Township of Franklin shall designate, subject to the approval of
COAH, one or more administrative agents to administer the
rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 and
N.J.A.C. 5:97. The administrative agent(s) shall provide a
rehabilitation manual for the owner-occupancy rehabilitation
program and a rehabilitation manual for the rental occupancy
rehabilitation program to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of COAH. Both rehabilitation manuals
shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the
Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(7) Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:97-9 and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), but
shall be administered in accordance with the following:
(a) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is rerented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
§ 81-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-3
1:206
§ 81-4. New construction.
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low-and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
(b) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(c) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
(d) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC,
except that households in owner-occupied units shall be
exempt from the regional asset limit.
B. Phasing. In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be
followed:
Maximum Percentage
of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of
Low- and Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25% 0%
25% + 1% 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
C. Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
D. Payments-in-lieu and off-site construction. The standards for the
collection of Payments-in-lieu of constructing affordable units or
standards for constructing affordable units off-site shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4.
E. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source
as market units within the affordable development.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
§ 81-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:207
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(e) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
§ 81-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-4
1:208
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, or evidence that the
Township of Franklin has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the
development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Franklin's affordable housing
trust fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Franklin for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by a
person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy
the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Township of Franklin.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, and that
the cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township of Franklin's
affordable housing trust fund in care of the Municipal
Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are deposited
into the affordable housing trust fund and appropriately
earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.14.
C. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:209
UHAC and in COAH rules. Income limits for all units that are
part of the HESFP and for which income limits are not already
established through a federal program exempted from the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 shall
be updated by the Township annually within 30 days of the
publication of determinations of median income by HUB as follows:
[Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for the region that
the Township is located within (i.e., Region 3) based on the
median income by household size, which shall be established
by a regional weighted average of the uncapped Section 8
income limits published by HUD. To compute this regional
income limit, the HUD determination of median county income
for a family of four is multiplied by the estimated households
within the county according within the housing region is
summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households
from the most recent decennial census in the Township's
housing region. This quotient represents the regional weighted
average of median income for a moderate-income unit for a
household of four shall be 80% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. The income limit
for a low-income unit for a household of four shall be 50% of
the HUD determination of the regional weighted average
median income for a family of four. The income limit for a verylow-
income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the
regional weighted average median income for a family of four.
These income limits shall be adjusted by household size based
on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. In no event shall the income limits be less than
those for the previous year.
(b) The income limits attached hereto as Figure 1:2017 Income
Limits are the result of applying the percentages set forth in
Subsection C(1)(a) above to HUD's determination of median
income for FY2017 and shall be utilized until the Township
updates the income limits after HUD has published revised
determinations of median income for the next fiscal year.
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Township annually by
taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated
pursuant to Subsection C(1)(a) above over the previous year's
income limits and applying the same percentage increase to
the regional asset limit from the prior year. In no event shall
the regional asset limit be less than that for the previous year.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
§ 81-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-4
1:210
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
(a) Notwithstanding the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 30% of median
income. [Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted-ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted-ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted-ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:211
§ 81-5. Guidelines for all developments.
The following general guidelines apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated
future developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units.
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28%
of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate-size household
as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low- income housing tax
credits.
(11) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall
be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
A. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) The Township of Franklin shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
§ 81-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-5
1:212
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The affirmative marketing plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward COAH Housing Region
3 and covers the period of deed restriction. [Amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 4246-18]
(3) The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 3
comprised of Hunterdon, Middlesex and Somerset Counties.
[Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4246-18]
(4) The administrative agent designated by the Township of Franklin
shall assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units is
consistent with the affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
(5) In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
(6) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
(7) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Township of
Franklin.
B. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(c) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(2) Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall
be provided in the municipal operating manual.
C. Control periods for restricted-ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:213
(1) Control periods for restricted-ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted-ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this chapter until the Township of
Franklin elects to release the unit from such requirements;
however, and prior to such an election, a restricted-ownership unit
must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted-ownership unit
shall commence on the date the initial certified household takes
title to the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted-ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value.
(4) At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute
and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating
the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and
assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the requirements of this chapter, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value
and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by
a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the
unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted-ownership units.
(6) A restricted-ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title that follows the expiration of the
applicable minimum control period provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
D. Price restrictions for restricted-ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices. Price restrictions for restrictedownership
units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted-ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
(2) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
§ 81-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-5
1:214
(3) The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable
between the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market
unit owners.
(4) The owners of restricted-ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
E. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted-ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted-ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's
certified monthly income.
F. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restrictedownership
unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing
that the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section.
(2) With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time
cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restrictedownership
unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale
price of that unit, as such price is determined by the administrative
agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
G. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this chapter until the Township of Franklin elects
to release the unit from such requirements pursuant to action
taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:215
and supplemented, and prior to such an election, a restricted rental
unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1,
as may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
(2) Deeds of all real property that includes restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Somerset. A copy of the filed document shall
be provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the
receipt of a certificate of occupancy. [Amended 10-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 4246-18]
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this chapter, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
H. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
except for units in an assisted-living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except in the case of units in an assisted-living residence to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this chapter.
I. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
§ 81-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-5
1:216
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income, lowincome
or moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40% for
age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended
and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be
exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside source such as a family member in a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in I(2)(a) through (e) above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
J. Administration.
(1) The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Township
of Franklin is established by this chapter. The Township of Franklin
shall make the actual appointment of the MHL by means of a
resolution.
(a) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of
the Township of Franklin.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:217
(b) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to COAH
for approval.
(c) The MHL must meet all COAH requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training.
(d) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Township of Franklin, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the
administrative agent:
[1] Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
[2] The implementation of the affirmative marketing plan and
affordability controls;
[3] When applicable, supervising any contracting
administrative agent;
[4] Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the
Township of Franklin's Fair Share Plan;
[5] Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
[6] Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and administrative agents, as applicable; and
[7] Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring and
affirmative marketing as offered or approved by COAH.
(2) The Township of Franklin shall designate by resolution of the
Township Council, subject to the approval of COAH, one or more
administrative agents to administer newly constructed affordable
units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C. 5:97 and UHAC.
(3) An operating manual shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and
subject to approval of COAH. The operating manuals shall be
available for public inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk
and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(4) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC
and which are described in full detail in the operating manual,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 26.16 and 26.18
thereof, which includes:
§ 81-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-5
1:218
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(b) Affirmative marketing;
(c) Household certification;
(d) Affordability controls;
(e) Records retention;
(f) Resale and rerental;
(g) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(h) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(i) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
K. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
[1] A fine of not more than $1,000. Each and every day that
the violation continues or exists shall be considered a
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:219
separate and specific violation of these provisions and not
as a continuing offense;
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Township of Franklin affordable housing trust fund of the
gross amount of rent illegally collected;
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first-purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first-purchase money mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first-purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or
until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
§ 81-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-5
1:220
§ 81-6. Administrative approval of mortgage discharges, discharge
of affordable housing agreements and mortgage subordinations.
[Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 4258-18]
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to administer and execute
the discharge of mortgages, discharge of affordable housing agreements
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first-purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first-purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first-purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
L. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent
designated pursuant to this chapter shall be filed in writing with the
Executive Director of COAH.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:221
and subordination of mortgages associated with the Township's affordable
housing and affordable housing rehabilitation programs.
§ 81-7. through § 81-11.1. (Reserved)
§ 81-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-7
1:222
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)49
§ 81-12. through § 81-17. (Reserved)
49.Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Affirmative Action Marketing Plan, was repealed 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 4246-18.
§ 81-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-12
1:223

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)50
§ 81-18. through § 81-20. (Reserved)
50.Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Municipal Housing Liaison, was repealed 10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 4246-18.
§ 81-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-18
1:225

ARTICLE IV
Local Affordability Assistance Programs
[Added 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3957]
§ 81-21. Down payment and/or closing cost affordability assistance
program.
A. There is established a down payment and/or closing cost affordability
assistance program, funded by developer fees, payable only from the
Township Housing Trust Fund and administered through the Township
of Franklin affordable housing program, for purchasers who seek to
purchase low- or moderate-income condominium units as part of said
program. Prospective homeowners will not receive direct funds. The
assistance dollars will be supplied to the appropriate entity/entities.
(1) Purchasers seeking down payment and/or closing cost assistance
through this program must make application to the administrative
agent. This is a grant program. The maximum amount of any grant
shall be $20,000. Approval of any grant shall also be subject to
certification by the Township Housing Liaison and Chief Financial
Officer that funds are available from the Township's housing trust
fund for this grant.
(2) Qualification and eligibility for this program:
(a) Individuals/households must make an application with the
administrative agent and be precertified, meaning that
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
administrative agent that there is a very high likelihood that
with the receipt of the grant provided herein the applicant will
be able to pay all of the required expenses related to owning
their affordable home.
(b) Individuals/households will only be awarded a grant after they
have contracted to purchase an affordable unit and the
attorney review process has been completed.
(c) Qualified individuals/households must have incomes not
exceeding low or moderate income guidelines as applicable for
Somerset County per the New Jersey Fair Housing Act.
(d) The home/unit to be purchased must meet HUD housing
quality standards as evidenced by a professional and written
home-inspection report.
(e) Applicants must be deemed credit worthy by the
administrative agent, and the amount of the mortgage
principal shall not exceed three times the applicant's gross
annual income.
(f) All grant recipients must occupy the property as their principal
residence and own no other real estate.
§ 81-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-21
1:227
§ 81-22. Homeowner affordability assistance program.
(g) All grant recipients must have attended a prepurchase
homebuyer education class administered by the administrative
agent prior to signing a contract of sale or receive a certificate
by meeting face-to-face for at least three hours of one-on-one
prepurchase counseling with a counselor of the administrative
agent.
(h) Funds will be made available at closing to the appropriate
attorney trust account.
(i) At no time will any individuals/households be allowed to
receive funding approval under any of the local affordability
assistance programs more than once in a five-year time frame.
A. Homeowners that may be in arrears with their mortgage, sewer/water,
real estate taxes, and/or association fees may apply for the homeowner
affordability assistance program, funded by developer fees and payable
only from the Township housing trust fund and administered through
the Township of Franklin affordable housing program, for low- and
moderate-income households owning units as part of said program.
(1) Qualification and eligibility for this program:
(a) Any low- or moderate-income households, as defined by New
Jersey Fair Housing Act for Somerset County, paying as part of
their shelter costs mortgage, sewer/water, real estate taxes or
homeowners' association (condominium) fees (collectively
defined as "shelter costs"), who are in arrears are eligible to
apply for the program.
(b) On application for homeowner affordability assistance, the
administrative agent will determine whether or not the given
household is spending more than 30% of its gross income for
shelter costs. This program is not available to households
spending less than 30% of their gross income for shelter costs.
(c) If the aforementioned shelter costs, by paying off the
arrearages, would allow the household to spend between 30%
and 40% of gross income on shelter costs, then the household
may request affordability assistance in the form of a deferred
loan to assist the affordable homeowner in becoming current
with their Shelter expenses.
(d) The eligible household shall then submit to the office of the
administrative agent income and expense information
concerning the household's shelter costs. The administrative
agent, with the assistance of the Township of Franklin will
evaluate the request for the above-referenced loan for a
maximum amount not to exceed $15,000.
§ 81-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 81-22
1:228
(e) After review and approval by the administrative agent and
Township of Franklin Municipal Housing Liaison and subject to
the availability of funding through the Township's affordable
housing program for this form of affordability assistance, the
Township of Franklin may approve a loan to assist with the
payment of the aforementioned shelter costs. Approval shall
only be granted to applicants who demonstrate to the
reasonable satisfaction of the administrative agent and the
Township of Franklin that there is a very high likelihood that
with the receipt of the affordability assistance provided herein
that the applicant will be able to stay current with their shelter
costs in the future. If denied, a written determination of why
the funding assistance has been denied will be provided by the
administrative agent. This determination shall be final and
nonappealable.
(f) The homeowner affordability assistance program is a deferred
payment loan, with the loan amount (and no interest) to be
repaid either upon the sale of the unit (if less than five years) or
it is forgiven upon the expiration of five years from the date of
the execution of the second mortgage, whichever comes first.
Recapture of Township of Franklin assistance funds provided
herein will occur if the property is sold within five years of the
date of the loan. If the affordable unit is sold during the fiveyear
recapture period, 20% of the funds are forgiven for each
full year after the loan closing. In such cases, the Township of
Franklin shall receive a pro rata portion of the assistance
amount from the Borrower, which amount shall be deposited in
the Township's Housing Trust Fund.
(g) Loans for all properties participating in the homeowner
affordability assistance program shall be secured through a
mortgage and mortgage note executed by the property owner
in favor of the Township of Franklin.
(h) Further, approval of any loan shall also be subject to
certification by the Township Housing Liaison and Chief
Financial Officer that funds are available for this form of
affordability assistance.
(i) The administrative agent will record said documents with the
County Clerk's office. A copy of the information will be kept in
the unit file.
(j) At no time will any individuals/households be allowed to
receive funding approval under any of the local affordability
assistance programs more than once in a five year time frame.
§ 81-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-22
1:229
Chapter 85
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 121.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, requiring a
response by the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal
agency of the Township.
§ 85-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm which is designed to
summon the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal agency
to any location in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this
chapter shall in no way apply to or prohibit alarm companies from providing
service by private source to other offices within or without the Township.
§ 85-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment providing
warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location.
CENTRAL STATION ALARMS — Alarm systems monitored by persons other
than the Township police requiring a response by the Police Department,
Fire Department or other municipal agency.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — A member of the Police Department of
the Township.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm for which there is no evidence of an attempted
unauthorized entry or for which there is evidence of an equipment failure or
evidence of inadvertence on the part of any permittee, agents, servants and
employees requiring a response by police, fire or other municipal agency.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces an
audible signal, such as store burglar alarms actuating bell devices.
§ 81-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 85-3
1:230
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association.
§ 85-4. Dial alarm devices connected to police headquarters
prohibited.
No dial alarm shall be connected to police headquarters.
§ 85-5. Fire alarm devices.
All fire alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the state and with the approval of the Director of Fire Prevention.
§ 85-6. Disconnection of unauthorized equipment; consent to
inspection.
Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of Police
or his designated representative for noncompliance with this chapter, and
any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each day such equipment is in
operation shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 85-7. False alarms. [Amended 6-27-2002 by Ord. No. 3299]
A. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department. In addition, in the case of
false alarms, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made
and keep a record of such alarms on file.
B. For such false alarms the Council prescribes the following penalties:
[Amended 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3833]
(1) A first warning will be issued after the third false alarm in any
given calendar year.
(2) A fine of $50 plus a court fee of $15 paid to the Township will be
issued after the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year.
(3) A fine of $75 plus a court fee of $15 paid to the Township will be
issued for the fifth, sixth and seventh false alarms in the same
calendar year.
(4) For the eighth and subsequent false alarms within a calendar year,
appearance in the Franklin Township Municipal Court shall be
mandatory. If found guilty, violators shall be subject to a fine of up
to $2,000 as prescribed by the Municipal Court Judge. [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 4238-18]
§ 85-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:231
§ 85-8. Registration of alarm systems. [Added 10-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 2033; amended 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 3492]
All alarm devices must be registered within 30 days of installation or
activation with a central monitoring center. Failure to register a new alarm
device or new service with a central monitoring company within 20 days of
receipt of written notice to register the alarm shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and subject to the permittee to penalties as outline in § 85-13
of this chapter.
§ 85-9. Registration form. [Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2033]
C. In the case of a false fire alarm as defined in Chapter 132, Fire
Prevention, §§ 132-25, reports investigations, summons, violations, and
penalties shall be in accordance with §§ 132-26 and 132-27.
A. Any person utilizing an alarm system shall complete and file with the
Chief of Police a registration form, which may be obtained from the
Police Department, correctly containing the following information:
(1) Full name, address, and telephone number of applicant, including
an address description which will permit the appropriate municipal
department to respond to the alarm;
(2) Common name of alarm premises;
(3) Name and address of person installing, maintaining and/or owning
the system;
(4) Description of system's operation, including, not by way of
limitation, activation points of the system and the mechanism or
mechanisms by which the system becomes activated;
(5) Name, address, and telephone number of person or business entity
monitoring and initially responding to an activation of the alarm
system;
(6) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of four responsible
persons to be contacted in case of alarm and/or malfunction,
commonly referred to as "key holders;"
(7) Any additional relevant information specifically requested by the
Chief of Police.
B. If there has occurred any material change in the information previously
submitted with respect to any alarm system by the alarm user, it shall
be the duty of the alarm user, within 10 days of such material change, to
file a supplemental or revised registration form containing accurate
current information. This section shall include, but is in no way limited
to, the disconnection of said alarm. Failure to comply with these
provisions will be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject the
violator to the penalties contained herein.
§ 85-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 85-10
1:232
§ 85-10. Indemnification [Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2033]
By installing an alarm system and registering same with the Township
of Franklin, each alarm user agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
Township of Franklin, its agents, servants, and employees from and against
all claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses and to release the
Township of Franklin, its agents, servants, and employees from any and all
liability or damages in any way resulting from or arising out of or connected
with the installation, operation, or maintenance of the alarm system or any
act or omission connected therewith.
§ 85-11. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Manager may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of the system, provided that the
Council must first approve such rules or any changes thereto.
§ 85-12. Fees. [Added 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 383351]
§ 85-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of the Township for violation
of the terms of this chapter other than for violating the terms of § 85-7,
which provides specific penalties for violations thereof, shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 88
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142. Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
A. There shall be a one-time registration fee for all new alarms registered
with the Police Department pursuant to § 85-8. The fee schedule shall
be:
(1) Residential alarms: $25.
(2) Commercial alarms: $50.
B. Any alarms registered with the Police Department prior to the
enactment of this section shall not be required to pay a registration fee.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 85-12,
Violations and penalties, as § 85-13.
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-1
1:233
§ 88-1. Conditions for required removal. [Amended 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 3972]
The owner, tenant or occupant of lands lying within the Township, where
it shall be determined by the Department of Health to be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public health, safety and general welfare
or to eliminate a fire hazard, shall remove from such lands brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage,
trash and debris within 10 days after notice to remove the same, which shall
be conspicuously posted on said property and sent by regular mail to the
last known address of the tenant, owner or occupant.
§ 88-2. Removal by Township; cost to become lien.
Whenever the owner, tenant or occupant of any lands shall refuse or neglect
to remove from said lands all brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris as required by
§ 88-1 and after notice given as provided therein, then the same may be
removed under the direction of the Township Manager or his designee.
The cost paid or incurred for investigating, administering and removing
same shall be charged against such lands, and the amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes then next to be assessed and levied upon the
lands and shall be collected and enforced according to law. The Township
may elect to foreclose on the properties of repeat violators and the proceeds
used to maintain said property.
§ 88-3. Return of land to its natural condition.
A. The owner, tenant or occupant of lands may make an application to the
Department of Health to allow land to revert back to its natural
condition. Application forms may be obtained from the Department of
Health.
B. The application will require submission of a survey of the subject land.
Additionally, property owners within 200 feet of the subject property
must be notified of the application via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within seven days of the date the application was filed. The
notification shall include the name and address of the applicant, a
description/designation of the lands affected, and a method and
deadline by which to raise objection to the application. An application
will not be deemed complete until proof of service upon contiguous
property owners is submitted to the Department of Health.
C. Once a completed application has been received by the Department of
Health, it will be forwarded to the Environmental Commission. The
Environmental Commission will make a determination within 30 days
after receipt of the completed application as to whether permission
should be granted to allow the land to return to its natural condition.
The Environmental Commission must consider impact upon public
health and safety in making its determination.
§ 88-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 88-3
1:234
§ 88-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the
court. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 88-5. Powers of Construction Code Official not affected.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed as restricting or otherwise
abrogating the enforcement and other powers of the Township's
Construction Code Official under the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, including without limitation N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq. (collectively, the "Code"). The provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as consistent with the enforcement and other powers of
the Township's Construction Code Official under the Code.
Chapter 93
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
D. The Environmental Commission shall notify the Department of Health
of its determination. The Department of Health shall then issue written
notification of the determination on the application to the applicant.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:235

ARTICLE I
Regulatory Provisions
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 75, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 93-1. Location restrictions for licensing.
§ 93-2. Possession of untaxed beverages.
No person shall sell or offer for sale, possess or have in custody any
alcoholic beverages upon which any federal tax or tax imposed by the laws
of the state have not been paid.
§ 93-3. Sale to minors.
No person shall sell, serve, deliver or allow or suffer the sale, service or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages or allow, permit or
A. No plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail distribution
license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted or
transferred to premises within 2,000 feet of any existing premises
licensed for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the renewal of such a
license or the person-to-person transfer of an existing license to the
same licensed premises.
B. The transfer of any license from the premises acquired by any
corporation or instrumentality having the power of eminent domain for
a public purpose or premises which have been destroyed shall not be
subject to the provisions hereof.
C. The distances hereinabove specified shall be measured in a straight line
from the nearest entrance of the licensed premises to the nearest
entrance of the premises sought to be licensed.
D. The distance limitations set forth in Subsection A hereof shall not be
applicable to the granting or transfer of plenary retail consumption
license when the existing licensed premises referred to in Subsection A
is a hotel or motel with at least 100 sleeping rooms, licensed pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20, and provided that the premises for which grant
or transfer is sought were previously licensed premises or part of a
licensed premises within the three-year period immediately preceding
the granting or transferal. [Added 1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1815]
E. The distance limitations set forth in Subsection A hereof shall not be
applicable to the granting or transfer of plenary retail consumption
license for a restaurant which shall mean a commercial establishment
used for the primary purpose of preparing and selling meals to the
public and not engaged in the sale of packaged goods or providing live
entertainment. [Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 3185]
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-3
1:237
suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the
licensed premises.
§ 93-4. Disturbances.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any disturbance, brawl or unnecessary noise nor allow or permit or suffer a
licensed place of business to be conducted in such a manner as to become a
nuisance.
§ 93-5. Hours of sale.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, suffer or permit the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages directly or indirectly,
upon the licensed premises except during the hours specified
hereinbelow: [Amended 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1619; 10-23-2018
by Ord. No. 4250-18]
License Permitted Hours
Consumption licenses Monday
through
Sunday:
7:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m.
December
31:
7:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m.
Distribution licenses Monday
through
Sunday:
9:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(1) During the hours when sales are prohibited, the entire licensed
premises shall be closed, the only person to be permitted therein
being the owner and/or his employees, and then only for the
purpose of cleaning up, getting the premises ready for the
commencement of business on the following day and shutting down
for the night, and only for an additional period not to exceed two
hours. In an instance where the sales of alcoholic beverages is not
the primary use of the premises but only an accessory use, the
portion of the premises devoted to the preparation and sale of
alcoholic beverages shall be closed during the hours sales are
prohibited, but the remainder of the premises may remain open to
pursue its regular business. No alcoholic beverages shall be
consumed or served by anyone on the licensed premises during the
hours sales are prohibited.
B. The sale of package goods by consumption licensees shall be limited to
those permitted hours set forth in Subsection A above for distribution
licensees. [Amended 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1619; 10-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 3162]
§ 93-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 93-6
1:238
§ 93-6. Service in private rooms prohibited.
No person shall serve or allow, permit or suffer the service of any alcoholic
beverage to any person in any room which is not open to the use of the
public generally; provided, however, that in hotels, guests may be served
in their rooms or in private dining rooms, and provided further that this
section shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 93-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 93-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-7
1:239

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Establishments
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 75, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 93-8. License required.
No person shall possess, sell, distribute or transport any alcoholic
beverages in the Township except as expressly permitted by Title 33 of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes, without first obtaining a license pursuant to
its provisions.
§ 93-9. Number of retail consumption licenses limited; exception.
[Amended 5-16-1991 by Ord. No. 1640]
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses to be issued annually
by the licensing authorities of the Township is limited to that number as is
permitted by the limitation of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14.
§ 93-10. Fees. [Amended 11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1800; 10-14-1998
by Ord. No. 3011; 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162; 5-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 3461]
§ 93-11. Revocation or suspension. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
A. The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be $2,500 per
annum.
B. The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be $2,500 per
annum.
C. The fee for a club license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to bona fide
club members and their guests shall be $188 per annum.
A. In addition to the penalty provided in § 1-3 of the Code, any licensee
may suffer revocation or suspension of his license after due notice and
hearing in accordance with the provisions of Title 33 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes and the regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, for any violation of the provisions of this article, but this
section shall not be construed in any way to limit other revocation or
suspension powers of the Township Council.
B. In the case of closure of licensed establishment for reasons of
suspension as a result of action of the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control or municipal ordinance, where the sale, delivery or
consumption of alcoholic beverages is not the primary function of the
establishment but secondary or ancillary, such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, hotels/motels, clubs, bowling alleys, the primary function
of said establishment may continue during the time of said suspension,
provided that the licensee complies with the prohibitions set forth in
§ 93-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-11
1:241
§ 93-12. Hotels and motels.
§ 93-13. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.27. The Township of Franklin may make periodic
inspections through the Police Department or other representatives
to ensure compliance with all provisions of N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.27.
[Amended 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1619]
A. Nothing in this article shall prevent the issuance of a new license to a
person who operates a hotel or motel containing 100 guest sleeping
room or who may hereinafter construct and establish a new hotel or
motel containing at least 100 guest sleeping rooms.
B. The limitation concerning the issuance and transfer of plenary retail
consumption licenses within 2,000 feet of existing premises so licensed
in § 93-1 and in other ordinances established in the Township shall not
be applicable to the issuance and transfer of a new plenary retail
consumption license to persons who operate a hotel or motel
accommodation containing at least 100 sleeping rooms. [Amended
12-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1611]
C. Licenses issued pursuant to Subsections A and B shall be expressly
conditioned that the premises continue to be operated as a bona fide
hotel or motel containing at least 100 sleeping rooms, and there shall
be no renewal or transfer of such licenses except for or to a hotel or
motel containing at least 100 sleeping rooms.
§ 93-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 93-13
1:242
ARTICLE III
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1753 (Ch. 75, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 93-14. Public consumption prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of the Township of Franklin, consume
any alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any unsealed alcoholic
beverage container with alcoholic beverage therein:
§ 93-14.1. Exception to public consumption prohibited; permit
required; insurance requirement; fee. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
4074-14]
A. In the parking area adjacent to any licensed premises for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
B. While in or on a public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public
parking place public park or public picnic area, playground, recreation
area.
C. While in or about any other public or quasi-public place or place to
which the public is invited, including but not limited to any multifamily
residential parking areas, common open space except when such
consumption or possession is permitted with the express permission of
the owner or other body, board or person having the authority to grant
such permission or while upon any land owned or occupied by any
federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision thereof or
Board of Education unless the government body owning or occupying
such land shall have granted such permission.
A. Exempt from § 93-14C are the following facilities: Van Wickle House,
1289 Easton Avenue, Somerset; Wyckoff-Garretson House, 215 South
Middlebush Road, Somerset; Van Liew-Suydam House, 280 South
Middlebush Road; and Hageman Farm, 209 South Middlebush Road,
and said facilities are required to obtain a permit through the Township
Clerk's office.
B. Application to obtain permission to serve alcoholic beverages in the
facilities listed in § 93-14.1A shall include name, address, primary
phone number, cell phone number, email address, name and address of
facility, and date, time and purpose of event.
C. Submitted with said application shall be a certificate of insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000 for the use of said facility, naming the Township
of Franklin as additional insured. Said certificate shall be filed with the
Franklin Township Clerk at least five days prior to event.
D. Permit fee: $100.
§ 93-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-15
1:243
§ 93-15. Determination of unsealed container.
For the purpose of the article, a container shall be regarded as unsealed
when its top or cork has been removed or any of its contents have been
removed or the government tax stamp has been removed or broken, or, in
the case of a metal container, when the container has been opened in any
fashion, or in the case of twist-top containers, when the original seal has
been broken.
§ 93-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of a violation of any section of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 93-15 FRANKLIN CODE § 93-16
1:244
ARTICLE IV
Consumption by Underage Persons on Private Property
[Adopted 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 3191 (Ch. 75, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 93-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the enforcement of P.L. 2000, c.
33 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2).
§ 93-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 93-19. Consumption prohibited; violations and penalties.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses without legal authority or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished
by a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
The court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense,
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defendant.
B. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
§ 93-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-19
1:245
§ 93-20. Exemptions.
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set for in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of
a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. The court shall, of any person convicted under this section who is not a
New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
A. This article does not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
B. This article does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post-secondary educational institute; however, no ordinance
enacted pursuant to this section shall be construed to preclude the
imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other
section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
§ 93-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 93-20
1:246
Chapter 94
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Fire-damaged rental property — See Ch. 290.
§ 94-1. Statement of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the Township which are so old,
dilapidated, unclean or have become so out-of-repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use are inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the
health and safety of the people of the Township and that a public necessity
exists for the repair, boarding up, securing of, closing or demolition of such
building or buildings or parts thereof.
§ 94-2. Designation of public officers.
The Construction Official and/or Health Officer are hereby authorized to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following powers, in addition to others herein granted:
§ 94-3. Powers of public officers.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the Township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
C. To give notice to the property owners, lending institutions and/or
insurance companies in accordance with this chapter.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officer, agents and employees as
they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances.
E. To delegate any of their functions and powers to such officers and
agents as they may designate.
A. The Construction Official and/or Health Officer may determine that a
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if it is found
§ 93-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-3
1:247
§ 94-4. Determination of unfit buildings; procedure for repair or
demolition. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2054]
that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious
to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants
of neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township, or the
building is not in compliance with the requirements of the Building
Code or the certificate of occupancy. Such conditions may include the
following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(1) Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
(2) Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
(3) Dilapidation;
(4) Disrepair and structural defects;
(5) Uncleanliness.
A. Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official and/or Health
Officer by at least five residents of the Township of Franklin charging
that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or
whenever it appears to the Construction Official and/or Health Officer
(on his/her own motion) that any building is unfit for habitation or
occupancy or use, the Construction Official and/or Health Officer shall,
if his/her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest
in such building by regular and certified mail return receipt requested a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice
that a hearing will be held before the Construction Official and/or
Health Officer (or his/her designated agent) at a place therein fixed not
less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right
to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise,
and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that
the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Construction Official and/or Health Officer.
B. If, after such notice and hearing as set forth in Subsection A, the
Construction Official and/or Health Officer determines that the building
under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
he/she shall state in writing his/her findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest by regular mail and certified mail return
receipt requested an order:
(1) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or, at the option of the owner to vacate or
§ 94-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 94-4
1:248
§ 94-5. Summary proceedings for demolition of building. [Added
2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2054]
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the Construction
Official and/or Health Officer may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in
summary proceedings for the demolition thereof.
§ 94-6. Costs to become a lien. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No.
2054]
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the Township,
have the said building vacated and closed within the time set forth
in the order; and
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the
time specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to
remove or demolish the said building within a reasonable time as
specified in the said order of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Construction Official and/or Health Officer may cause such building to
be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, and the
Construction Official and/or Health Officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
D. The Construction Official and/or Health Officer may grant an extension
to any requirement set forth in Subsections A, B and C if, in his
discretion, the property owner or party in interest shall present
evidence to the Construction Official and/or Health Officer that steps
have been taken to correct the deficiencies and/or remove or demolish
the building and the reason for any delay is not attributed to anything
within the property owner's or party in interest's control and that such
deficiencies will be corrected or the building removed or demolished
within a reasonable period of time.
E. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Official and/or Health Officer may cause
such building to be removed or demolished in accordance with the
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., unless immediate
action is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-6
1:249
and such costs of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale
of materials derived from such building or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished
by the Construction Official and/or Health Officer, he/she shall sell the
materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance and, if necessary,
leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum
derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If
there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total
of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount
so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to
the owner by regular and certified mail return receipt requested. If the total
of the credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Construction Official and/or Health Officer, shall
be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be
disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of
the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to
contest the reasonableness of the amount or the inaccuracy of the costs set
forth in the municipal lien certificate.
Chapter 99
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 106. Gambling — See Ch. 265.
§ 99-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 3014;
1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 3189]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT MACHINE OR DEVICE — Any pool
table, whether coin-operated or not coin-operated, and any machine,
contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc or key into a slot, crevice or other opening, or by the public generally
for use a game, score, and shall include without limitation, such device as
marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical games or video
games, coin-operated pool table, bagatelle, mack table, Ballyhoo devices,
high score table, and any and all operations, transactions, or mechanical
devices similar thereto by whatever name they may be called.
§ 94-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 99-1
1:250
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures.
NET FLOOR AREA — The gross floor area of the premises wherein the
amusement machine or device is located, less deductions for counter space
areas, storage areas, shelving areas, aisle areas, bathroom, areas of ingress
and egress, areas of 192 square feet for non-coin-operated pool tables,
office space and other areas which are not intended or held out for public
use. The Division of Code Enforcement shall determine the maximum
number of square feet in each prospective premises subject to this chapter.
OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls a premises
or a location within the Township of Franklin in which any amusement or
entertainment machine or device is displayed for public patronage or is
placed or kept for operation by the public.
OWNER — Any natural persons, partnership, firm association, corporation
or any other business entity which owns the amusement or entertainment
machine or device licensed or sought to be licensed under the terms of this
chapter.
PREMISES — The entire premises, including without limitation the gross
floor area of all buildings, auxiliary buildings, structures, appurtenant
structures and walks, alleys, drives and parking facilities wherein the
amusement machine or device is located.
§ 99-2. Applicability. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
The provisions herein set forth shall not apply to the residences of private
persons to which the public is not admitted or to any duly incorporated
church or society owned for charitable purposes or tax-exempt
organizations if such church, society or tax-exempt organization is the
owner of the device.
§ 99-3. Certification of premises for installation of devices.
[Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
Prior to the installation of amusement or entertainment machines or
devices, the premises as described herein shall have been certified as
eligible to permit such devices.
§ 99-4. Certification fee.
A certification fee of $150 shall be paid at the time of application for each
premises to be certified. Certification shall be posted in a conspicuous place
within the premises.
§ 99-5. Duration of certification.
Certification shall remain in effect as long as the use and net floor area of
the premises remain the same. Any change in same shall result in the need
for recertification.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-6
1:251
§ 99-6. Number of machines per premises. [Amended 1-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 3189]
There shall be permitted not more than one amusement or entertainment
machine or devices as defined in this chapter for each 150 square feet
of net floor area as the same is defined herein, provided that under no
circumstances shall the number of machines permitted exceed 30% of the
net floor area of the licensed premises as defined herein. In the case of pool
table or coin-operated pool table, there shall be permitted not more than
one such pool table for each 192 square feet or net floor area. The Code
Enforcement Official shall determine the maximum number of square feet
in each prospective licensed premises which is subject to this chapter.
§ 99-7. Application information for certification of eligibility.
[Amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 3339]
A. No premises shall operate or cause to be operated such amusement or
entertainment machine or device within the Township of Franklin
without first having obtained from the Township Clerk a certification of
eligibility. The application for said certification shall state the following:
(1) The name and address of the premises to be certified.
(2) The name, home address, business address and telephone number
of the manager or authorized agent of the operator as defined in
§ 99-1.
(3) A sketch or plan of the proposed operator's premises showing the
net floor area as defined herein.
(4) A certification from the Division of Code Enforcement that the
occupancy load of the operator's premises has been calculated and
posted in accordance with the BOCA Construction Code.52
(5) A certification, under oath, by the applicant or its authorized
representative that the information contained in the application
and all attachments thereto are complete, accurate and truthful to
the best of his knowledge and belief.
(6) Whether they have ever run this type of business before in Franklin
Township or in any other municipality in the State of New Jersey.
(7) Proposed hours for the operation of the business associated with
the amusement devices and the proposed hours of operation of the
amusement devices. No amusement device shall be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. No person
under the age of 18 years of age shall be allowed to play or operate
any amusement device during regular school hours of public
schools of the Township of Franklin nor between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except that the hours of operation for devices
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 99-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 99-7
1:252
§ 99-8. Inspection and investigation; reports. [Added 12-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 3339]
located upon a premises licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Division shall be consistent with the hours of operation
established for such premises by municipal ordinance. Such hours
of operations may be approved by the Chief of Police at the time of
application approval.
(8) What will be sold on the premises in detail. The applicant must also
explain how the devices will be monitored by the staff.
(9) A signed letter from the landlord stating that he or she is aware
that amusement devices will be operating on the property.
(10) That the Franklin Township police have been advised prior to
approval that the planned business will be operating amusement
devices on the premises.
(11) What type of devices and how many devices are proposed to be
maintained within the establishment, subject to the limitation on
number of machines set forth in § 99-6 of this chapter and to the
approval process set forth in § 99-8 of this chapter.53
B. All applicants applying for an amusement device permit must go
through a criminal background check. Conviction of a crime shall be the
basis for denial of the amusement device permit.
A. At the time of the application for certification of premises for
installation of machines or devices, the Chief of Police or his designated
representative shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the
premises described in the application and shall attach to the
application, upon completion of this inspection and investigation, a
written report which shall state:
(1) The nature and type of machine or device;
(2) The place where or when it will be operated or maintained;
(3) The name of the proprietor of the store or premises at or in which
the machine or device shall be operated or maintained;
(4) The name and address of the owner of the particular machine or
device;
(5) The recommendations of the Chief of Police and other pertinent
information the Chief of Police deems necessary.
(a) The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall file
this report with the Township Clerk and file a copy with the
53.Editor's Note: Original § 77-8, License fee; § 77-9, License fee due upon application;
duration; § 77-10, Application materials, and § 77-11, Procedure for transfer of license,
were deleted 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 3061.
§ 99-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-8
1:253
Director of Fire Prevention and the Code Enforcement Officer
and determine compliance with all other applicable laws or
ordinances required to be enforced by the Police Department.
(b) The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall also
cause a review to be made of the applicant's criminal record, if
any, and shall note and report any violations of the Township's
codes or conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, sale
or possession of drugs or gambling.
(c) During the time as the license is in effect, subsequent to the
initial issuance of certification, the Chief of Police or his
designated representative shall inspect the premises annually
or upon receipt of a complaint.
B. At the time of the application for certification of premises, the Director
of Fire Prevention or his/her designated representative shall make or
cause to be made an inspection of the premises described in the
application, with reference to fire safety generally and the
requirements of this chapter in particular. He/she shall also determine
compliance with all other applicable laws or ordinances required to be
enforced by the Fire Prevention Department. Upon the completion of
the inspection, the Director of the Fire Prevention Department or his/
her designated representative shall issue a written report with all
findings, violations of laws or ordinances, if any, and his/her
recommendations and shall file said report with the Township Clerk and
shall file a copy of said report with the Chief of Police and Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. At the time of the application for certification of premises, the
Construction Official or his/her designated representative shall inspect
the proposed licensed premises and measure the proposed licensed
premises and determine the net floor area in accordance with this
chapter. Upon completion of this measurement, he/she shall issue a
written report with his/hers findings, which shall include the maximum
number of machines for which this premises shall be licensed, and shall
file said report with the Township Clerk, Chief of Police and Director of
Fire Prevention. He/she shall also determine compliance with this
chapter and all other applicable laws or ordinances required to be
enforced by the Division of Code Enforcement.
D. Upon completion of the aforementioned written reports of the Police
Department, Fire Prevention Department and the Construction Official,
the same shall be submitted to the Township Clerk, who shall determine
that the following requirements have been met, and, if same have been
met, he/she shall forthwith issue the certification. If the provisions of
this chapter are not complied with, the Township Clerk shall deny the
certification and notify the applicant by regular and certified mail. The
applicant may appeal that denial to the Township Manager within 10
days of the receipt of the denial. Thereafter, the Township Manager
shall grant a hearing to the applicant and afford him/her the right to
§ 99-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 99-8
1:254
§ 99-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No.
3162]
§ 99-10. Seizure of machines used for gambling.
If the Chief of Police of the Township of Franklin Police Department shall
have probable cause to believe any amusement or entertainment machine
or device is being used for gambling, such machine or device may be
temporarily seized by the Police Department and impounded and may be
considered as contraband by law.
§ 99-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the license issued may be
suspended or revoked for a violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 99-12. Construal.
It is the intention of the governing body of the Township of Franklin that
this chapter be read in pari materia with all other applicable ordinances
within the Township of Franklin that are not inconsistent with the provisions
contained herein.
submit relevant information on his/her own behalf. After the hearing, if
the Township Manager finds the denial was improper, it shall direct the
issuance of a license.
A. Every certification issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the
Township Clerk should the licensed operator distribute or operate any
amusement or entertainment machine or device contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation
or fail to cooperate fully with any enforcement officer or agency, upon
30 days' notice by regular mail and certified mail to owner and the
owner/tenant of the licensed premises, with seizure by the Police
Department for failure to comply.
B. Any material misstatement or omission in the license application or in
any information submitted therewith or the failure to notify in writing
the Township Clerk of any changes by addition or deletion or
amendment to said application information during the term of any
license or renewal shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of
said license by the Township Clerk.
§ 99-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-12
1:255
Chapter 106
BINGO AND RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 99. Gambling — See Ch. 265.
§ 106-1. Games permitted by authorized organizations on Sunday.
Bona fide organizations or associations of veterans of any war in which the
United States has been engaged, churches or religious congregations and
religious organizations, charitable, educational and fraternal organizations,
civic and service clubs, officially recognized volunteer fire companies and
officially recognized volunteer first-aid or rescue squads are hereby
authorized to hold and operate games of chance of and restricted to the
specific kinds of games of chance commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" and
"raffles" on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as
"Sunday," in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., and
5:8-50 et seq.
§ 106-2. Clerk to issue licenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No.
4000]
The Municipal Clerk of the Township of Franklin is hereby granted the
authority and designated as the issuing authority to review, approve and
grant bingo and raffle licenses within the Township in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
Chapter 109
CLOTHING BINS, CHARITABLE
§ 109-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, relative to charitable clothing bins, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind of value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 109-2. Permit required. [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4136-16]
It shall be unlawful for any person firm, or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate in the Township of Franklin any charitable clothing
§ 99-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 109-2
1:256
bin without first submitting a completed application to the Township Clerk;
receiving approval from the Franklin Township Police Department and
Zoning Officer; and obtaining a decal from the Township Clerk and affixing
that decal to the charitable clothing bin.
§ 109-3. Fees.
§ 109-4. Form of application.
The application for a charitable clothing bin permit shall require the
following information from the applicant:
§ 109-5. Form of application for renewal.
A. Initial application (one-year period): $25.
B. Renewal applications (one-year period): $25.
A. Name, address, telephone number, name of contact person of the
organization that is in charge of the charitable clothing bin;
B. Location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible,
including but not limited to block and lot of property, street address,
description of exact location of bin and written consent from the
property owner to place the bin on his property;
C. Manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent;
D. Name and telephone of the bona fide office required pursuant to
§ 109-7B of any entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin.
A. Updated name, address, telephone number, name of contact person of
the organization that is in charge of the charitable clothing bin;
B. Location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, including
but not limited to block and lot of property, street address, description
of exact location of bin, and if the applicant intends to move said bin,
the new location where the bin would be situated after the renewal is
granted and written consent from the property owner to place the bin
on his property;
C. Manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin, the method by which the proceeds
of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and any changes
the person anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal;
D. Name and telephone of the bona fide office required pursuant to
§ 109-7B of any entity which shared or profited from any clothing or
§ 109-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-5
1:257
§ 109-6. Location restriction.
The Township shall not grant an application for a permit to place, use, or
employ a charitable clothing bin if it determines that the placement of the
bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards include, but shall not be
limited to, the placement of a charitable clothing bin within 100 yards of
any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases.
§ 109-7. Permit and information displayed.
other donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do
so during the period covered by the renewal.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin, in
addition to the information required pursuant to the subsections of this
section; and
B. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
C. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) Name and address of the registered person that owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin;
(2) Telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Township Clerk's Office in the most recent permit or renewal
application pursuant to this chapter, indicating the manner in
which the person anticipates any clothing or other donations
§ 109-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 109-7
1:258
§ 109-8. Receipt, investigation of complaints.
§ 109-9. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of this
state, county or municipality, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter which results in seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
collected via the bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
A. The appropriate municipal office, Police, Health, Zoning, and/or Fire
Prevention, within the Township where the donation clothing bin has
been placed shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
appropriate municipal officer that a person has engaged in, or is
engaging in any act or practice in violation of this chapter, the person
who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Township Council is not
requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person does not rectify the violation or request a
hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, the appropriate
municipal office may seize the bin, remove it, or have it removed, at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at public auction or
otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected via the bin
shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The appropriate
municipal office may bring this action in the municipal court or
Superior Court as a summary proceeding under the Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.),
and any penalty monies collected shall be payable to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township.
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to § 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or employing a
donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of § 2 of P.L. 2007, c.
209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), may apply to the appropriate
municipal office to have that person's eligibility restored. The
appropriate municipal office may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
§ 109-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-9
1:259
Chapter 112
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 81.
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Junkyards — See Ch. 156.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 210.
Trees — See Ch. 222.
Massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy — See Ch. 230.
Nursing homes and rest homes — See Ch.
248.
Quarrying and blasting — See Ch. 278.
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of § 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.),
and all other applicable laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent
intentions.
§ 109-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 109-9
1:260
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 112-1. Title.54
The short title by which this chapter shall be known shall be the "Zoning
and Subdivision Ordinance of the Township of Franklin."
§ 112-2. Purpose and objectives.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) in order to promote and protect the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare, and in furtherance of the following related and
more specific objectives:
A. To encourage Township action to guide the appropriate use or
development of all lands, in a manner which will promote the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of the Township does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
county and the state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all citizens.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
54.Editor's Note: Original § 112-1, Title, which immediately preceded this section and
consisted of the long title of the ordinance, was deleted 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591).
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:261
§ 112-3. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the health, safety, morals and general welfare. This chapter is not intended
to interfere with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the
use of buildings or premises, or upon the height or bulk of a building, or
requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 112-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use that is incidental to
the principal building or use on the same lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of Land Use or such person
designated by this chapter.
ALTERATIONS — As applies to a building or a structure, any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or facilities, or any enlargement to or
diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — An application form completed as
specified by this chapter and the rules and regulations of the board or
agency before which the application is to be presented and all
accompanying documents, information and fees required by ordinance for
approval of the application for development, including where applicable,
but not limited to, a site plan, subdivision plat, D Variance (use variance)
or C Variance (hardship variance) provided that the board or agency may
require such additional information not specified in this chapter, or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of such additional information or
any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
board or agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately
upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in
the rules and regulations of the municipal board or agency, and shall be
deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer
for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
municipal agency. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3934]
K. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 112-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:262
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the municipality unless
a different agency is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the
authority of the Municipal Land Use Law.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the
sale and installation of lubricant, tires, batteries and similar accessories,
and customary servicing and minor repair of vehicles.
AVERAGE DENSITY — The total number of units divided by the total area
designated as a residential cluster.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material that is
temporarily mounted flush on the building, between standards for permitted
off-premises signs, or suspended over a public right-of-way. Flags, as
defined herein, shall not be considered banners for the purpose of this
chapter.
BASEMENT — A story partly above grade level, having 1/2 or more of its
floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BILLBOARD — A freestanding sign structure and/or sign utilized for
advertising a business, establishment, activity, product, service,
entertainment, or message, which is operated, located, performed,
produced, manufactured, or available at a place or location other than on
the property on which the sign structure and/or sign is located.[Added
4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 387555]
BILLBOARD DISPLAY AREA — The total surface area of the sign
face.[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3875]
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — "Body art" shall mean the practice of
physical body adornment, alteration or modification by means including, but
not limited to, piercing, tattooing, branding, braiding, beading/implantation
or scarification, also known as "scarring."[Added 11-27-2018 by Ord. No.
4252-18]
BUFFER — An area consisting of trees, shrubs, solid fencing, berms or
a combination of all of these so installed as to provide a visual or an
acoustical barrier between uses. No building, driveway, parking lot, street,
sign (except traffic directional sign) or storage of materials shall be
permitted within a required buffer.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The proportion of the total lot area expressed as a
percent that is covered by the horizontal area measured within the outside
of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory
55.Editor's Note: The former definition of "billboard" was repealed 6-25-1991 by Ord. No.
1646.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:263
buildings on a lot. In the event that any other floor of a building exceeds the
dimensions of the ground floor, the area of the larger floor shall be used in
the computation of building coverage.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator, penthouses, tanks and
similar projections other than signs shall not be included in calculating the
height.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — See "principal building."
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CELLAR — A story with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the
average finished grade of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon completion of the construction of a new building
or upon a change in the use of the occupancy of a building which certifies
that the applicant has complied with all requirements of this chapter, or
such adjustments thereof which have been granted by the approving
authority and all other applicable requirements.
CHURCH — A building or structure or group of buildings or structures
where persons regularly assemble for worship, which by design and
construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized
religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures, and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewerage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLUSTER OPEN SPACE/PRESERVATION AREAS —
Land set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private
use as active or passive recreation, preservation areas, historically
significant areas, or agriculture or horticulture, which shall be
appropriately landscaped if required.
A.
Cluster open space areas shall preferably be located in one contiguous
parcel but, should unique site conditions dictate two or more sections
of open space, the minimum size of any such cluster open spaces
areas shall be not less than two acres in an RD development, five
acres in an AC development, and 15 acres with no portion thereof
less than 500 feet in width in an NRPC development except, however,
the Planning Board may allow the creation of a preservation area less
than 15 acres or less than 500 feet in width as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of this chapter if the literal
enforcement of the provisions of this subsection is impracticable or will
B.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:264
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES — For purposes of this chapter, the phrase
"community residences for the developmentally disabled and community
shelters for victims of domestic violence" shall be limited to facilities which
are licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448, N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq. or
N.J.S.A. 30:40-1-14 to provide food, shelter and personal guidance to
mentally ill persons or persons who have been the victim of domestic
violence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2.56
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter and upon the issuance of
an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of the county, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the county Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Somerset County.
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question.
For purposes hereof, preservation areas in an NRPC tract shall be
cluster open space areas set aside for preservation of natural resource
features, such as but not limited to forested areas, hedgerows,
significant stands of trees or individual trees of significant size;
farmland and recently cultivated farm fields; natural wildlife habitats;
stream corridors, headwaters of streams, wetlands, floodplains, flood
hazard areas, ponds or lakes, rock outcroppings, including the bluffs
or cliffs along the D&R Canal State Park; frontage along the D&R
Canal State Park; historic structures, sites, villages or districts, and
frontage along any existing or proposed reservoir, and all reservoirowned
acreage.
C.
Cluster open space shall not include parking areas, vehicular rights
of way, driveways, and drainage facilities such as detention areas,
retention areas or swales. However, provided it can be demonstrated
that a drainage facility can be located within the portion of the cluster
open space devoted to active agricultural or horticultural use without
precluding said use, the Planning Board may permit such location. Any
area within a lot in excess of lot area requirements which is the subject
matter of a conservation easement shall qualify as cluster open space,
provided that it complies with all other criteria contained in § 112-204
et seq.
D.
56.Editor’s Note: The former definition for "complete application," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3934.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:265
COURT — Any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more
attached walls.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or other change in the use of
any building or other structure, land or extension of use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
DISTRICT or ZONE — Any part of the territory of Franklin Township which
is designated on the Zoning Map to which certain uniform regulations and
requirements of this chapter apply.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with Chapter One of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment which by design of
physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or
permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product which may be
used or consumed in a motor vehicle on the premises or to be entertained
while remaining in an automobile.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by three or more families and containing three or more dwelling
units.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:266
DWELLING, MULTILEVEL — A building more than 2 1/2 stories and
containing three or more units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building which is not
attached to any other dwelling by any means and designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family and containing no more than one kitchen facility.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY (ZERO LOT LINE) — A single-family dwelling
unit contained within a building containing two dwelling units on two lots
(one dwelling unit on each lot), each of which is separated from the other
by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling
and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.[Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
3846]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and
floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.57
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based
on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and
stability.[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
FARM, COMMERCIAL, MANAGEMENT UNIT, MARKET, PICK-YOUR-OWN
OPERATION — As defined in § 112-171.
FENCE — A structure which encloses or borders a field or yard.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on a
preliminarily approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the approving authority for final approval in accordance with
these regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
county recording officer.
FLAG — Any fabric, cloth, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns,
or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other
nonprofit entity or established commercial entity, displayed on a flagpole.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 13, Art. VIII, Environmental Commission.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:267
Government flags shall observe protocol. Any other similar items shall not
be considered a flag, but shall be considered a freestanding, projecting,
or attached sign depending upon the manner of display. Flags as defined
herein are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The floor area ratio shall be the computed
mathematical ratio of the gross floor area divided by the total lot area.
FOOTCANDLE — The illumination at all points one foot distance from a
uniform point of one candle power.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A structure which is accessory to
a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of
vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a
separate commercial enterprise available to the public.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, or portion thereof, other than a private
customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily
for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building not more than 2 1/2 stories exclusive
of chimney or tower, on one lot containing three or more separate dwelling
units, sharing joint utility services or facilities, and not having common
access hallways serving more than two dwelling units.
GARDEN APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT — Two or more garden apartment
buildings on a single lot.
GLARE — The sensation produced by the brightness within the visual
field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance or
visibility.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land for playing golf containing a minimum of
nine holes in length, which may include the necessary and, usual accessory
uses and structures such as but not limited to clubhouse facilities, dining
and refreshment facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts, and equipment
storage facilities provided that the operation of such facilities is incidental
and subordinate to the operation of the golf course.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council of the Township of Franklin.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas measured
from the exterior walls of each story of a building but not including a cellar
story.
DIRECT GLARE — Results from high brightnesses or insufficiently
shielded light sources in the field of view or from reflecting areas of
high brightness.
A.
REFLECTED GLARE — Results from specular reflections of high
brightnesses in polished or glossy surfaces in the field of view.
B.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:268
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation and has been so designated pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident in
the resident’s dwelling unit where the activity is clearly accessory to the
principal use of the structure and occupies not more than 25% of the gross
floor area of the dwelling unit; the activity is conducted wholly indoors and
only within the principal structure; there are no employees other than the
immediate family residing on the premises; there are no clients, buyers,
patients, students, etc., who come to the premises on a regular basis (with
the exception of a teaching occupation of a tutoring nature where no more
than five pupils are in attendance at one time); there are no deliveries
received in frequency or quantities beyond those ordinarily delivered to
a residence; the activity does not involve merchandising trade, or the
exchange of commodities by sale to persons who come to the premises;
no service involving the repair of devices powered by gasoline, diesel fuel,
kerosene or other fuels is involved with the activity; there is no external
display or advertising of goods or services or other external evidence of
such activity, including no signage identifying the business; there is no
equipment stored on the premises, but transported for use elsewhere,
such as landscaping equipment; and there are no changes in the outside
appearance of the structures or premises which would alter its residential
character; and no activity that generates traffic, parking, noise, dust,
vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or any
other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than what
normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.[Amended 12-11-2007
by Ord. No. 3729]
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily temporary in-patients suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other abnormal physical or mental
condition, and including as an integral part of the institution related
facilities. "Hospital" does not include institutions for the permanent care of,
or occupation by, the poor, infirm, incurable or insane.
HOTEL — An establishment offering to the general public transient lodging
accommodations including one bathroom to each room but not including
cooking facilities and which may provide additional services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities.
HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY — Any building containing six or more guest
rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or
hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for
transient guests. Extended stay hotels shall contain kitchen facilities for
food preparation including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators,
stoves and ovens. Appliances shall be either in a self-contained single unit
or compact in size. Extended stay hotels may provide additional services
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. Residence
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:269
shall be limited to one year or less, with 50% of the units limited to a
maximum stay of 90 days.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percent of lot area covered by impervious
surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material which substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land.
Impervious surface shall include graveled driveways and parking areas.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITIES — One or more roofed and enclosed
buildings or structures designed and equipped for the conduct of sports,
leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities,
such as but not limited to tennis courts, handball and racquetball courts,
soccer fields, batting cages, skating and roller rinks, pools and gymnasiums,
and other active recreation activities.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; and in the case of a civil proceeding in
any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without a municipality, whose right to
use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter, or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under
this chapter or under any other law of this state or of the United States
have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure under this
chapter.
ISOLATED LOT — An existing, undeveloped, substandard lot not meeting
the lot area and/or lot frontage requirements for the zone in which it is
located and which is not deemed by law to be merged with an adjacent
lot(s).[Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4010-13]
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the purchase,
collection, storage, recycling or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or vehicles.
KENNEL — An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs,
cats or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding,
training or selling of animals is conducted as a business. Building and
operating standards shall comply with local and state Department of Health
standards.
LABORATORIES OF AN EXPERIMENTAL, RESEARCH OR TESTING
NATURE — A facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical
or social sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of
such investigation, and which does not produce noticeable noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare outside the buildings.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including sandy areas, marshes,
swamps, drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water. The
term "land" includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:270
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding the area and is always expressed in terms of square feet or
acres. Any portion of a lot included in an existing street or street proposed
by the applicant as part of a major subdivision plan shall not be included in
calculating lot area.
LOT COVERAGE — Same as "building coverage."
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street(s)
right-of-way line. In case of corner lots, the frontage shall be met along
all streets. In the case of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac street, the frontage
for lots fronting on the turnaround portion of the street shall be measured
along the front setback line but in no case shall the length of the lot line
coexistent with the street line be less than 2/3 of the required front lot
width.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot shall be the distance between the side
lot lines of said lot measured at and along a line parallel to the front lot
line which is drawn at a distance therefrom a distance equal to the required
depth of the front yard.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more existing
or proposed streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of less than 135°. Corner lots with streets
on two sides shall have two front yards along the streets and two side yards
opposite the front yards. Corner lots with streets on three sides shall have
three front yards along the streets and one side yard for the remaining yard.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, which has more than one
frontage.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which is designated to be made
available for sale or lease on such basis that the costs shall not exceed 30%
of gross family income and which is available for families or individuals
whose incomes do not exceed 50% of the median income of the area with
adjustments for family size as defined for the county by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development Section 8 guidelines.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:271
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Franklin.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which 1)
does not involve proposed disturbance or structures in excess of 5,000
square feet and does not require relief from any provisions of this chapter;
2) does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to § 112-196
of this chapter, and 3) contains the information reasonably required in
order to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements
established by § 112-185D(1) have been met.[Amended 12-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 3729]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — In order to be classified as a minor subdivision,
the proposed subdivision must meet the following criteria:
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building containing two or more principal uses.
In the HBD Zone, a mixed-use building shall contain one or more of the
principal or conditional permitted nonresidential uses and residential units,
with the entirety of the first floor (with the exception of necessary common
and utility areas) being comprised of permitted nonresidential use. In the
O-P Zone, a mixed-use building shall consist of permitted office use and up
to two residential units.[Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15]
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which is designated to be
made available for sale or lease on such basis that the costs will not
generally exceed 30% of gross family income and which is available for
families or individuals, whose incomes do not exceed 80% of the median
income of the Township's housing region, with adjustments for smaller and
larger families as defined for the county by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development Section 8 guidelines.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations
containing six or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct
access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main
lobby of the building.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — A Municipal Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, or a governing body of a municipality when acting pursuant to
Create three or fewer lots including the original tract if it remains a lot
with frontage on an existing street;
A.
B. Property in question has not been subdivided within the past 10 years;
Not involving the creation of more than one lot on a private right-ofway;
C.
Not involving a planned development, any new streets or the extension
of any off-tract improvements, the cost of which is to be pro rated
pursuant to § 112-196 of this chapter.
D.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:272
this chapter, and any agency which is created by or responsible to one or
more municipalities when such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Franklin.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — A building providing lodging and nursing care for
convalescents, or providing facilities for rehabilitation to the aged, infirm, ill
or handicapped, and which includes those establishments generally known
or recognized as convalescent homes, nursing homes or rehabilitation
homes.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT GLARE SOURCE — Glare resulting from
excessive levels of illumination or insufficiently shielded light sources
emanating from light fixtures in the field of view where the lens, lamp or
reflector is offensively visible above a height of five feet at a property line
or a public roadway.[Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4156-16]
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application, or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and nonimpervious, set aside and dedicated, designated or reserved for
public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:273
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to
be incidental to the natural openness of the land and which does not include
road rights-of-way.
OPEN SPACE, CLUSTER —
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Land within or related to a development which
is not individually owned or dedicated for public use and which is designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development. Common open space may contain only such complementary
structures and improvements as are appropriate for the recreation and
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — An area of land set aside, dedicated, designated
or reserved for public or private use as active or passive recreation and
which shall be appropriately landscaped. Usable open space areas shall
have a minimum of dimension of 50 feet in length and 50 feet in width as
measured at right angles and shall not include the front yard setback areas,
parking areas, vehicle access roads, driveways, and drainage facilities such
as detention areas, retention areas or swales.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered illuminating device
containing a total light source of more than 1,800 initial lumens per fixture,
or any spot or flood luminaire with a reflector contained in the lamp
component such as a parabolic aluminized reflector (PAR) lamp, of more
than 900 initial lumens, which is permanently installed outdoors, including
Land within a cluster development pursuant to E800 herein set aside,
dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use as active or
passive recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or
historically significant areas, or agriculture or horticulture which shall
be appropriately landscaped if required. Cluster open space areas shall
preferably be located in one contiguous parcel, but should unique site
conditions dictate two or more sections of open space, the minimum
size of any cluster open space areas shall be no less than two acres in
an RC development, and five acres in an AC or NRPC development.
A.
Cluster open space shall not include any required lot or yard areas,
parking areas, vehicular rights-of-way, driveways, and drainage
facilities such as detention areas, retention areas, or swales. However,
provided it can be demonstrated that a drainage facility can be located
within the portion of the cluster open space devoted to active
agricultural or horticultural use without precluding said use, the
Planning Board may permit such location. Any area within a lot in
excess of lot area requirements which is the subject matter of a
conservation easement shall qualify as cluster open space.
B.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:274
but not limited to devices used to illuminate any site, architectural
structure, or sign.[Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4156-16]
PARKING LOT — An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and
improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and including
parking spaces, aisles, maneuvering areas and plantings.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For the purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by the
Township in the form of cash, certified check, performance bond, surety
bond, or certificate of deposit endorsed to the Township, provided that
the Township shall not require more than 10% of the total performance
guaranty in cash.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Includes planned unit residential
development, residential cluster, planned commercial development or
planned industrial development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Municipal Planning Board established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48, 40:55D-49 prior to final approval after
specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the
approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRESERVATION AREAS — Preservation areas shall be open space areas set
aside for preservation of natural resource features such as but not limited
to forested areas, hedgerows, significant stands of trees or individual trees
of significant size; farmland and recently cultivated farm fields; natural
wildlife habitats; stream corridors, headwaters of streams, wetlands,
floodplains, flood hazard areas, ponds or lakes, rock outcroppings, including
the bluffs or cliffs along the D&R Canal State Park; historic structures, sites,
villages or districts and all reservoir-owned acreage; and shall include open
space and cluster open space as defined herein.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:275
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A building or portion thereof used as a place
of business of a person, corporation, firm or public agency for professional
services and administrative or executive purpose as distinguished from a
shop or store.
PROPRIETARY SCHOOL — A school which is privately owned and operated
on a for-profit basis.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE — A building and related facilities owned or
operated by a corporation, association, or group of individuals established
for the fraternal, social, educational, recreational or cultural enrichment of
its members and not primarily for profit, and whose members meet certain
prescribed qualifications for membership and pay dues.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation, and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing proposed culverts and bridges, to induce
water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen nonpoint
pollution.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE — A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious,
club, fraternity or eleemosynary institution and providing educational,
cultural, recreational, religious or similar types of public programs.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements, open space, water areas
and lands with environmental constraints unless otherwise specified.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:276
RESUBDIVISION —
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling or other residential structure in which
lodging facilities are supplied for three or more people and there are key
locks for sleeping quarters and/or one or more of the people do not have use
of all common areas, including but not limited to the kitchen, dining room,
living room, bathrooms, etc.[Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4010-13]
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front
line of a building or any other projection thereof, excluding cornices, eaves,
fascia, rain gutters and windows, which may project up to 36 inches into a
required yard, and uncovered steps.[Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No.
3718]
SETBACK LINE — A line within any lot parallel to any property line between
which line and the property line no building or portion thereof may be
erected except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
SETBACK, FRONT — The minimum horizontal distance between the street
and the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding
uncovered steps.
SETBACK, REAR — The minimum horizontal distance between the rear
lines of the lot and the rear setback line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The minimum horizontal distance between the side lines
of the lot and the side setback line.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that allows
no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90° above nadir
(straight down at perfect vertical), through the light fixture's lowest lightemitting
part. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this cutoff
angle must be permanently affixed.[Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
4156-16]
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law.
A.
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:277
SIGN AREA — The entire face of a sign including the surface and any
framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting structure.
SIGN SETBACK — The length of a line perpendicular to the lot line or
curbline, whichever is farther from the street center line, drawn from the
lot or curbline to the sign.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is outside the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign attached to a structure, the sole
purpose of which is to support the sign and which is detached from any
building.
SIGN, INTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign, displaying information, on the premises for
a limited period of time.
SIGN, WARNING — Any sign whose purpose is to provide awareness to
traffic control and safety precautions.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system which converts wind
energy by means of a rotor into electrical power for the primary purpose
of meeting all or a part of a dwelling’s energy requirements. As used in
these regulations, the primary application of a wind energy system (SWES)
is the conversion of wind by a machine with turbine apparatus (includes
base, rotor blades, nacelle, tower, inverter, batteries or other component
used in the system) capable of producing electricity by converting the
kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy to be used primarily for onsite
consumption. The term does not include electrical distribution or
transmission lines, or electrical substations. The term is limited to systems
that have a nameplate capacity of 20 kilowatts or less. A SWES is incidental
and accessory to the permitted principal use located on the lot. A SWES is
intended to produce electricity primarily for on-site consumption but excess
electrical power may be transferred to a utility company power supply
grid pursuant to utility company interconnection agreements. Such term is
inclusive of the term “vertical axis wind turbine” which is a compact type of
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and
screening devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
C.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:278
small energy wind system that can be mounted on buildings and poles and
produces energy using vertical wind turbine technology in low wind speeds
and operates at low noise levels.[Added 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 3843]
SOLAR ACCESS — Access to unobstructed direct sunlight of a southerly
exposure of the principal building. Solar access shall be considered
adequately available if the southerly wall of a proposed building has
unobstructed access to sunlight for 45% of the time between 8:45 a.m. and
3:15 p.m. local time on December 21.
SOLAR EASEMENT — Any easement created for the purpose of securing
adequate solar access to a solar energy system. Any instrument creating a
solar easement shall include but not be limited to a description of: 1) the
vertical and horizontal angles, expressed in degrees (°), at which the solar
easement extends over the real property subject to the solar easement;
2) any terms or conditions or both under which the solar easement is
granted or will be terminated; and 3) any provisions for compensation of
the owner of the property benefiting from the solar easement in the event
of interference with the enjoyment of the solar easement or compensation
of the owner or the property subject to the solar easement for maintaining
the solar easement.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility and components of the
distribution system.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne
or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles,
waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such
other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the municipality.
STORY — The portion of any building comprised between any floor and the
floor or roof next above, provided that the average height between the floors
or roof is no less than seven feet.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way:
A. Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
B. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
C. Which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter; or
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
D.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:279
STREET, ARTERIAL — Designed to provide for intermunicipal and through
community traffic flow. Arterial streets are generally the higher speed
routes for regional traffic flow as indicated on the Circulation Plan Map of
the Franklin Township Comprehensive Plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR — The streets which link the many small local roads
into the overall traffic flow system of the Township. Collectors serve as the
first stage point of traffic concentration for the local roads.
STREET, LOCAL — Those streets which primarily serve only those lots
located on the street. Use as a through street is generally limited.
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL — A street with access control, channelized
intersections, restricted parking and which collects and distributes traffic
to and from minor arterials.
STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR — The principal streets providing traffic
flow throughout the Township by connecting the various residential and
industrial areas.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this act, if no new streets are created: 1) divisions of land found by
the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the
Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are
five acres or larger in size; 2) divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions; 3) divisions of property upon court order, including
but not limited to judgments of foreclosure; 4) consolidation of existing lots
by deed or other recorded instrument; and 5) the conveyance of one or
more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person
or persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative
officer to conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas
of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairperson for the purpose of classifying
RESIDENTIAL — Those collector streets which solely serve residential
areas.
A.
B. NONRESIDENTIAL — Those collector streets not in residential areas.
RESIDENTIAL — Those local streets which solely serve residential
areas.
A.
B. NONRESIDENTIAL — Those local streets not in residential areas.
§ 112-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-4
1:280
subdivisions, approving minor and final subdivision plans and
recommending action on land subdivision by the Board.
TOWNHOUSE — A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one
family and included in a row of at least three such units in which each unit
has its own front and rear access to the outside, no units are located over
another unit and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more
common fire-resistant walls. For the purpose of this chapter, a townhouse
may include a building in fee simple, condominium or cooperative
ownership or any combination thereof.
TRAILER — A structure used for living or sleeping purposes which is
equipped with wheels and is towed or hauled by another vehicle for the
purpose of transporting such structure from place to place, or any unit
used for temporary living, sleeping or temporary office purposes, whether
supported by posts or any other type of foundation.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b and 40:55D-70d of the Municipal
Land Use Law.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS — Devices which are used for
the transmission and reception of wave frequencies for the purposes of
any wireless communication (e.g., telephone, radio, internet, paging and/
or television communication) and which are permitted in accordance with
the specific zoning conditions and standards for their location, approval and
operation included within this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter,
wireless communication antennas shall not be considered to be a public
utility.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the front property line and the front setback line projected to the side lines
of that lot. Front setback line shall be synonymous with the front yard line.
YARD, REAR — The open space between the rear property line and the rear
setback line and extending between side property lines.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot
and the nearest side setback line and extending in width from the front yard
line to the rear yard line, or in the absence of either of such yards, to the
front or rear lot lines as the case may be. The depth of a side yard shall be
measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer:
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and 40:55D-70 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B.
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:281

ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 112-5. Districts enumerated. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
3597; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 3740; 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3890;
8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3891; 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3892;
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 3905; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13;
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
Establishment of zoning districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the
Township of Franklin is divided into the following zoning districts:
A Agricultural
CP Canal Preservation
RR3 Rural-Residential
RR5 Rural-Residential
R-40 Single-Family Residential
R-20 Single-Family Residential
R-15 Single-Family Residential
R-10 Single-Family Residential
R-10A Single-Family Development
R-10B Single-Family Development
R-7 Single-Family Residential
C-R Cluster-Residential
N-B Neighborhood Business
G-B General Business
C-B Corporate Business
ROL Research-Office-Laboratory
OP Office-Professional
M-1 Light Manufacturing
M-2 Light Manufacturing
M-3 Mining
H Historic Overlay
RC Residential Cluster Option
NRPC Natural Resources Preservation Cluster Option
AC Agricultural Cluster Option
Note: The zoning requirements for Agricultural Option shall
remain in effect for the Wildflower Ridge development.
SCV Senior Citizen Village
HBD Hamilton Street Business District
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:283
RDO Retail District Overlay
I-P Institutional/Public
ISL Independent Senior Living
PRC Planned Residential Community
NRPCR40
Natural Resource Preservation Cluster (R-40 option)
CR-NH Cluster Residential (Nob Hill)
§ 112-6. Zoning Map.
A. Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of districts are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map-Franklin Township (Somerset
County), prepared by Mark Healey, PP/AICP, and dated September
2010, which is hereby made a part of this chapter and incorporated
herein by reference.58 [Amended 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 3905]
B. Official Zoning Map. The aforesaid zones are established by the
designations, locations and boundaries set forth and indicated on the
Official Zoning Boundary Maps to be located in the office of the
Township Engineer and to be maintained by him. A Zone Location Map
indicating the designations and locations shall be attached to all copies
of this chapter for informational purposes only.
(1) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from M-3 (Mining) to CP (Canal
Preservation) as depicted on Figures 1 and 2: [Added 3-27-2013
by Ord. No. 4007-13]
(a) Part of Lot 34 in Block 1.02;
(b) Lot 37 in Block 1.02;
(c) Part of Lot 38.01 in Block 1.02;
(d) Lot 39.01 in Block 1.02.
(2) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from ROL (Research-Office-Laboratory) to
M-3 (Mining) as depicted on Figures 1 and 2: Part of Lot 1.02 in
Block 5.02. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
(3) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from ROL (Research-Office-Laboratory) to
RR5 (Rural-Residential) as depicted on Figures 1 and 2: Part of Lot
172.04 in Block 5.02. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
(4) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following property from A (Agricultural) to RR5 (Rural-
58.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is available in the Clerk's office or through the Township's
online version of the Code (eCode 360®).
§ 112-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-6
1:284
Residential) as depicted on Figures 1 and 2: Part of Lot 172.04 in
Block 5.02. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
(5) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
property known as Block 536.01, Lot 2.03, from MR to CB. [Added
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
(6) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from O-P (Office-Professional) to HBD
(Hamilton Street Business District) as depicted on Figure 1: Lots
1.01 and 1.02 in Block 290. [Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
4115-1559]
(7) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from G-B (General Business) to HBD
(Hamilton Street Business District) as depicted on Figure 1:
[Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15]
(a) Lots 1 through 16 in Block 133.
(b) Lots 1 through 31 in Block 134.
(8) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the designation of
the following properties from R-7 (Residential) to HBD (Hamilton
Street Business District) as depicted on Figure 1: Lot 63 in Block
154. [Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15]
(9) The Official Zoning Map is amended to change the redevelopment
district designation of the following properties from CMMU
(Churchill Millstone Mixed Use) to CMR (Churchill Millstone
Residential) as depicted on Figure 1: Lots 20 to 22 and 45 to 47 in
Block 117. [Added 4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 4197-17]
(10) The Official Zoning Map is amended to extend the NBR
(Neighborhood Business/Residential) Overlay Zone over the
following lots (while retaining the existing MFR zoning): Lots 18-25
in Block 149 and Lots 12-15 in Block 141.01. [Added 9-26-2017
by Ord. No. 4211-17]
(11) The Official Zoning Map is amended, as reflected in Figure 1
below,60 to change the zoning designation of the following
properties from the Senior Citizen Village (S-C-V) Zone to the
Agricultural (A) Zone: Lots 5, 8, 9 and 14 in Block 513.01. [Added
4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 4271-19]
(12) The Official Zoning Map is amended, as reflected in Figure 2
below,61 to change the zoning designation of the following property
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance, a complete copy of which is on file in the Township offices,
also included an illustration of the Zoning Map amendments of Subsection B(6), (7) and
(8).
60.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
61.Editor's Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:285
§ 112-7. Designation and interpretation of district boundaries.
§ 112-8. Purposes of districts.
from the Research-Office-Laboratory (R-O-L) Zone to the
Agricultural (A) Zone: Lot 1.03 in Block 511. [Added 4-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 4271-19]
(13) The Official Zoning Map is amended as follows to zone the
following properties from the R-7 zone to the R-C (Renaissance-
Commercial) zone as reflected on the attached Figure 1 below: Lots
19-22 and 31-34 in Block 162. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
4299-19]
C. Amendments. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, changes are made in
the district boundaries or other matters portrayed in the map by the
Township Council, such changes shall be made promptly by the
Engineer after the amendment has taken effect as provided by law. For
each change in the map, note shall be made thereon, in the revision
box, of the date of revision, zones affected by the revision and a brief
identifying description of the revision. These changes are to be
endorsed upon the map on the effective date of the amendment.
[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of streets,
railroad rights-of-way, streams, lot or property lines as they exist on
plats of record at the time of the passage of this chapter, unless such
zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning
Map.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing thereon.
A. A Agricultural District. The purpose of the A District is to preserve
those agricultural areas in Franklin Township where it is necessary and
desirable because of their highly productive agricultural capability to
promote, maintain and enhance the use of the land for agricultural
purposes, and to protect from encroachment by nonagricultural uses,
structures or activities.
B. RR3 Rural-Residential. The purpose of this district is to recognize the
development opportunities and limitations of the Brunswick shale
formation and underlying soils; to protect groundwater quantity and
§ 112-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-8
1:286
quality and to limit degradation of this resource; to maintain and
enhance forested areas; to preserve stream quality which feeds the
Canal; and to permit relatively low-density single-family residential
development.
C. RR5 Rural-Residential. The purpose of this district is to recognize the
development opportunities and limitations of the diabase formation and
underlying soils; to protect steep slopes from development activities; to
maintain agricultural resources; to protect groundwater quantity and
quality and to limit degradation of this resource; to maintain and
enhance forested areas; to preserve stream quality which feeds the
Canal; and to permit low-density single-family residential development.
D. R-40 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of the R-40 District is to
provide for the continuance of single-family residential development on
one-acre lots.
E. R-20 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of the R-20 District is to
provide for the continuance of single-family residential development on
one-half-acre lots.
F. R-15 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of the R-15 District is to
provide for the continuance of single-family residential development on
lots of 15,000 square feet.
G. R-10 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of the R-10 District is to
provide for the continuance of single-family residential development on
lots of 10,000 square feet.
H. R-10A Single-Family Development. The purpose of the R-10A District is
to permit single-family development. [Added 2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
3591]
I. R-10B Single-Family Development. The purpose of the R-10B District is
permit to preservation of forests identified in the forest survey
prepared by the Franklin Township Environmental Commission by
providing for development on lots containing 7,500 square feet at a
density of 2.1 units per acre and requiring a minimum set aside for open
space preservation of 25% of the tract.
J. R-7 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of the R-7 District is to
provide for the continuance of single-family residential development on
lots of 7,500 square feet and also two-family residences on lots of
10,000 square feet.
K. C-R Cluster-Residential. The purpose of the CR District is to
accommodate single-family, two-family and multifamily residences
while fostering the preservation of open space, recreational areas,
floodplains and wooded tracts and provide low- and moderate-income
housing.
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:287
L. N-B Neighborhood Business. The purpose of the NB District is to allow
for small areas throughout the Township where small retail and service
businesses may be located, primarily for the convenience of the
residents in the immediate neighborhood.
M. G-B General Business. The purpose of the GB District is to provide
business and commercial uses for the local traveling public. The district
is established to preserve and enhance commercial, financial, retail and
similar activities and services.
N. C-B Corporate Business. The purpose of the CB District is to take
advantage of major highway access to Route 287. The standards are
intended to require maximum attention to proper site design including
the location of structures and parking areas, proper ingress and egress,
architectural design, landscaping and the need to avoid visual
intrusions and performance nuisances upon adjacent residential areas.
Primary uses are intended to be oriented towards corporate office and
research operations with only incidental shipping and receiving related
to non-production-oriented uses.
O. ROL Research-Office-Laboratory. The purpose of the ROL District is to
encourage large-lot research, office and laboratory uses in an open
setting.
P. OP Office-Professional. The purpose of the OP District is to permit small
professional office buildings, small general office buildings, and mixed
use buildings which are compatible with the single-family detached
dwellings and two-family dwellings permitted in the district, and the
adjacent, densely developed residential areas.
Q. M-1 Light Manufacturing. The purpose of the M-1 District is to permit
light manufacturing and industrial uses on five-acre minimum lots.
R. M-2 Light Manufacturing. The M-2 District is designated for
manufacturing and industrial operations on two-acre minimum lots.
S. M-3 Mining. The purpose of the M-3 District is to allow quarrying
activities consistent with the character of adjacent development and
the preservation of environmental and historical features. [Amended
3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
T. H Historic Overlay. The purpose of the H Overlay District is to
recognize, preserve and protect the cultural, architectural and historic
resources of Franklin Township and to promote the use of scenic and
historic areas for the education, pleasure and general welfare of
citizens of Franklin Township and its visitors.
U. RC Residential Cluster Option. The purpose of the RC option is to
recognize, preserve, and protect certain defined natural resources
existing in the Township by preserving such features while permitting
medium-density residential development within specified areas
adjacent or in proximity to such natural resources.
§ 112-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-8
1:288
V. NRPC Natural Resources Preservation Cluster. The purpose of the
NRPC option is to recognize, preserve and protect certain defined
natural resources and to preserve an environment for the continuance
of viable agricultural and horticultural uses; preserve open space to
serve environmental, scenic, and public service purposes; promote
imaginative, well-designed residential subdivisions; and respect the
physical and socioeconomic qualities of the land.
W. AC Agricultural Cluster. The purpose of the AC option is to preserve an
environment for the continuance of viable agricultural and horticultural
uses; preserve open space to serve environmental, scenic, and public
service purposes; promote imaginative, well-designed single-family
detached residential subdivisions; and respect the physical and
socioeconomic qualities of the land. Note: The zoning requirements for
the agricultural option shall remain in effect for the Wildflower Ridge
development.
X. CP Canal Preservation. The purpose of the Canal Preservation Zone is
to recognize, protect and preserve the unique resources of the
Delaware and Raritan Canal; to protect and preserve the groundwater
and surface water resources which flow into the Canal; to maintain the
scenic amenity of the Canal and adjacent slopes and ridges; to reduce
the impact upon streets adjacent to the Canal; to protect the wooded
slopes and areas from the impact of development, including erosion and
increased runoff; and to maintain the agricultural resources which
currently exist in the area.
Y. HBD Hamilton Street Business District. The purpose of the HBD
District is to provide for commercial uses with supportive residential,
community and institutional uses that, in combination, contribute to an
attractive, vibrant and sustainable business district that is geared
towards pedestrian circulation, bicycle circulation and public
transportation.
Z. RDO Retail District Overlay. The purpose of the RDO Retail District
Overlay is to encourage and advance long-term economic vitality
through commercial design standards to achieve a premium aesthetic
appeal, while discouraging less attractive layouts. Designs should
contribute to an attractive commercial center, creating a sound
commercial community identity and inviting pedestrian interest and
activity.
AA. I-P Institutional/Public. The purpose of the I-P District is to retain
existing housing, public and institutional uses in the area and to allow
the redevelopment of existing low- and moderate-income housing for
the purpose of providing new, modern and additional low- and
moderate-income housing. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 3740]
BB. ISL — Independent Senior Living. The purpose of the ISL District is to
allow the development of an independent senior living facility that
addresses the need for age-restricted housing in the Township and
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:289
§ 112-9. Summary of requirements.
which addresses the need for affordable housing intended solely for
seniors. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3892]
CC. (Reserved)62
DD. NRPC-R40 Natural Resource Preservation Cluster (R-40 option). The
purpose of the NRPC-R40 zone is to recognize, preserve and protect
certain defined natural resources and to preserve an environment for
the continuance of viable agricultural and horticultural uses; preserve
open space to serve environmental, scenic, and public service purposes;
promote imaginative, well-designed residential subdivisions; and
respect the physical and socioeconomic qualities of the land. [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 3905]
EE. CR-NH Cluster Residential (Nob Hill). The purpose of the CR-NH option
is to recognize, preserve, and protect certain defined natural resources
existing in the Township by preserving such features while permitting
medium-density residential development within specified areas
adjacent or in proximity to such natural resources. [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 3905]
A. Applications for development within the various zoning districts shall
meet all requirements of this chapter. The accompanying chart entitled
"Summary of Requirements" is provided as a general reference for
development applications.
B. This chart is provided for informational purposes only and shall not be
construed as complete or limiting in the application of the requirements
of this chapter.
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection CC, Multifamily Residential, added 8-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 3890, was repealed 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13.
§ 112-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-9
1:290
ARTICLE III
General Zoning Regulations
§ 112-10. Schedules of regulations.
Schedule of regulations. The restrictions and controls intended to regulate
development in each district are partially set forth in the schedules
incorporated herein and entitled "Schedule 1, Schedule of Permitted Uses,"
"Schedule 2, Lot and Yard Requirements," and "Schedule 3, Height,
Coverage and Building Requirements" and are further supplemented by
other sections of this chapter.63
§ 112-11. Application of regulations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
§ 112-12. Permitted uses.
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be
designed, used for, intended to be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than as specified among the uses listed as permitted in
the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limit designated for the district in which such
building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any
open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area, and building
location regulations designated for the district in which such building
or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided contiguous to any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered to provide a yard or open space for any other building, and
no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing
a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
A. The regulations set forth in Schedule 1, Permitted Uses shall apply to
all buildings and lots within the several districts respectively, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
B. Any use not designated as a permitted principal use, accessory use or
special use is specifically prohibited from any district in the Township.
C. Exterior alterations which substantially change the character and
nature of a building for the purpose of changing the use of the building
63.Editor's Note: These schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:291
§ 112-13. Lot and yard requirements.
The regulations set forth in Schedule 2, Lot and Yard Requirements, shall
apply to all buildings and lots within the several districts respectively,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 112-14. Height and coverage requirements.
The regulations set forth in Schedule 3, Height and Coverage
Requirements, shall apply to all buildings and lots within the several
districts respectively, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 112-15. Principal buildings.
§ 112-16. Accessory buildings.
No accessory building permitted by this chapter shall be placed in any
required yard except as specified hereinafter in this section.
shall not be permitted in any zoning district in which residences are
permitted.
D. Zoning districts designated by "H" on the Township Zoning Map shall
additionally meet the requirements set forth in § 112-193.
E. Development within the I-P Institutional/Public Zoning District shall be
subject to § 112-280I, Institutional/public. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 3740]
A. There shall be no more than one single-family or two-family residential
principal building erected on any one lot in a residential zone district.
B. All principal buildings and required front yard areas must face on a
dedicated public street or a private street approved by the Planning
Board.
C. The following are applicable to principal buildings located in the OP
Zone:
(1) The outside dimension of a two-story mixed use or nonresidential
building shall be limited to 75 feet.
(2) The minimum distance between buildings shall be no less than 25
feet.
(3) The number of dwelling units within a mixed use building shall be
limited to two, and may be arranged in a vertical or horizontal
manner utilizing one or two floors or a combination thereof;
however, no living space shall be permitted above the second floor.
(4) The total number of dwelling units per lot shall be limited to two,
contained either in a mixed use building or in a two-family dwelling.
§ 112-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-16
1:292
§ 112-17. Lot frontage.
A. The aggregate ground area covered by accessory buildings in any
required rear yard shall not exceed 30 percent of the required rear yard
area within any residential zone. Within any business and industrial
zone, the aggregate area covered by any accessory buildings shall not
exceed 50% of the required rear yard area.
B. An accessory building attached to the principal building shall comply in
all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building.
C. No accessory building within any zone shall exceed the height of the
principal building.
D. No accessory building erected in a required yard on any lot within any
zone shall be used for residential purposes.
E. Within the limitations hereinbefore recited, any accessory building
within any residential zone shall be a distance not less than the
minimum front yard setback distance from the street line required for
that zone.
F. On through lots, no accessory building erected in the rear yard shall be
nearer the street line than the minimum distance specified for a front
yard setback on that part of the street which said yard abuts.
G. Open, private swimming pools designed and intended for the sole use of
resident site occupants shall be considered accessory structures for the
purpose of permits and shall be controlled by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.64
H. Garden sheds shall be governed by § 112-16 Accessory buildings,
except that they may be erected closer to the rear and side property
lines as indicated in the below modified schedule. In no instance,
however, shall the location of the garden shed be closer to an existing
dwelling, which is located on an adjacent lot, then the prescribed
minimum side yard depth for accessory buildings of the zone in which
the garden shed is to be erected. (See Schedule 2, Lot and Yard
Requirements.) Applicants desiring a permit to erect a garden shed
within the modified setbacks, must provide the location of dwellings on
the adjacent lots on their filed plan. Garden sheds shall not exceed the
following standards governing size: [Amended 9-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 4210-17]
(1) Height: 12 feet.
(2) Total square footage: 200 square feet.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 112-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-17
1:293
§ 112-18. Reduction of open space prohibited.
§ 112-19. Applicability to government functions.
Regardless of whether the Township or any duly constituted board, agency
or department thereof is acting in or pursuant to the performance of a
governmental function, carrying out a legislative mandate or in the exercise
of its private right as a corporate body, any structure, facility or use, either
existing or proposed, owned, operated or controlled by the municipality,
or the Franklin Township Board of Education or any of its agencies, shall
be permitted in any class of zone; it being the intention that whatever the
Township may be authorized to do shall constitute a function of government
and that whenever the Township shall act pursuant to granted authority, it
acts as government and not as a private entrepreneur.
A. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall
have frontage on and access from an existing street on the Township
Master Plan or Official Map or unless such street exists as defined
herein.
B. Through lots and reversed frontage lots shall be prohibited except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages to shape
topography or orientation and when vehicular access is permitted on
only one street. Vehicular access on more than one street shall be
prevented by a deed restriction or similar mechanism approved by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. [Amended 1-23-2007 by
Ord. No. 3652]
C. Where a building lot has frontage upon a street which, on the Master
Plan or Official Map of the Township of Franklin is contemplated for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard area shall be measured
from such proposed future right-of-way line.65
A. No lot shall hereafter be so subdivided or reduced in area as to cause
any open space required by this chapter to be less in any dimension
than is herein required for the zone and lot in question.
B. Where a lot is formed as part of another lot and occupied by a building,
such division shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of
the requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing buildings
or yards and open spaces in connection therewith. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a new building on a new lot thus created,
unless it complies with all provisions of this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which prohibited games of chance and which
subsection immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-14-2007 by Ord. No.
3708.
§ 112-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-20
1:294
§ 112-20. Building lots to abut street.
No building permit shall be issued unless the building lot abuts a street as
defined herein giving public access to said building, and until such street
shall have been certified by the governing body to be suitably improved
or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means of a
performance guaranty in accordance with the standards and specifications
for road improvements as required by this chapter.
§ 112-21. Yards and courts.
§ 112-22. Removal of soil.
No soil, mineral or similar materials may be removed from any lot except in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 206, Soil Removal and Deposit.
A. No yard or part thereof or any other open space or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the
purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a
yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly
required for any other building.
B. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
C. In the case of irregularly shaped lots existing at the time of passage of
this chapter, the minimum frontage requirements as specified in the
schedule shall be measured at the rear line of the required front yard
area, provided that in no case shall the frontage or the distance
between side lot lines be reduced to less than 50% of the minimum
frontage requirement.
D. All yard areas facing on a public street shall be considered as front
yards and shall conform to the front yard requirements for the
particular zone.
E. When the rear yard of a corner lot adjoins the front yard of a lot to the
rear, no accessory building on such corner lot shall be located nearer to
the street on which the lot to the rear faces than a distance equal to the
depth of front yard required along such frontage.
F. No side or rear yard area shall be required for nonresidential uses
abutting railroad right-of-way boundary lines except as considered
necessary by the Planning Board to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of site occupants.
§ 112-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:295
§ 112-23. Parking of vehicles. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No.
3678]
No commercially registered vehicle of more than 12,500 pounds gross
vehicle weight rating shall be parked out of doors in any residential zone
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
§ 112-24. Brush and hedges near roadways and intersections.
A. Any owner or tenant of lands lying within the limits of the Township
shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life, or any other
obstruction, growing or located in the sight triangle area as determined
by measurements taken in accordance with current Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) formula for sight rights, and where
determined to be a safety hazard by the officer designated by the Chief
of Police, limited to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet. At the direction
of the officer designated by the Chief of Police, all traffic signs shall be
maintained free and clear of obstruction by vegetation.
B. Where any owner or tenant of lands described in § 112-24A shall have
failed to keep such brush, hedges or other plant life cut to a height of
not more than 2 1/2 feet upon written notice to such owner or tenant
served personally upon such owner or tenant or mailed to the last
known address of such owner or tenant, certified mail, return receipt
requested, the Traffic Safety Officer of the Township of Franklin shall,
upon the expiration 10 days after delivery of such notice, provide for
the cutting of the same under his direction. He shall thereupon certify
the cost of such cutting to the Township Council, which shall examine
such certificate and if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against said lands, or in the event that such cost
is excessive, shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged
against said lands. The amounts so charged shall forthwith become a
lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
C. Any owner or tenant who shall violate any provision of this chapter or
fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, upon
conviction thereof, shall be liable to the penalties in § 112-325. Each
and every day such violation continues, shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
§ 112-23 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-24
1:296
ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Zoning Regulations
§ 112-25. Gas or fuel transmission lines.
No structure designed for human habitation shall be placed within 100 feet
of any gas or fuel transmission line.
§ 112-26. Storage of fuel for motor vehicles.
§ 112-27. Keeping of livestock and bees.
A. The storage of more than five gallons either above or below ground of
any volatile, combustible gasoline, diesel fuel or similar substances
other than underground fuel oil tanks which are directly connected to a
heating source is hereby prohibited in any residential zone district
throughout the Township of Franklin, or on any lot upon which there is
a residence, or a single or multiple dwelling unit or units in a residential
structure, with the exception of a lot which meets the definition of
"farm" as defined in this chapter or those applicable uses as per
§ 112-114 and Article V of this chapter.
B. Any such storage container not prohibited hereunder containing five
gallons or greater shall not be connected to any building, and further,
any such container shall be located at a safe distance therefrom. Such
container shall be protected from the weather and shall be maintained
and kept under security at all times; provided, further, that such
container shall be placed on a stand made of metal or concrete blocks.
Stands made of wood or other combustible materials are forbidden.
A. The keeping of livestock is permitted in the A, R-40, RR-3, RR-5 and CP
Districts, provided that the building used for the shelter and care of
said animals is located no closer than 100 feet to any property line, and
further that no other animals not owned by the owner or lessee of the
property shall be cared for or boarded thereon unless the property
complies with the definition of a farming operation as described herein.
B. Beekeeping.
(1) No beekeeper shall maintain colonies of honeybees (Apis
melliferus) so as to cause physical danger or property damage.
(2) Where this chapter does not state farming operations as a
permitted use or permitted accessory use the number of bee
colonies shall be limited to two.
(3) In the event a citizen's complaint is lodged with the Township about
a colony or colonies of honeybees, the Township Manager will
authorize an individual (Health Officer, member of Environmental
Commission, etc.) to determine validity of complaint. If the
complaint is determined by the Township authority to be valid the
Township authority will present the beekeeper with a written list of
§ 112-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-27
1:297
§ 112-28. Height exceptions.
§ 112-29. Roadside stands.
the problems and the corrective action that must be taken. The
beekeeper will have a fourteen-day period to take the
recommended corrective action.
(4) If the corrective action, as recommended by the Township
authority, is not taken within the prescribed fourteen-day period, or
the corrective action is insufficient to alleviate the problem, the
Township authority is empowered to require the removal of the bee
colonies from the property. Failure of the beekeeper to remove the
bee colonies from the property in a seven-day period shall result in
a fine of $10 per day for each day the colonies remain beyond the
removal date.
(5) The Township retains the right to have beehives removed or the
bees killed and the hives burned, at the owner's expense, if any of
the following conditions exist:
(a) The beehives pose an immediate health hazard.
(b) The owners of the hives do not take the corrective action in the
prescribed time period as directed by the Township authority.
(c) The owner of the hives cannot be found after a reasonable
attempt has been made to locate said owner.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, and cupolas: nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water
tanks, bulkheads, similar features, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. Such features,
however, shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose they are to serve. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to prevent the erection above the building height limit of
a parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and without windows)
extending above such height limit not more than five feet.
B. Public schools, federal, state and municipal buildings, hospitals, and
churches may exceed the height limitations of this chapter, provided
that such uses shall increase the front, rear and side yards 1/2 foot for
each foot by which such building exceeds the height limit herein
established for such zone in which it is located, and further provided
that in no case shall any building have a height greater than 50 feet.
A. Roadside stands shall be permitted as an accessory use provided that
said use shall sell and display produce primarily raised and produced by
the owner of the farming operation.
§ 112-27 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-29
1:298
§ 112-30. Equipment storage.
§ 112-31. Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing
nature in the ROL District.
§ 112-32. Use of wells restricted.
Whenever the groundwater has been contaminated by chemicals, heavy
metals or volatile organics on any premises as verified by the Health
B. Roadside stands shall be permitted as an accessory use provided that
said roadside stand and produce shall be located no closer than 30 feet
from the street line.
A. All junkyards, contractors yards including plumbing and electrical
contractors facilities or commercial and industrial facilities storing
equipment, raw materials or products outdoors shall completely
enclose the storage area by a six-foot stockade, board and batten or
chain link fence with redwood or treated lumber slats to completely and
aesthetically conceal the stored material from any adjacent properties.
Vinyl or plastic slats for chain link fences are not permitted.
B. Storage of hazardous wastes materials must be located in a properly
enclosed spillproof facility meeting the requirements of the Health and
Fire Departments. All drums and containers of hazardous waste must
be clearly labeled as to product and handling instructions. Removal of
hazardous waste must be in accordance with Health and Department of
Environmental Protection requirements.
A. A gatehouse, bus stop shelter or security office shall not be more than
one story in height and shall not be less than 25 feet from a street rightof-
way.
B. Parking areas may be located in any of the required yard areas,
provided that they are at least 25 feet from a street line and 50 feet
from a side or rear lot line.
C. All such uses shall comply with performance standards as specified in
Article XIII (§ 112-115 et seq.) of this chapter.
D. Permitted accessory uses. The following accessory uses are permitted:
(1) Living quarters, recreation facilities and other required accessory
uses to the main research use for caretakers and watchmen, as well
as their families, where the constant availability of the
aforementioned employees is necessary. All living quarters as
permitted shall comply in height, cubic content, and yards
requirements as set forth for the R-R District. In no event shall
there be more than one accessory use for living quarters for each
five acres.
(2) Private garage space.
§ 112-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-32
1:299
Department and State Department of Environmental Protection, well water
supplies shall be prohibited where public water is available within 200 feet
from the property line connection to said public water shall be mandatory.
§ 112-33. Recycling facilities in multifamily housing developments.
[Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3728]
A. Definitions. The terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — A space allocated for collection and storage of
source separated recyclable materials.
B. There shall be included in any application to the Township Planning
Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment that requires subdivision or
site plan approval for the construction of multifamily housing, singlefamily
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial,
institutional, government or industrial development for the utilization
of 1,000 square feet or more of land, a recycling plan. The plan must
contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and
storage of residentially generated recycling materials.
(a) The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number, and which are consistent with
anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the
area in which the project is located; and
(b) The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers
shall be determined in consultation with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator, and shall be consistent with the District
Recycling Plan adopted pursuant to § 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of the
Municipal Master Plan, adopted pursuant to § 26 of P.L. 1987,
c. 102; and
(c) The location of the recycling area shall be convenient for the
residential disposition of source separated recycling materials,
preferably near, but clearly distinct from, a refuse dumpster;
and
(d) The plan shall represent that:
§ 112-32 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-33
1:300
§ 112-33.1. Independent Senior Living. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 3892]
[1] The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles; and
[2] Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling
area without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles.
C. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling area and
the bins or containers placed therein against theft of recycling
materials, bins or containers.
D. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township, the
owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source separated recyclable materials in those instances where the
Township or Somerset County does not otherwise provide this service.
E. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions, which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall
be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
F. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
G. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
H. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Township Engineer.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) Independent senior living facilities for senior citizens who are
capable of living independently of supportive services to assist
them with the activities of daily living. Such development shall
consist of an apartment-style facility in which residency is agerestricted
to households in which the head of household or their
spouse is age 62 years or older, except that due to death, a
remaining spouse less than 62 years of age shall be permitted to
continue to reside and further provided that no person under 19
years of age shall reside in any dwelling unit for more than 90 days
§ 112-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-33.1
1:301
in any calendar year. Independent senior living facilities may also
contain porches, patios, balconies and public areas to provide
activities for residents, including a dining room, community/
multipurpose rooms, chapel and recreational areas.
(2) Assisted living facilities for senior citizens who are able to live
independently in apartment-style units but require some assistance
with the activities of daily living.
B. Accessory uses. Accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Housing units for caretaker, facility director or similar on-site
employee(s), which units shall be included toward the number of
permitted units.
(2) Security booths.
(3) Recycling areas.
(4) Indoor recreational areas such as game rooms, library, computer
room.
(5) Outdoor recreational sitting areas such as an event lawn, gazebos
and other civic amenities.
(6) Other uses customary and incidental to the principal permitted use.
C. Development requirements. Development within this zone shall be in
accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
(1) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
(3) Maximum number of units: 127.
(4) Maximum height: three stories or 50 feet to the highest ridge beam
of a pitched roof or 35 feet to a flat roof.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(7) Minimum setbacks for all building:
(a) Front yard: 100 feet.
(b) One side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Total of two side yards: 100 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(8) Buffer areas: Along the front and rear lot lines, a minimum buffer of
50 feet shall be provided. Such buffer shall be 15 feet along side lot
lines. With the exception of minimum disturbance necessary for the
§ 112-33.1 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-33.1
1:302
construction of an access driveway and utilities, said buffer shall
be kept in its natural state where wooded, and when natural
vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, the developer shall supplement
the existing vegetation with new landscape screening. Elsewhere
on the site, existing trees shall be preserved to the greatest degree
possible.
(9) Off-street parking: in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(10) Minimum parking setbacks:
(a) From building: 10 feet.
(b) No parking area shall be permitted in the required front yard
or within required buffer areas.
(11) The development shall be serviced by public water and sewer
facilities.
(12) Support services, functions and facilities shall include the following
at a minimum: indoor recreation or activity facilities; kitchen and
dining facilities; private emergency transportation; pass-key
locking doors that provide twenty-four-hour security.
(13) Provision of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing;
mandatory set-aside requirements. The developer shall provide or
cause others to provide, on-site, very-low-, low- and moderateincome
dwelling units totaling at least 38 units (30%) with at least
10 of such units being affordable to very-low income households.
The developer shall abide by all applicable requirements of the
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) including the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) including but not limited to
pricing, bedroom mix, low/moderate income split, affirmative
marketing, and assignment of a COAH-qualified administrative
agent. The developer shall be solely responsible for all payments
required for the services of the administrative agent. The
administrative agent shall be COAH-qualified, shall be approved by
the Township, and shall perform all duties and responsibilities of an
administrative agent as set forth in the COAH rules and UHAC,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 26.16 and 26.18
thereof, which duties and responsibilities include, but are not
limited to, affordability controls; affirmative marketing; household
certification; communication and education; and enforcement.
§ 112-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-33.2
1:303
§ 112-33.2. Outdoor lighting.66 [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
4156-16]
All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained, other than
those serving one- and two-family dwellings, shall comply with the
requirements as specified below.
A. General requirements.
(1) Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways,
roadways and parking lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be
used.
(2) Where used for commercial and industrial purposes such as in
merchandise display areas, work areas, platforms, signs,
architectural, landscape or sports or recreational facilities, all light
fixtures shall comply with the following:
(a) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or any other
objects mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform shall use a
narrow cone beam of light that will not illuminate other
objects.
(b) Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct light emissions shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated
structure.
(c) Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded
whenever possible. Such lighting shall have directional and
glare control devices, when necessary, to comply with
§ 112-33.2B, Light trespass.
(d) Externally illuminated signs, including building identification
or other similar illuminated signs, shall comply with the
following:
[1] Top-mounted light fixtures shall be shielded and are
preferred.
[2] When top-mounted light fixtures are not feasible,
illumination from other positioned light fixtures shall be
restricted to the sign area. Visors or other directional
control devices shall be used to keep spill light to an
absolute minimum.
(e) All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures.
(3) All floodlight type fixtures, once properly installed, shall be
permanently affixed in the approved position.
66.Editor's Note: Former § 112-33.2, Multifamily Residential, added 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
3890, was repealed 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13.
§ 112-33.2 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-33.2
1:304
(4) Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed three feet
behind the curb shall not be less than 30 inches above ground.
(5) No light fixtures approved as part of a development application
shall be changed in number, height, type lumen, and/or power
without obtaining necessary Township approval.
B. Light trespass. All light fixtures, except street lighting, shall be
designed, installed and maintained to prevent light trespass, as
specified below.
(1) Illumination from light fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles at
the property line adjoining residentially zoned property.
(2) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained
shall be directed so that there will not be any objectionable direct
glare source visible above a height of five feet from any other
property or public roadway.
(3) Light fixtures near adjacent property boundary may require special
shielding devices to prevent light trespass.
C. Illuminance and luminance requirements. Illuminance and luminance
requirements shall be as set forth in the most current edition of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) Lighting
Handbook and other IESNA publications, and this section shall adopt
the most current edition of those standards.
(1) Street lighting. Average IESNA illuminance recommendations
should not be exceeded. IESNA average to minimum illuminance
uniformity ratios are to be used as a guide for designing safe and
adequate roadway lighting.
(2) Outdoor parking facilities. Outdoor parking lot illuminance shall be
based on certain illuminance specifications recommended by the
IESNA, as specified below:
Maintained Illuminance for Parking Lots
Horizontal
Illuminance Basic Enhanced Security
Minimum 0.2 fc 0.5 fc
Average 1.0 fc 2.5 fc
Uniformity ratios
Average to minimum 5:1 5:1
Maximum to
minimum
20:1 15:1
Minimum vertical
illuminance
0.1 fc 0.25 fc
§ 112-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-33.2
1:305
Minimum vertical illuminance shall be measured at 5.0 feet above
parking surface at the point of lowest horizontal illuminance,
excluding facing outward along boundaries.
For typical conditions: During periods of nonuse, the illuminance
of parking facilities should be turned off or reduced to conserve
energy. If reduced lighting is to be used only for the purpose of
property security, it is desirable that the minimum illuminance be
not less than 0.1 fc in susceptible areas of the property. Reductions
should not be applied to facilities subject to intermittent night use,
such as apartments, hospitals and active transportation areas.
If security or vandalism is a likely and/or severe problem, an
increase above the basic level may be appropriate.
High vehicular traffic locations should generally require the
enhanced level of illumination. Exits, entrances, internal
connecting roadways and such would be some examples.
(3) All other illuminance uses shall not exceed IESNA
recommendations.
(4) Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed IESNA luminance
recommendations.
D. Electric utility floodlights. No electric utility floodlight intended for
property illumination shall be located within the public right-of-way on
any public roadway or on any property unless:
(1) The luminaire is sufficiently shielded and aimed so that no
objectionable direct glare source is visible at any point on the
roadway where the viewing height is five feet or greater and when
the distance from the mounting pole is 70 feet or greater.
(2) The property being illuminated does not exceed the maximum
maintained illuminance levels to perform the lighting task
prescribed in § 112-33.2C, illuminance and luminance
requirements.
(3) All electric utility floodlights shall be subject to the requirements in
§ 112-33.2B, Light trespass.
E. On-site outdoor lighting energy conservation. The design and
installation of outdoor lighting on the site of a subdivision or site plan
shall be constructed so as to conform to the standards specified herein.
(1) All outdoor lighting not necessary for security purposes shall be
reduced, activated by motion sensor devices or turned off during
nonoperating hours. Illuminated signs are excluded from this
requirement.
(2) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light and to maximize energy efficiency.
§ 112-33.2 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-33.2
1:306
§ 112-33.3. Renewable Energy Facilities. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord.
No. 4007-13]
Consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.11 of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, a renewable energy facility on a parcel or parcels
of land comprising 20 or more contiguous acres that are owned by the
same person shall be a permitted use within the Township's M-1, M-2
and M-3 Zoning Districts. For the purposes of this section, “renewable
energy facility” means a facility that engages in the production of electric
energy from solar technologies, photovoltaic technologies, or wind energy
and shall include associated equipment necessary for the generation and
transmission of electric energy from the renewable energy facility.
§ 112-33.4. Lot shape. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4008-13]
(3) Lighting plans shall employ lighting technology that is as energy
efficient as practicable, e.g., the use of light-emitting diode (LED)
technology.
F. Prohibitions. Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are prohibited,
other than for a period of seven days from the date of the opening of a
new establishment.
A. Every lot created for one- and two-family residential use after the
effective date of this section shall be capable of containing a horizontal
square wholly within its boundaries and located wholly outside the
minimum required front yard setback. Such horizontal square shall be
termed the "effective square."
B. The dimensions of this "effective square" shall correspond to the
dimensions listed below for the district in which the lot is located:
(1) A and CP (standard lot) Zones: 250 feet per side.
(2) RR5, RR3, CP (lot size averaging), NRPC, and R40 Zones: 125 feet
per side.
(3) AC, C-R (two-family): 90 feet per side.
(4) R-20, R-15, NRPC-R40, RC, HBD, C-R (single-family): 70 feet per
side.
(5) R-10, R-10A, R-10B, R-7 (single-family), R-7 (single-family, zero lot
line), R-7 (two-family), R-F (two-family), NBR (two-family), NBR
(single-family): 55 feet per side.
(6) C-R (Nob Hill), R-F (single-family): 35 feet per side.
§ 112-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-33.4
1:307

ARTICLE V
Conditional Uses
§ 112-34. Grounds for authorizing conditional uses.
Conditional uses, as enumerated in Article V, (§ 112-34 et seq.), shall be
permitted upon authorization by the Planning Board, provided that such
uses are found by the Planning Board to comply with the following
requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this section:
§ 112-35. Application procedure.
A. The use is a conditional use as set forth in Schedule 1.
B. The use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the
public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens will be
protected.
C. Adequate landscaping and screening is provided.
D. Adequate off-street parking and loading is provided, and ingress and
egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on
abutting streets.
E. The use conforms to all applicable regulations governing the district in
which it is located.
A. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of submission of a complete application by an
applicant to the Secretary of the Planning Board, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include site
plan review pursuant to § 112-185B. The time period for action by the
Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to § 112-35A shall apply to
such site plan review. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and a
certificate of the Township Clerk as to the failure of the Planning Board
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site
plan, the Franklin Township Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
§ 112-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-36
1:309
§ 112-36. Automobile service stations.
Such uses may be permitted upon authorization by the Planning Board in
accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
A. Plans shall show the exact location of buildings, the number of gasoline
tanks to be installed, the dimensions and capacity of each tank, the
depth at which the tanks will be placed below ground, the number of
pumps to be installed, the type of structure and accessory buildings to
be constructed, the number of service bays and a description of the
nature and extent of the proposed use.
B. Said proposed use or structure shall not be located on any highway or
street within 1,500 feet of any other automobile service station situated
on the said highway or street, or on any other street as measured along
the center line of the street or streets.
C. It is further provided that said use or structure shall not be located on a
lot whose lot lines are located within 1,000 feet from any public or
private school, hospital, church, library, theater, club, place of assembly
seating more than 50 persons, or public building housing offices and
records of this municipality.
D. It shall be further provided that vehicular entrances and exits shall be
clearly visible from the highway or street upon which such use is
located and shall not be located within 50 feet of a street intersection
and further provided that all filling pumps shall be located at least 35
feet from the street line and side and rear property lines of the lot on
which such use is to be located.
E. No more than three service stations shall be permitted within a linear
mile.
F. No part of any automobile service station may be used for residence or
sleeping purposes except by a watchman.
G. No part of any building used as an automobile service station nor filling
pumps, car lifts, greasing equipment, nor other service equipment used
to service or supply motor vehicles shall be erected within 50 feet of
any residential zone boundary line.
H. All lifts and greasing equipment shall be located within an enclosed
building.
I. No gasoline or oil pump or other service appliances installed for use in
connection with any automobile service station shall be so installed or
located within 35 feet of any lot line.
J. No automobile service station shall store out of doors in a side or front
yard, wrecked, damaged or disassembled (either whole or in part)
vehicles, boats, used automotive or marine parts or used supplies or
materials thereof. Any such storage location in a rear yard shall be
§ 112-36 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-36
1:310
§ 112-37. Churches and similar places of worship. [Amended
12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3729; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3772;
6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3881]
A house of worship may be permitted upon authorization by the Planning
Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
screened so that no stored vehicle or article shall be visible from the
front of the premises nor to any adjacent premises.
K. All other regulations for the district in which the use is to be located
shall be met except that the minimum lot area for a service station shall
not be less than 40,000 square feet.
L. Car wash facilities may be permitted as an accessory use.
A. Permitted zones. Places of worship shall be permitted as conditional
uses as specified in Schedule 1, Permitted Uses.67
B. Permitted uses. All proposed principal and accessory uses, including
anticipated or future uses, and all principal and accessory structures
greater than 100 square feet in area shall:
(1) Be delineated on the site plan and architectural plan;
(2) Be included in all lot data table calculations;
(3) Be addressed in the traffic study; and
(4) Meet all standards related to that use and/or structure.
C. Roadway location. No place of worship having a gross floor area over
5,000 square feet shall front or have direct vehicular access to a street
classified in the Township Master Plan as a scenic roadway (with the
exception of those roadways under state or county jurisdiction) nor
shall a place of worship having a gross floor area over 5,000 square feet
be located on any roadway with an improved cartway width of 18 feet or
less.
D. Parking requirements.
(1) One parking space per every three seats. One seat shall be
considered 22 inches in calculating the capacity of pews or
benches. In the event there is no seating provided, parking shall be
provided at one parking space for every three persons at the
largest anticipated gathering or a minimum of one parking space
for every 15 square feet of worship area.
(2) Depending on the number of special occasions, the Planning Board
may require overflow parking to be constructed of pervious
pavement materials. Parking may be banked upon approval of the
67.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is attached to this chapter.
§ 112-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-37
1:311
Planning Board in anticipation of future growth, but it shall be
delineated on the plan and included in all coverage calculations
and drainage calculations.
E. Parking location. The majority of the parking shall be located to the rear
of the main structure, with no more than 10% of the total parking
located at the front entrance for handicapped accessibility, weddings
and funeral services.
F. Parking setbacks and standards. Unless modified herein, the parking
setbacks and standards contained in Article XI (§ 112-81 et seq.) for the
applicable zone shall apply, provided that no parking or access
driveways shall be permitted within any required buffer area identified
in Subsection K below.
G. Building setbacks. The walls of the main building or of any accessory
building or structure greater than 100 square feet shall be set back in
compliance with the zone district requirements, but in no case less than
50 feet from the abutting street right-of-way line or lines (front yard
setback) or less than 25 feet from every adjoining property line.
H. Building height. The building shall not exceed the height restrictions
for the zoning district in which it is to be located unless in accordance
with § 112-28.
I. Impervious cover.
(1) Impervious cover shall be permitted to be two times the allowable
percent in the applicable residential zone, and shall comply with
the applicable percent in nonresidential zones and the HBD zone.
(2) Impervious cover may be increased an additional 10% upon
approval by the Planning Board where the parking, drive or
pedestrian surface is constructed of pervious pavement material,
subject to the same conditions contained in Subsection D(2) above.
J. Lot cover. Lot or building cover maximums shall not exceed the
allowable percent in the applicable zone.
K. Buffers and lighting. Buffering, landscaping and/or fencing shall be
required pursuant to either of the following standards in Subsection
K(1) or (2) below where any yard is adjacent to a residential zone or
residence:
(1) Fifteen feet of heavily landscaped buffer containing, at a minimum,
a double, staggered row of evergreen trees planted at a maximum
of 10 feet on center with a minimum planting height of six to eight
feet, or approved equivalent; a mix of evergreen and deciduous
shrubs; and a six-foot high, solid, board-on-board fence; or
(2) Twenty-five feet of heavily landscaped buffer containing, at a
minimum, a triple, staggered row of evergreen trees planted at a
maximum of 10 feet on center with a minimum planting height of
§ 112-37 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-37
1:312
§ 112-38. Community residences and community shelters.
Community residences for developmentally disabled and community
shelters for victims of domestic violence which house six or more individuals
except for residential staff may be permitted upon authorization by the
Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan
review:
six to eight feet, or approved equivalent; and a mix of evergreen
and deciduous shrubs.
(3) Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare and spill-over onto
adjacent property or into the sky. This shall be accomplished
through the use of cutoff fixtures and/or reflectors so that light is
directed, as much as possible, to the area intended to be
illuminated. The light source shall be fully concealed. Where
located adjacent to a residential zone or residence, lighting fixtures
shall be limited to 15 feet in height and 250 watts in power and
shall not exceed 0.0 footcandles beyond the property line zoned or
used for residential purposes;
L. Minimum Lot Area.
(1) In the A, CP, RR-5 and RR-3 Districts: two times the minimum lot
area required of a single-family home.
(2) In the R-40, R-20, R-15, R-10, R-10A, R-10B, C-R and R-7 Districts:
three times the lot area required of a single-family home or one
acre, whichever is greater.
(3) In the GB, NB, OP and HBD Districts: the minimum lot area
requirement applicable to nonresidential uses.
M. Location on flag lot prohibited. When located in a residential zone and/
or adjacent to a residence, no place of worship shall be located on a flag
lot as such term is defined in § 112-71. [Amended 9-14-2010 by Ord.
No. 3898]
A. Minimum lot size by zoning districts shall be as follows:
Zone Minimum Lot Size
RR3, RR5 and R-40 5 acres
R-20 and R-15 1 acre
R-7 and R-10 20,000 sq. ft.
C-R 20,000 sq. ft.
B. Minimum of 250 square feet of gross floor area shall be required for
each site occupant inclusive of resident staff personnel.
C. Such community residences must be at least 1,500 feet apart from each
other.
§ 112-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-39
1:313
§ 112-39. Garden apartment development.
A. No garden apartment structure shall be located within 200 feet of a
single-family dwelling which is not located on the same lot.
B. No garden apartment building shall be closer than 30 feet to any other
garden apartment.
C. No more than 24 dwelling units in the R-10B Zone or 16 dwelling units
in any other zone shall be contained in any one garden apartment
structure.
D. A planting screen having a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
along all side and rear property lines that do not abut an open space
area. This screen shall consist primarily of evergreen trees and earth
contouring so as to provide visual screen. Planting material shall be at
least three feet high at the time of planting, and it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to carry out this program and to promote
such maintenance and care as is required to obtain the effect intended
by the original plan.
E. All private streets shall be paved to a minimum width of 30 feet.
F. No off-street parking area shall be located within the required front
yard area of the development tract.
G. No on-street, parallel parking shall be permitted on any street, road,
thoroughfare, accessway or driveway, whether public or private.
H. On-site parking shall be proved in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
I. Each parking area shall contain no more than 50 vehicle spaces and
shall be adequately lighted either with wall-mounted or post-mounted
ornamental fixtures.
J. No off-street parking spaces, including detached garages, shall be
located closer than seven feet to the principal building, and no principal
building shall have off-street parking areas on all sides of the building.
K. No off-street parking area shall be located closer than 10 feet to a side
or rear property line.
L. If garages are provided, they shall have an unobstructed clear floor
space area of not less than 240 square feet and such a garage may be
built into the dwelling structure or separately constructed as herein
provided.
M. Each group of attached garages shall be no more than one story in
height. The architectural design and materials used in the construction
thereof shall conform to the design and building materials used in the
construction of other buildings and structures. No part of any garage or
other accessory building shall be used for living purposes.
§ 112-39 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-39
1:314
N. The following recreational requirements shall be met and developed
with facilities suitable to serve the residents of the dwelling units; said
facilities shall be located so as not to be detrimental to adjacent
property owners by virtue of noise, light, glare and any other
objectionable features emanating therefrom. A minimum of 400 square
feet of recreational area shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
O. Other requirements.
(1) All projects shall be serviced by public water and sewer utilities.
(2) Minimum lot size shall be one hundred acres in the R-10B Zone and
10 acres in all other zones.
(3) Minimum frontage shall be 300 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard shall be 75 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard shall be 40 feet.
(6) Maximum density shall be 3.25 units in the R-10B Zone and six
units per gross acre in all other zones.
(7) Maximum lot coverage shall be 20%.
(8) Minimum rear yard shall be 40 feet.
(9) The total height of the building shall not exceed three stories nor
42 feet in height in the R-10B Zone and 2 1/2 stories nor 30 feet in
height in all other zones. (No basement units are permitted.)
P. Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses which are customarily
incidental to said use, such as but not limited to the following, shall be
permitted on the same lot:
(1) Private garages.
(2) Swimming pools.
(3) Recreation areas and incidental structures accessory thereto.
(4) Management office.
(5) Maintenance and storage building.
Q. Required use: low- and moderate-income dwelling units. Every garden
apartment development shall provide dwelling units for families of low
and moderate income pursuant to Article X (§ 112-74 et seq.) of this
chapter except for garden apartments in the R-10B Zone which shall
pay a development fee pursuant to Article XXXIII (§ 112-252 et seq.).
R. Garden apartment developments existing within the General Business
(GB) Zone as of the effective date of this ordinance68 shall be
68.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 4021-13, adopted 7-16-2013.
§ 112-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-39
1:315
§ 112-40. (Reserved)69
§ 112-41. Small wind energy systems.70 [Added 9-22-2009 by Ord.
No. 3843]
considered permitted uses, subject to the requirements of § 112-39.
[Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
A. A small wind energy system shall be permitted in the Agricultural (A),
Canal Preservation (CP), Rural Residential 3 (RR3) and Rural
Residential 5 (RR5) Zoning Districts subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a small wind energy
system shall be five acres.
(2) Setbacks. The minimum setback distance shall be 150% of the
height of the wind tower. Such distance shall be doubled along a
property line adjoining a scenic roadway. The setback distance is
the horizontal distance from the center of the supporting structure
to the nearest property line or to the nearest overhead utility
easement or underground petroleum product pipeline easement.
(3) Height.
(a) A small wind energy system shall not exceed 120 feet in total
height. The height of the structure is the vertical distance from
the ground surface to the highest point of a rotor blade when in
an upright position.
(b) The bottom of the rotor blade sweep shall be no closer than 35
feet above the ground surface.
(4) Number. No more than one wind tower for a small wind energy
system shall be located on any one property.
(5) Visual impacts.
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning
and proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's
visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors
and the community. This may include, but not be limited to,
information regarding site selection, turbine design or
appearance, buffering, and screening of ground-mounted
electrical and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall
be underground.
69.Editor's Note: Former § 112-40, Apartments, townhouses and independent senior living
facilities in HBD, was repealed 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 112-41, Home occupations, was repealed 12-11-2007 by Ord. No.
3729.
§ 112-39 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-41
1:316
(b) The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the
stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a
nonreflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the
surrounding environment.
(c) Wind turbines may only be attached to monopole towers with
or without guy wires. Lattice towers are prohibited.
(6) Lighting. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit
unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant shall
provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the required
markings and/or lights for the small wind energy system.
(7) Signs. All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on
the small wind energy system, except as follows: manufacturer's or
installer's identification on the wind turbine; and appropriate
warning signs and placards.
(8) Code compliance. A small wind energy system including tower shall
comply with all applicable construction and electrical codes, and
the National Electrical Code.
(9) Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy systems
that connect to the electric utility shall comply with the New
Jersey's net metering and interconnection standards for Class I
renewable energy systems.
(10) Noise. The noise level of any small wind energy system shall not
exceed 60 dB(A) measured from any property line, or be in excess
of five dB(A) above the background noise, whichever is greater, as
measured at the closest inhabited dwelling on a neighboring
property, except during short-term events such as severe wind
storms and utility outages.
(11) Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
(12) Access.
(a) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(b) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a
minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
B. Permit requirements.
(1) Site plan approval. Site plan approval shall be required for the
installation of a small wind energy system.
§ 112-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-41
1:317
(2) Documents. In addition to other normally required application
materials for site plan and conditional use applications, the site
plan application shall be accompanied by a plot plan which includes
the following:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
(b) Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
property;
(c) Location of the proposed small wind energy system tower;
(d) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property;
(e) Any overhead utility lines;
(f) Small wind energy system specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower
type (freestanding or guyed);
(g) Tower and tower foundation drawings signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey;
(h) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine
manufacturer or qualified engineer including noise levels of
the proposed wind energy system at all property lines and at
the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling.
(i) A visual analysis must be submitted, including photos of the
subject property, that graphically simulates the appearance of
any proposed small wind energy system and indicating its view
from at least five locations around and within one mile of the
proposed tower.
(j) A report from a structural engineer containing the following: a
description of the tower, including a description of the design
characteristics and material; and documentation to establish
that the tower has sufficient structural integrity for the
proposed uses at the proposed location and meets the
applicable minimum safety requirements. The applicant shall
provide evidence that the proposed tower height does not
exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer of the
wind turbine. Every two (2) years the owner shall submit a
structural report to the Building Department attesting to the
structural integrity of the wind generator, tower and/or
support system.
(3) Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire if:
(a) The small wind energy system is not installed and functioning
within 24 months from the date the permit is issued; or
§ 112-41 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-41
1:318
§ 112-42. Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses shall be permitted upon
authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the following
standards and site plan review:
(b) The small wind energy system is out of service or otherwise
unused for a continuous twelve-month period.
C. Abandonment.
(1) A small wind energy system that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been presumptively
abandoned. The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment
to the owner of a small wind energy system that is deemed to have
been abandoned. The owner shall have the right to respond to the
notice of abandonment within 30 days from notice receipt date. The
Zoning Officer shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify
the owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides
information that demonstrates the small wind energy system has
not been abandoned. In the event that the Zoning Officer, after
investigation, determines that a small wind energy system has been
abandoned, the Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment
during the presumptive twelve-month period and the owner shall
have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment.
(2) If the small wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the
owner of a small wind energy system shall remove the small wind
energy system and all related improvements at the owner's sole
expense within three months of receipt of notice of abandonment.
The applicant may provide a performance bond and/or other
assurances satisfactory to the approving Board, in a form approved
by the Township Attorney, that will cause the removal of the small
wind energy system and all related improvements at no cost to the
Township. In the absence of a performance bond and/or other
assurances, if the owner fails to remove the small wind energy
system, the Zoning Officer may, at the option of the Township
Council, have the small wind energy system and all related
improvements removed at the owner's expense, and impose a lien
on the property.
D. Violations. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate
a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this section
or with any condition contained in a building permit issued pursuant to
this section. Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption
of this section are exempt.
A. Said use will have direct access to an arterial or major collector street
as defined in this chapter and as designated on the adopted Master Plan
of the Township of Franklin.
§ 112-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-42
1:319
§ 112-43. Kennels.
Kennels may be permitted upon authorization by the Planning Board in
accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
§ 112-44. Membership swimming pools.
Membership swimming pools may be permitted upon authorization by the
Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan
review:
B. Off-street parking space shall be required in accordance with the
standards set forth below:
(1) Hospitals: 2.5 spaces for each bed.
(2) Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses: one space for each two
employees.
C. Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
D. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
E. Maximum percent of lot coverage shall be 15%.
A. No structure or pen used for keeping or exercising of animals shall be
located within 75 feet of any property line.
A. Such use shall meet the following area, yard and site requirements:
(1) Minimum frontage shall be 300 feet.
(2) Minimum depth shall be 600 feet.
(3) Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(4) No building, structure, parking area, driveway or recreational
facility or use shall be within 25 feet of any boundary of the subject
property, except that a driveway providing direct ingress and
egress from a public roadway may be located within said buffer, but
not within 75 feet of a site boundary of the subject property.
B. The seventy-five-foot buffer as required shall be planted and maintained
with adequate trees and shrubs to provide adequate visual and noise
barriers and shall meet the following specifications:
(1) A six-foot high security fence must be provided at the inner
perimeter of the buffer area, contiguous to recreational facilities
area.
(2) If no natural tree growth exists which forms a visual and noise
barrier within the buffer area, a screen planting consisting of
evergreen trees shall be provided.
§ 112-42 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-44
1:320
§ 112-45. Nursing homes.
Licensed nursing homes may be permitted upon authorization by the
Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan
review:
(3) The minimum height of the plantings at the time of installation
shall be five feet and shall be of the type to reach a mature height of
at least 10 feet.
(4) Said evergreen trees shall be planted in four staggered rows, and
no tree shall be more than 20 feet from the next adjacent tree.
C. Entrance driveways and exit driveways shall have plantings, the mature
height of which shall not exceed two feet. These plantings shall extend
on either side of the driveway for a distance of 15 feet.
D. Plans indicating the proposed planting layout must be submitted for
approval prior to planting. Plans shall be drawn at a scale no greater
than one inch equals 50 feet and shall show the location, variety and
size of proposed plantings.
E. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided pursuant to Article XI
(§ 112-81 et seq.) of this chapter.
F. No parking will be permitted on internal driveways or roadways.
G. Each pool will be developed in accordance with at least the minimum
standards for public pools as recommended by the National Swimming
Pools Institute.
H. A membership swimming pool facility shall have direct access to and
front on at least a collector street as shown on the adopted Township
Master Plan.
I. No membership swimming pool shall be located within one mile of
another such facility.
J. Outdoor public address facilities shall be specifically prohibited.
K. The maximum membership limit of said organization shall be fixed at
the time of application for site plan approval and shall be
commensurate with the amount of facilities to be utilized and the exact
nature of the use. No further expansion of said membership shall be
granted unless additional facilities are developed and site plan approval
and conditional use approval obtained therefor.
A. Nursing homes shall be constructed and furnished so as to provide
facilities, lodging and care for not less than 35 patients.
B. All nursing homes shall be constructed in such a manner as to comply
with the State of New Jersey, Department of Institutions and Agencies,
Manual of Standards for Nursing Homes, reprinted July 1967, as
§ 112-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-45
1:321
amended from time to time, and in compliance with the pertinent codes
of the Township of Franklin including, but not limited to, the site plan
procedure herein.71
C. The lot or tract on which said nursing home is situated fronts on a
primary or secondary or collector road as designated on the Master
Plan of the Township of Franklin.
D. No nursing home shall be situated on a site not serviced by water and
sewer utilities maintained and operated by a public utility franchised
with the Township of Franklin or by the Township of Franklin.
E. No nursing home shall be operated in the Township of Franklin unless
duly licensed and approved by the Department of Institutions and
Agencies in the State of New Jersey.
F. All nursing homes shall be equipped with a fire sprinkler system and
thermal alarm system connected to the Franklin Township Police
Department. The maintenance of said systems shall be the continuing
responsibility of the owner.
G. Landscaping should be such as may be easily maintained and
contribute to the overall appearance and use of the site. Landscaping
shall be the continuing responsibility of the owner.
H. All nursing homes shall have a minimum land area of five acres.
I. Minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
J. Minimum building setback shall be 100 feet.
K. Such uses shall have a minimum 50 feet side yard on each side.
L. Maximum percent lot coverage shall be 20%.
M. Off-street on-site parking shall include one space per two beds and one
space per employee including doctors, nurses, orderlies and
management personnel, and in no event shall include less than 10
spaces for employees and management.
N. Rear yards shall be 50 feet minimum.
O. Maximum height of nursing home structures shall be two stories, not to
exceed 30 feet.
P. There must be an adequate driveway for unobstructed ambulance
entrance to an exit in the building. Said driveway shall be such that
ambulances can enter and leave the premises without danger of being
blocked by other traffic or parked vehicles and with sufficient room for
turning, loading and unloading said ambulances.
71.Editor's Note: See Art. XXIII, § 112-184 et seq.
§ 112-45 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-45
1:322
§ 112-46. Professional office uses in the R-20-H District.73 [Added
6-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3701]
Q. A safe and convenient system of drives, walkways, access areas,
parking facilities must be provided for the employees, doctors,
management, visitors, ambulances, delivery vehicles and fire, police or
other emergency vehicles.
R. There shall be adequate outside lighting to provide safety for all
persons at all times at said nursing home, and said lighting shall be
directed and shielded so as to cause minimum disturbance to adjoining
properties.
S. Nursing home structures shall be built of fireproof material in
accordance with the Building Codes of the State of New Jersey and the
Township Fire Code.72
T. Nursing home design shall be functional and shall adequately provide
for the health, welfare and safety of the patients, employees, visitors
and general public.
A. Professional office uses shall be permitted in the R-20-H District upon
authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the following
standards and site plan review:
(1) Such use is located in the R-20-H District, located along the north
side of Route 27, east of its intersection with Shaw Drive.
(2) Such uses shall only be located on lots that meet or exceed the
minimum lot area and frontage requirements of the R-20 District.
(3) Such use shall only be permitted in buildings in existence as of the
adoption of this section.
(4) No expansion or other modification to the building exterior shall
affect the residential appearance of the building.
(5) Lot coverage shall not exceed 20%, and impervious surface
coverage shall not exceed 45%.
(6) Parking areas shall be located to the rear of the building and/or to
the side of it. No parking area shall extend closer to the street than
the front of the building. Additionally, no off-street parking area
shall be located closer than 10 feet to a property line.
(7) A landscaped buffer area of at 10 feet in width shall be located
around the perimeter of the parking and loading areas of such use.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Construction Codes, Uniform; and Ch. 132, Fire Prevention.
73.Editor's Note: For provisions regarding philanthropic or eleemosynary uses (former
§ 112-46), see § 112-42.
§ 112-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-46
1:323
§ 112-47. Schools in residential districts. [Amended 8-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3772; 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3881]
Schools, including private and parochial schools recognized by the New
Jersey Department of Education, may be permitted upon authorization by
the Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan
review:
(8) Signs for such uses shall be limited to one freestanding sign not
exceeding six square feet in area or six feet in height (including
supports) nor located closer than 10 feet from a property line. Such
signs shall be constructed of high-quality materials, such as carved
wood, architecturally treated metal or stone. Only externally
lighted signs shall be permitted. No building-mounted signage shall
be permitted.
A. Such school shall have, as its prime purpose, the general education of
students in the arts and sciences and shall be licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services or the Department of Education
(NJ) if a license for its operation is required by law.
B. Any other provision contained in this chapter notwithstanding, no
school building or part thereof shall be erected nearer than a distance
equal to three times the height of such building to any property line
other than a street line.
C. All accessory buildings shall be located on the same lot as the principal
building, and the sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.
D. No school permitted hereunder shall be a trade school, except to the
extent that instruction in a particular trade or trades may be a part of
the general education curriculum of the school in the arts and sciences,
and no correctional, health or any other institution not primarily
concerned with the general education of students in the arts and
sciences shall be permitted.
E. Parking location. The majority of the parking shall be located to the rear
of the main structure, with no more than 10% of the total parking
located at the front entrance for handicapped accessibility, student
drop-off and other such functions.
F. Parking setbacks and standards. Unless modified herein, the parking
setbacks and standards contained in Article XI (§ 112-81 et seq.) for the
applicable zone shall apply, provided that no parking or access
driveways shall be permitted within any required buffer area identified
in Subsection H below.
G. Building setbacks. The walls of the main building or of any accessory
building or structure greater than 100 square feet shall be set back in
compliance with the zone district requirements, but in no case less than
§ 112-46 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-47
1:324
50 feet from the abutting street right-of-way line or lines (front yard
setback), or less than 25 feet from every adjoining property line.
H. Buffers and lighting. Buffering, landscaping and/or fencing shall be
required pursuant to either of the following standards in Subsection
H(1) or (2) below where any yard is adjacent to a residential zone or
residence:
(1) Fifteen feet of heavily landscaped buffer containing, at a minimum,
a double, staggered row of evergreen trees planted at a maximum
of 10 feet on center with a minimum planting height of six to eight
feet, or approved equivalent; a mix of evergreen and deciduous
shrubs; and a six-foot high, solid, board-on-board fence; or
(2) Twenty-five feet of heavily landscaped buffer containing at a
minimum a triple, staggered row of evergreen trees planted at a
maximum of 10 feet on center with a minimum planting height of
six to eight feet, or approved equivalent; and a mix of evergreen
and deciduous shrubs.
(3) Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare and spill-over onto
adjacent property or into the sky. This shall be accomplished
through the use of cutoff fixtures and/or reflectors so that light is
directed, as much as possible, to the area intended to be
illuminated. The light source shall be fully concealed. Where
located adjacent to a residential zone or residence, lighting fixtures
shall be limited to 15 feet in height and 250 watts in power and
shall not exceed 0.0 footcandles beyond the property line zoned or
used for residential purposes;
I. Minimum lot area.
(1) In the RR-5 and RR-3 Districts: two times the minimum lot area
required of a single-family home.
(2) In the R-40 and R-20 Districts: three times the lot area required of a
single-family home or one acre, whichever is greater.
J. No school shall front or have direct vehicular access to a street
classified in the Township Master Plan as a scenic roadway (with the
exception of those roadways under state or county jurisdiction) nor
shall a school be located on any roadway with an improved cartway
width of 18 feet or less.
K. Location on flag lot prohibited. When located in a residential zone and/
or adjacent to a residence, no school shall be located on a flag lot as
such term is defined in § 112-71. [Amended 9-14-2010 by Ord. No.
3898]
§ 112-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-48
1:325
§ 112-48. Public utility installations.
The location of all public utility installations shall be permitted upon
authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the following
standards and site plan review:
§ 112-49. Townhouse development. [Amended 1-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 3652]
Such development shall be permitted upon authorization of the Planning
Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
A. No public utility electric or gas main transmission line shall be located
within 100 feet of a school, church, or other public buildings.
B. No permanent storage of vehicles or outdoor storage of materials shall
be permitted.
A. The minimum development tract size shall be 10 acres.
B. The maximum permitted density shall be six dwelling units per gross
acre.
C. The development shall provide 400 square feet of recreational area for
each dwelling unit. Such space shall not include the yard areas of a
lot(s) in fee-simple ownership.
D. All private streets shall be paved to a minimum width of 30 feet.
E. In addition to yard requirements for the tract of land set forth in
Schedule 2 (Lot and Yard Requirements), no dwelling unit shall be
located less than 25 feet from the curbline or edge of pavement of a
private street or access driveway.
F. Each individual lot shall have a front and rear yard not less than 20 feet.
There shall be a single side yard of not less than 20 feet at the end of
each row. In the instance of a development proposal under this
subsection creating a lot for each dwelling unit, each unit shall have a
rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
G. There shall be no more than eight dwelling units in any single group of
dwelling units.
H. No dwelling unit, or group of dwelling units, shall exceed 2 1/2 stories
or 35 feet in height, whichever is lesser. No living space shall be
permitted above the second floor.
I. Refuse storage areas shall be so designed as to minimize any
detrimental effect on the character of the development.
J. All utility wiring shall be underground.
§ 112-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-49
1:326
§ 112-50. (Reserved)75
§ 112-51. Warehouses.
The following uses may be permitted subject to the authorization by the
Planning Board in accordance with the following standards and site plan
review:
§ 112-52. R-10A Zone Single-Family Development.
R-10A Zone Single-Family Development shall be permitted in the R-10A
Zone south of Bunker Hill Road in accordance with the following standards
and subdivision plan review:
K. Common accessory buildings and facilities shall be designed to
harmonize with the overall character of the development and shall meet
the setback requirements set forth herein for groups of dwelling units.
L. All site facilities shall meet Township design standards.
M. Required use: low- and moderate-income dwelling units. Every
residential cluster development shall provide dwelling units for families
of low and moderate income pursuant to Article X, § 112-74 et seq., of
this chapter.
N. Townhouse developments existing within the General Business (GB)
Zone as of the effective date of this ordinance74 shall be considered
permitted uses, subject to the requirements of § 112-49. [Added
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
A. No warehouse building shall be higher than one story; in any event no
warehouse building shall be higher than 30 feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed a maximum of 0.4.
D. Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 60% of lot area.
E. Loading bays/areas shall not be located in the front of the building or in
any yard adjacent to a residential district and shall not be on any side of
a building which faces a street.
F. No sale of goods to the general public shall be permitted on the
premises.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be single-family dwellings.
B. Permitted accessory uses shall be private garages, private swimming
pools and signs. [See Article XII, § 112-106 et seq.]
74.Editor's Note: “This ordinance” refers to Ord. No. 4021-13, adopted 7-16-2013.
75.Editor's Note: Former § 112-50, Contractors and design/build operations, was repealed
8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15.
§ 112-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-52
1:327
§ 112-53. Principal uses in Neighborhood Business (NB) Zone.
Principal uses in the Neighborhood Business (NB) Zone shall be permitted
in the CR Zone subject to the following:
C. Conditional uses shall be public utility installations, community
residences, home occupations and churches and other similar places of
worship.
D. The minimum development tract size shall be 10 acres.
E. The maximum permitted density shall be three dwelling units per gross
acre.
F. The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet.
G. The minimum frontage shall be 75 feet. The minimum frontage
requirement on corner lots shall be met on all frontages on a public
street.
H. The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet. Front yard setbacks
on corner lots shall comply with sight triangle distances as established
elsewhere in this chapter.
I. The minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet on one side.
J. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet.
K. The minimum setbacks for accessory structures shall be eight feet for
side and 10 feet for rear yards.
L. The maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.
M. The maximum impervious coverage shall be 35%.
N. The maximum height shall be 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
O. All streets shall have a right-of-way of 50 feet and shall be paved to a
minimum width of 30 feet.
P. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided pursuant to Article XI,
§ 112-81.
Q. Garages shall be constructed according to the following standards:
(1) All garages provided shall conform architecturally to and be of
similar materials as the principal building in the development.
(2) No detached garage shall exceed a height of one story or fifteen
feet.
R. All streets shall have four-foot concrete sidewalks on one side.
S. All utility wiring shall be underground.
§ 112-52 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-53
1:328
§ 112-53.1. Billboards. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3875]
Billboards may be permitted upon authorization of the Planning Board in
accordance with the following standards and site plan review:
A. NB uses shall be permitted only as support uses to an existing or
approved multifamily development in the CR Zone.
B. NB development shall conform to all development standards for the NB
Zone (Schedules 1 through 6), unless modified herein.
C. NB development shall occupy no more than 3% of the land area of an
existing and/or approved multifamily development in the CR Zone.
D. NB development in the CR Zone shall not include gas stations,
restaurants, funeral homes, health clubs, or quasi-public or private club
or fraternity.
E. A 20-foot wide perimeter buffer shall be provided where the proposed
NB development is adjacent to existing or proposed residential
development. The perimeter buffer is not required adjacent to a public
right-of-way.
F. The perimeter buffer shall be landscaped with a solid six-foot high fence
and massed evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. Evergreen
trees shall be eight feet in height at time of installation and planted 10
feet on center in a double staggered row. One deciduous tree and two
shrubs shall be planted for each 10 linear feet of buffer.
G. Pedestrian access shall be provided from the residential development to
the NB development.
H. Driveway access from the NB development to Route 27 shall be
prohibited if there is an alternative public street to provide access to
the development.
A. Location.
(1) Billboards shall be located in the M-2 District.
(2) Billboards shall only be located on a lot fronting on an interstate
highway and shall be located, positioned and designed so that the
advertising surface is visible only from the interstate highway and
not local roadways or residential uses to the greatest degree
possible, and no portion of a billboard shall be more than 200 feet
from the property line adjoining the Interstate Highway.
(3) No portion of a billboard shall be within 200 feet of a right-of-way of
an improved County or local road.
(4) Only one billboard shall be permitted on any one lot.
(5) No portion of a billboard shall be within 1,000 feet of any portion of
another billboard or the applicable spacing requirements of the
§ 112-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-53.1
1:329
New Jersey State Department of Transportation, whichever is
greater.
(6) No portion of a billboard shall be located within 300 feet of a lot
containing a residential use.
B. Bulk requirements.
(1) Billboards are a principal structure subject to the M-2 District bulk
requirements and size and design requirements except as provided
in Subsections B and C.
(2) Billboards may be placed zero feet from the property line adjoining
the Interstate Highway; however, no portion of the billboard shall
extend beyond such property line. No portion of a billboard shall be
less than 50 feet from any other property line.
(3) The minimum distance from any portion of a billboard to any
portion of a nonbillboard structure shall be 100 feet.
C. Size and design.
(1) A billboard display area shall not exceed 50 feet in height above the
elevation of the outside stripe of the nearest portion of the
adjoining highway, nor shall it be less than 25 feet from grade.
(2) A billboard display area shall not exceed 672 square feet.
(3) No billboard or billboard display area or portion thereof shall
rotate, move, produce noise or smoke, give the illusion of
movement, display video or other changing imagery, automatically
change, or be animated or blinking, nor shall any billboard or
portion thereof have any electronic, digital, tri-vision or other
animated characteristics resulting in an automatically changing
depiction.
(4) A billboard shall contain no more than two billboard display areas.
A triangular (three-sided) configuration shall not be permitted.
Two-sided billboards with an angle of deflection of no greater than
35 degrees shall be permitted.
(5) Billboard display areas may be illuminated subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Illuminating lights shall be arranged so as to direct
illumination only towards the billboard display area and to
reduce overglow and glare.
(b) Illuminating lights shall be arranged so that overglow and
glare shall not be visible from any residential properties at any
time of year.
§ 112-53.1 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-53.1
1:330
(c) Illuminating lights shall be shielded from view of all vehicular
traffic and shall be arranged so that there exists no glare to any
vehicular traffic.
(d) No billboard shall be illuminated by means of intermittent,
flashing, or blinking lights.
(e) Illuminating lights shall only be permitted to be arranged on
the base margin of any billboard display area.
(6) No billboard or billboard display area be painted with, or composed
of, any material of a fluorescent, phosphorescent, or holographic
material.
(7) No billboard shall display pornographic or sexually indecent and/or
obscene pictures, depictions, or images, whether such images are
actual pictures, illustrations, or computer-generated. For the
purposes of this section, pornographic or sexually indecent and/or
obscene pictures, depictions, or images shall include, but not be
limited to, images of unclothed humanoid genitalia, humanoid
breasts, humanoid buttocks, and other sexually explicit imagery
such as gratuitous humanoid breast cleavage. No billboard shall
display obscene, vulgar, or profane words or symbols, which shall
include, but not be limited to, words, phrases and symbols that are
commonly restricted from public broadcast pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
§ 1464.
(8) No billboard shall display and words or symbols that connotes
traffic control commands, including but not limited to "stop" or
"danger," or which may be confused as a sign displayed by a public
authority.
(9) No billboard shall be placed on any building.
(10)No billboard shall be erected so as to cause any visual obstruction
to traffic or impair traffic control devices.
D. Administration.
(1) Any application for the construction of a billboard shall require
compliance with the Road Side Sign Control and Outdoor
Advertising Act as found at N.J.S.A. 27:5-5, et seq., and such other
laws and applicable regulations related to the construction of
structures and/or billboards.
(2) Applications for the construction of a billboard shall comply with
the requirements contained within this chapter as to site plan and
conditional use review procedures.
§ 112-53.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-53.1
1:331

ARTICLE VI
Wireless Communications Antennas
[Amended 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 3845]
§ 112-54. Purposes.
It is the overall purpose of the provisions of this article to provide specific
zoning conditions, standards and limitations for the location, approval and
operation of antennas which are used for the transmission and reception
of wave frequencies for the purposes of any wireless communication (e.g.,
telephone, radio, internet, paging and/or television communication) within
the Township of Franklin, which recognize the need to safeguard the public
good and preserve the intent and the purposes of the Franklin Township
Master Plan and Zone Plan.
§ 112-55. Overall objective.
The overall objective of the provisions of this article is to enable the location
within the Township of Franklin of those antennas which are necessary to
provide adequate wireless communication services while, at the same time,
limiting the number of supporting towers to the fewest possible.
§ 112-56. Specific goals.
The specific goals shall be as follows:
A. To minimize the total number of wireless communication towers within
the Township of Franklin;
B. To limit the impact of wireless communications antennas, towers and
related facilities upon the residences and the streetscapes throughout
the Township of Franklin;
C. To safeguard the prevailing and historic character of development
throughout the Township of Franklin, with particular emphasis to
maintaining the prevailing character of the historic districts and sites
throughout the Township;
D. To encourage the location of antennas upon, or within, existing
structures, including existing wireless communication towers, existing
buildings, existing water towers or standpipes, and existing telephone
and electric poles and towers;
E. To encourage as many antennas as possible, of as many of the wireless
communication carriers as possible, to be co-located on the fewest
number of existing structures within the Township of Franklin;
F. To discourage the construction of new towers which do not have the
likelihood of being used by a number of wireless communication
carriers;
§ 112-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-56
1:333
§ 112-57. Exemptions of applicability.
§ 112-58. Review procedures.
G. To encourage the communication carriers to configure their facilities in
a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse impacts upon
affected properties, streetscapes and vistas through careful design,
siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
H. To formulate and maintain, for land use planning purposes, a complete
inventory of all wireless communications antennas, towers and related
facilities within the Township of Franklin, and others in the vicinity of
the Township, which are capable of providing service within the
Township;
I. To enhance the ability of the carriers of wireless communications
services who adhere to the letter and intent of these provisions to
provide such services quickly, effectively and efficiently; and
J. To comply with the mandate of the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c)(7), which preserves local government
authority to enforce zoning requirements which protect public safety,
public and private property and community aesthetics.
A. These article provisions shall not govern any tower, or the installation of
any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
only by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively to receive transmissions;
B. These provisions shall not govern any parabolic satellite antennas.
A. Applications requiring TRC review and approval.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter 112 to the contrary,
in the following instances the placement of wireless communication
antennas shall only require review and approval by the Technical
Review Committee (TRC) and shall be considered a permitted use
in the subject zoning district and therefore shall not require
conditional use approval, nor shall any variance be required in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d of the
Municipal Land Use Law: [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4010-13]
(a) Co-location of wireless communication antennas on any
wireless communication structure approved by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, including the placement
and/or replacement of antennas and/or wireless
communication equipment on such structure or site; or
(b) Placement or replacement of antennas and/or wireless
communication equipment on or within any of the structures
listed below:
§ 112-56 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-58
1:334
[1] 43 Old Georgetown Road, lattice tower.
[2] 281 Cedar Grove Lane, monopole tower.
[3] 275 Davidson Avenue, "The Tower" Building.
[4] Route 27 (near Finnegans), monopole tower.
[5] 78 Veronica Avenue, lattice tower.
[6] Hamilton and Veronica, monopole tower.
[7] 575 Easton Avenue, "Harrison Towers" Building.
[8] 8 Davidson Avenue, "Marriott" Building.
[9] Off Randolph Road, Elizabethtown water tank.
[10] Bennetts Lane (near Middlebush), power line towers.
[11] Grouser and Van Cleef, power line towers.
[12] Route 27 (near Cortelyous), power line towers.
[13] East Millstone (Grouser), power line towers.
(2) No construction permit shall be issued by the Township
Construction Official for such applications until he or she is in
receipt of plans approved by the TRC; and
(3) No proposed telecommunications antenna shall extend above an
existing building, existing water tower or existing high-tension
power line tower unless it is demonstrated by the applicant to be
the minimum height necessary for the proposed installation to
satisfactorily operate, unless the TRC is presented a satisfactory
structural report per § 112-59E, and, in the case of mounting on an
existing high-tension power line tower, unless satisfactory evidence
is provided from the owner of the transmission tower that it will not
allow "side mounting" for safety reasons. The maximum permitted
height increase in any such instance shall be 10 feet. In no case
shall such an application involve an increase in the height of an
existing telecommunication tower.
(4) The TRC may require modifications to any such application as
necessary, in its judgment, to ensure consistency with the goals and
requirements of this article. Such modifications may include but
are not necessarily limited to: alternative placement of antennas
and ancillary equipment; screening, camouflaging and/or
landscaping of antennas and ancillary equipment; and site-planrelated
matters regarding the installation of the proposed antennas
and ancillary equipment.
B. Applications requiring Township Council review and approval.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter 112 to the contrary, the
§ 112-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-58
1:335
placement of wireless communication support towers, antennas and
related equipment on lands owned by the Township of Franklin shall
require review and approval of the Township Council and shall be
considered a permitted use in the subject zoning district and therefore
shall not require conditional use approval; nor shall any variance be
required in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or 40:55D-70d of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
(1) The subject land owned by the Township of Franklin shall be
approved by the Franklin Township Council for the location of a
tower or antennas in consideration of existing site conditions and
surrounding land uses;
(2) If approved by the Franklin Township Council, the decided-upon
area shall be subject to a lease agreement between the applicant
and the Township of Franklin;
(3) The lease agreement shall have a detailed plan of the proposed
tower or antennas attached to the agreement, which detailed plan
shall be reviewed for the Township Council by the TRC. TRC review
shall take place after the bid has been awarded but prior to
finalization of the lease agreement. The TRC shall complete its
review of the plan within 45 days of its receipt.
(4) The detailed plan attached to the lease agreement shall have been
approved by the Township Council and shall include the
information required by § 112-59.
(5) The height of any proposed new supporting tower or antennas shall
not exceed 150 feet unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant,
to the satisfaction of the Township Council, that a higher height is
necessary for the proposed installation of the antenna(s) to
satisfactorily operate.
(6) The Township Council does not recommend Township-owned sites:
(a) In residential zones or areas;
(b) In historic districts;
(c) Along D&R Canal;
(d) On conservation or open space tracts.
(7) Replacement of existing wireless telecommunication antennas and/
or equipment antennas on wireless telecommunication facilities
located on Township-owned land shall be approved by the Township
Technical Review Committee, subject to the applicable
requirements of § 112-58A. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4010-13]
C. Applications requiring Planning Board review and approval. All other
applications for wireless communication towers or antennas, in the
§ 112-58 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-58
1:336
zones where permitted as conditional uses, shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Board. Such towers and antennas
shall be subject to the following conditional use standards:
(1) Excepting for any access driveway into the property, any required
landscaping and any underground utility lines reviewed and
approved by the Board as part of the site plan submission, a tower
shall be set back from all lot lines a distance equal to at least twice
the height of the tower. Ground-mounted equipment shall be
subject to the principal building setback of the zone, provided that,
in any case, no building, equipment, structure and/or land
disturbance shall be located within 500 feet of any historic district
or site as duly designated by Franklin Township, the State of New
Jersey and/or by the federal government.
(2) Roof-mounted antennas and related equipment on existing
structures shall be subject to the setback of the zone, plus the
height of the antennas if, and to the extent, they extend above the
permitted building height of the zone. Ground-mounted equipment
shall be subject to the principal building setback of the zone.
Antennas mounted to the side of a building shall only be mounted to
a building that meets the principal building setback of the zone and
shall only be flush-mounted.
(3) Any proposed tower shall be a monopole, except if the Board deems
an alternative design more appropriate in accordance with
§ 112-58C(6).
(4) No tower shall be located to be visible from any historic district or
site as duly designated by Franklin Township, the State of New
Jersey and/or by the federal government.
(5) To the extent possible, any new tower shall be located behind
existing buildings and/or natural topographic elevations in order to
screen the tower's base from being visible from adjacent properties
and from any street right-of-way.
(6) All new towers shall be camouflaged (e.g., housed in a silo, church
steeple, bell tower, etc., or made to look like a tree or an oversized
flagpole) as may be appropriate in the context of the visibility of the
tower from different vantage points throughout the Township and
the existing land uses and vegetation in the vicinity of the subject
site.
(7) The height of any proposed new supporting tower shall be the
minimum necessary to provide adequate service, but in no case
shall exceed 150 feet.
(8) All cables shall be installed within underground conduits.
§ 112-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-58
1:337
(9) No signage is permitted except the minimum necessary warning
and/or equipment information signs deemed necessary for safety
purposes and are specifically approved by the Planning Board.
(10)No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties. To the degree permissible by applicable FAA standards,
all lights shall be intermittent. The applicant shall provide to the
board of jurisdiction all applicable FAA standards regarding
lighting that may apply to a proposed tower.
(11) Individual cabinets for the required electronic equipment related
to the wireless communications antenna(s) shall be permitted in
accordance with the following criteria:
(a) All the required electronic equipment for all anticipated
communication carriers shall be housed within a building or
buildings not more than 20 feet in height and which shall be of
a design appropriate to the setting. Such building shall be no
more than 300 square feet in area per provider.
(b) No electronic equipment shall interfere with any public safety
communications.
(c) All of the electronic equipment shall be automated so that, to
the greatest extent possible, the need for on-site maintenance
and the commensurate need for vehicular trips to and from the
site will be minimized.
(d) The building may have one light at the entrance to the
building, provided that the light is attached to the building, is
focused downward and is switched so that the light is turned
on only when workers are at the building.
(12) Between the location of the tower and the building enclosing
related electronic equipment and any public street or residential
dwelling unit or residential zoning district within view of the tower,
and the building, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
(a) The landscaping shall consist of a combination of existing and/
or newly planted evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of
sufficient density to screen the view of the tower, particularly
at its base and to enhance the appearance of the building from
the surrounding residential properties and any public street;
(b) When required by the Board, the landscaping plan shall be
prepared by a certified landscape architect who may be
required to present testimony to the board of jurisdiction
§ 112-58 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-58
1:338
§ 112-59. Submission requirements.
Applications for wireless communication towers or antennas requiring
Township Council review and approval, applications requiring Planning
Board review and approval and applications submitted to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall submit all of the
information identified below in order to be deemed complete. Applications
requiring TRC review and approval shall submit the information specified
in § 112-59A, E, F, G and shall provide photo simulations from two vantage
points.
regarding the adequacy of the plan to screen the tower from
view and to enhance the appearance of the building; and
(c) Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least eight feet
high at time of planting, and any newly planted deciduous trees
shall be a minimum caliper of two inches at time of planting.
Such planting shall be spaced in a manner that provides solid
screening at the time of planting.
A. Site plan. In order to be declared complete, the application shall
include all of the applicable documentation and items of information
required for preliminary and final major site plans specified in this
chapter.
B. Comprehensive plan. In order to be declared complete, the application
shall include an overall comprehensive plan in accordance with the
following:
(1) In order to effectuate the purposes, objective and goals of this
article as noted hereinabove, any applicant to the Township of
Franklin for approval to erect a new wireless communication tower
or wireless communication antennas shall provide threshold
evidence that the proposed location of the proposed tower or
antennas has been planned to result in the fewest number of
wireless communication tower or antenna locations within the
Township of Franklin at the time full service is provided by the
applicant throughout the Township.
(2) Therefore, the applicant shall provide an overall comprehensive
plan indicating how it intends to provide full service throughout the
Township of Franklin and, to the greatest extent reasonably
possible, shall indicate how its plan specifically relates to and is
coordinated with the needs of all other providers of wireless
communication services within and around the Township. More
specifically, the overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the
following, and this information shall be provided at the time of the
initial submission of the application in order for the application to
be deemed complete and be scheduled for a public hearing:
§ 112-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-59
1:339
(a) The mapped location and written description of all existing and
approved supporting towers and wireless communication
antennas within one mile of the subject site, both within and
outside of Franklin Township;
(b) The mapped location and written description of all existing or
approved water towers and existing high-tension power line
towers within one mile of the subject site, both within and
outside of Franklin Township;
(c) Why the proposed antennas could not be located on any
existing structures within one mile of the subject site;
(d) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the anticipated need for additional
antennas and supporting structures within and near the
Township of Franklin by the applicant and by other providers of
wireless communication services within the Township;
(e) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the objective of collocating the antennas
of many different providers of wireless communication services
on a single supporting structure; and
(f) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the overall objective of providing full
wireless communication services within the Township of
Franklin while, at the same time, limiting the number of towers
to the fewest possible, including alternate technologies which
do not require the use of towers or require towers of a lesser
height.
C. Conditional use standards conformance. In order to be declared
complete, the initially submitted site plan shall indicate conformance
with each of the conditional use standards enumerated in § 112-58C
hereinabove, and any deviation from any of the standards shall be
addressed in writing by the applicant at the time the application is first
submitted.
D. Visual impact assessment. During the public hearing process, the Board
may require the applicant to schedule the time for a crane or balloon
test in order to provide the members of the board of jurisdiction and the
general public the opportunity to view a crane or balloon at the location
and height of the proposed tower. A visual impact analysis shall be
prepared by the applicant, submitted prior to being deemed complete,
and presented to the board of jurisdiction, graphically simulating the
appearance of the proposed tower, with at least three antenna arrays
attached thereto and from at least five locations selected in
consultation with the Director of Planning around and within one mile
of any proposed tower where the tower will be most visible.
§ 112-59 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-59
1:340
E. Structural integrity. Documentation by a qualified expert that the
proposed installation will have sufficient structural integrity to support
the proposed antennas and the anticipated future co-located antennas
and that the structural standards developed for antennas by the
Electronic Industries Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunication
Industry Association (TIA) have been met;
F. Co-location. A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is
reviewed and approved by the Board Attorney, indicating that the
applicant will share the use of any tower with other approved wireless
communication services at reasonable rates which shall be
economically viable; and
G. Removal guarantee. The applicant (and the landowner in the instance
of a leased property) shall provide a performance bond and/or other
assurances satisfactory to the board of jurisdiction, in a form approved
by the Township Attorney, that will provide for the removal of the
antennas, any supporting tower, the electric equipment cabinets, any
building enclosing the electronic equipment cabinets, and all other
related improvements, at no cost to the Township, when the antennas
are no longer operative. Any wireless communication antenna facility
not used for its intended and approved purpose for a period of six
months shall be considered no longer operative and shall be removed
by the responsible party within 60 days thereof.
H. Additional expert review. In addition to its normal professional staff,
given the technical and specialized nature of the testimony by the
applicant's radio frequency expert(s), the board of jurisdiction may hire
its own radio frequency expert to review and comment upon the
testimony presented by the applicant. Additionally, based upon other
testimony presented by the applicant, the board of jurisdiction may hire
other experts with specialized areas of expertise if deemed necessary.
§ 112-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-59
1:341

ARTICLE VII
Planned Residential Community (PRC)
[Amended 6-29-2006 by Ord. No. 3618; 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3891]
§ 112-60. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the PRC District is to enable the development
of an inclusionary development in accordance with a comprehensive site
development plan approved by the Planning Board of the Township. Such
development is intended to meet a portion of the Township's affordable
housing obligation.
§ 112-61. Permitted uses.
§ 112-62. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses may include:
§ 112-63. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Independent senior living facilities for senior citizens who are capable
of living independently of supportive services to assist them with the
activities of daily living;
B. Assisted living facilities for senior citizens who are able to live
independently in apartment-style units but require some assistance
with the activities of daily living;
C. Nursing homes for persons who are not able to live independently in
apartment-style units and who require a constant level of medical and
custodial care;
D. Continuum of care medical offices;
E. Adult day care; and
F. Apartment buildings.
A. Housing units for caretaker, facility director or similar on-site
employee(s), which units shall be included in calculations of density.
B. Security booths.
C. Maintenance storage buildings.
D. Recycling areas.
E. Recreational areas.
F. Other uses customary and incidental to the principal permitted use.
§ 112-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-63
1:343
ADULT DAY CARE — The provision of care and supervision, monitoring of
general health, social interaction and peer contact in a structured program
for impaired or socially isolated adult individuals, who may live on or off
site, and who cannot be left alone during the day, but who do not require
twenty-four-hour institutional nursing care.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including units that are located one over another.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY —
CONTINUUM OF CARE MEDICAL OFFICES — A building or portion of a
building used as a place of business of a person, corporation, firm or public
agency for professional medical services or executive services related to
the provision of professional medical services, which may be provided on
sites where assisted living facilities or senior independent living facilities
are provided.
A facility which is licensed by the New Jersey State Department of
Health and has obtained an approved application for a certificate of
need from the Department to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are
available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to
the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance. A lockable door may be omitted for special needs units, such
as those housing patients with Alzheimer's disease or similar afflictions
and for which immediate staff access is necessary for the safety of
the resident. A coordinated array of supportive personal and health
services available 24 hours a day are usually provided. (Source: N.J.A.C.
8:36-1.3)
A.
Basic services to be provided in an assisted living facility include:
(1) Assistance with eating, bathing and dressing.
(2) Assistance with arranging transportation.
(3) Assistance with personal and household chores.
(4) Housekeeping and linen service.
(5) Availability of three meals per day in a congregate setting.
(6) Organized social and recreational activities.
(7) Medication reminders and supervision.
(8) Monitoring of nutrition and health.
(9) Protective supervision.
(10)Twenty-four-hour response to emergency needs of the resident.
(11)Services coordination and management.
B.
§ 112-63 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-63
1:344
INDEPENDENT SENIOR LIVING FACILITY — An apartment-style facility
in which residency is age-restricted to households in which the head of
household or their spouse is age 55 years or older, except that due to death,
a remaining spouse less than 55 years of age shall be permitted to continue
to reside and further provided that no person under 19 years of age shall
reside in any dwelling unit for more than 90 days in any calendar year.
Independent senior living facilities may also contain public areas to provide
activities for residents, including a dining room, community/multipurpose
rooms, chapel and recreational areas.
NURSING HOME — As defined in § 112-4.
§ 112-64. Development requirements.
Development within this zone shall be subject to the following conditions
and as permitted by the Planning Board in accordance with the following
standards and site plan review:
A. A statement is submitted setting forth in full detail all particulars on the
building use.
B. The lot or tract on which the development facility is situated must front
on a major or minor road as designated on the circulation element on
the Master Plan of the Township of Franklin.
C. The development shall be serviced by water and sewer utilities
maintained and operated by a public utility franchised with the
Township of Franklin or by the Township of Franklin.
D. No assisted living or nursing home facility shall be operated in the
Township of Franklin in this zone unless duly licensed and approved by
the Department of Health in the State of New Jersey.
E. There must be an adequate driveway for unobstructed ambulance
entrance to an exit in an assisted living, independent senior living
facility, adult day care or nursing home building. Said driveway shall be
such that ambulances can enter and leave the premises without danger
of being blocked by other traffic or parked vehicles and with sufficient
room for turning, loading and unloading said ambulances. The
provisions of Chapter 248 of the Township Code are applicable.
F. A safe and convenient system of drives, walkways, access areas and
parking facilities must be provided for the employees, doctors,
management, visitors, ambulances, delivery vehicles and fire, police or
other emergency vehicles.
G. There shall be adequate outside lighting to provide safety for all
persons at all times, and said lighting shall be directed and shielded so
as to cause minimum disturbance to adjoining properties.
H. The development shall be built in accordance with the Building Codes
of the State of New Jersey and the Township Fire Code.
§ 112-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-64
1:345
I. The development designs shall be functional and shall adequately
provide for the health, welfare and safety of the patients, employees,
visitors and general public.
J. The lot or tract upon which the development is proposed, and the
development, shall conform to the following standards and
requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40 acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
(3) Maximum height:
(a) Assisted living facility:
[1] Pitched roof: three stories or 55 feet to the highest ridge
beam of a pitched roof.
[2] Flat roof: four stories or 45 feet to the highest flat roof.
(b) Independent senior living facility/non-age-restricted apartment
buildings:
[1] Pitched roof: three stories or 55 feet to the highest ridge
beam of a pitched roof.
[2] Flat roof: five stories or 52 feet to the highest flat roof.
(c) Continuum of care medical offices: two stories or 42 feet to the
highest ridge beam of a pitched roof.
(d) Nursing home: two stories or 30 feet, whichever is less.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 35%.
(5) Minimum setbacks for all buildings exclusive of entrance
gatehouse:
(a) Front yard: 100 feet.
(b) Side and rear yards:
[1] From residential zone and/or single-family or multifamily
residence property line: 100 feet.
[2] From nonresidential zone property line: 50 feet.
(c) A minimum of 50 feet of the setback area (except adjacent to a
nonresidential zone property line) shall be considered a buffer
strip. Driveways may only cross the buffer strip. Said buffer
shall be kept in its natural state where wooded and, when
natural vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to supplement the existing
vegetation.
§ 112-64 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-64
1:346
(6) Off-street parking: no parking or standing shall be permitted in the
required front yard except for emergency vehicles, dropoff/pickup
areas and visitor parking spaces.
(a) Assisted living facilities: in accordance with the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) Independent senior living facilities and non-age-restricted
apartment buildings: in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(c) Continuum of care medical offices: same as professional
offices.
(d) Nursing homes: as defined in § 112-45M.
(e) Minimum parking setbacks:
[1] From building: 10 feet.
[2] From single-family, multifamily residential zone and/or
single-family or multifamily residence property line: 50
feet.
[3] From nonresidential zone property line: five feet.
K. The permanent residents of the independent senior living units shall be
restricted to those 55 years of age or older; however, nothing herein
shall prohibit a spouse from residing in the facility who is under the age
of 55.
L. Support facilities, functions and services may be for the use and benefit
of the resident users of the facility, their guests and adult day-care
users.
M. The minimum size of a single-occupant independent senior living
residential unit, including bathroom, and of a double-occupant unit
shall be governed by the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
N. Health care and support services, functions and facilities shall include
the following at a minimum:
(1) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities;
(2) Physical therapy facilities;
(3) Entertainment facilities;
(4) Libraries;
(5) Dining facilities and food preparation facilities;
(6) Housekeeping and laundry services;
§ 112-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-64
1:347
(7) Emergency medical services and private emergency transportation
facilities; and
(8) Twenty-four-hour monitored security at all times to respond to and
handle emergency situations and inquiries.
O. The facilities and site shall conform to all design and other standards
set forth for the district in which situated unless modified herein.
P. Maximum number of units: 384.
Q. Maximum density: 10 units an acre.
R. Developer's agreement. The developer and the municipality shall enter
into an agreement at final plan approval pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39, setting forth the implementation requirements for
the development. The substance of the developer's agreement shall be
consistent with the laws of the State of New Jersey, this Chapter 112
and the conditions and standards applicable to the development. The
developer's agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township
Attorney and Township Council and shall include, but may not be
limited to, provisions relating to the following:
(1) The disposition of lands required to be set aside for public,
semipublic and/or open space and outdoor recreation uses.
(2) The disposition of lands adjacent to the development facility under
the control of either the applicant or the property owner to assure
compatibility with the activities of the development.
(3) The phasing, financing and extent of off-tract traffic improvements.
(4) Public approvals and municipal and developer actions required to
implement public infrastructure improvements, such as public
sewers and stormwater control.
(5) The developer's obligation to maintain the project and comply with
site plan approval conditions dealing with signage, building
exteriors, landscaping, drainage, security, buffer areas and open
spaces, trash removal and internal roadways.
(6) Cleanup of any environmentally contaminated area. The
municipality shall not have any responsibility for Superfund
cleanup or site remediation.
(7) Consideration of municipal impacts.
(8) Agreements to support fire and rescue squads.
(9) Open space area. Thirty percent of the gross acreage shall be open
space area, which areas shall not include paved roadways or
parking areas.
§ 112-64 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-64
1:348
(10) Buffer area. A buffer area of 50 feet in width shall be provided
along the tract boundary. Earth berms, landscaping and/or
ornamental fencing shall be provided within the required buffer
areas.
(11) Requirements pertaining to the provision of very-low-, low-, and
moderate- income housing.
S. Provision of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing; mandatory
set-aside requirements. The developer shall provide or cause others to
provide, on-site, very-low-, low- and moderate-income dwelling units
totaling at least 15% of the development (at least 58 units for a
development of 384 units) of which no less than 35 of the units shall be
affordable to very-low-income households as defined in the New Jersey
Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.). The developer shall
abide by all applicable requirements of the Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) including the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC) including but not limited to pricing, bedroom mix, low-
/moderate-income split, affirmative marketing, and assignment of a
COAH-qualified administrative agent. The developer shall be solely
responsible for all payments required for the services of the
administrative agent. The administrative agent shall be COAHqualified,
shall be approved by the Township, and shall perform all
duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in the
COAH Rules and UHAC, including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14,
26.16 and 26.18 thereof, which duties and responsibilities include, but
are not limited to, affordability controls; affirmative marketing;
household certification; communication and education; and
enforcement.
§ 112-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-64
1:349

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 112-65. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such use or building does not conform to the regulation
specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or building is
located; provided, however, that:
§ 112-66. Abandonment. [Amended 1-23-2007 by Ord. No. 3652]
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when: 1) some overt
act or failure to act which carries a sufficient implication that the owner
neither claims nor retains any interest in the subject matter of the
abandonment; and 2) an intention to abandon. Such use shall not thereafter
by reinstated, and the structure shall not be reoccupied except in
conformance with this chapter.
§ 112-67. Restoration. [Amended 11-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3638]
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased
except where such enlargement, extension or increase complies with all
provisions of this chapter and the only violation of this chapter arises
from such nonconformity which is not in any manner affected by such
proposed enlargement, extension or increase.
C. No nonconforming use may be expanded.
A. If any nonconforming building, other than an existing one-family or twofamily
detached dwelling or a service station located in a R-40, RR3 or
RR5 Zone, shall be destroyed by reason of windstorm, fire, explosion or
other act of God or the public enemy, then such destruction shall be
deemed complete destruction, and the structure may not be rebuilt,
restored or repaired except in conformity with the regulations of this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition any walk, floor or roof which has been
declared unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Any nonconforming single-family detached one- or two-family detached
dwelling or a service station located in a R-40, RR3 or RR5 Zone may be
rebuilt or restored, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The dwelling or service station is reconstructed within one year of
the destruction;
(2) The footprint and height remain unchanged or smaller than the
original structure;
§ 112-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-67
1:351
(3) The building setbacks remain unchanged or greater than the
original structure.
(a) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to safe condition any walk, floor or roof which has
been declared unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Reversion. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a
conforming use, be changed back again into a nonconforming use.
(5) Alterations. A nonconforming building may be altered but not
enlarged or extended during its life to an extent not exceeding in
aggregate 50% of the recorded true value of the building as
appraised in the records of the Tax Assessor unless said building is
changed to a building conforming to the requirements of this
chapter.
(6) Construction approved prior to ordinance. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been
diligently prosecuted within three months of the date of such
permit, and the ground-story framework of which, including the
second tier of beams, shall have been completed within six months
of the date of the permit, and which entire building shall be
completed according to such plans as filed within one year from the
date of this chapter.
(7) District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another
district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall
also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or created
thereby.
(8) Existing undersized lots.
(a) Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that
prescribed for a lot in the zone in which such lot is located,
which lot was under one ownership on or before November 13,
1958, and the owner thereof owns no adjoining vacant land
with continuous frontage may be used as a lot for the purpose
permitted in the zone, provided that the lot in question has an
area and frontage of not less than 90% of that prescribed in
§ 112-13 in Schedule 2, Lot and Yard Requirements, and
complies with all other regulations prescribed for the zone.
(b) If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots
with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record as
of November 13, 1958, and if all or part of the lots do not meet
the requirements for lot frontage and area as established by
this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel, and no portion thereof shall be used or sold
§ 112-67 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-67
1:352
which does not meet lot frontage and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel
be made which leaves remaining any lot with frontage or area
below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(9) Restoration of existing one- and two-family detached dwellings in
nonresidential zones.
(10) Certification of preexisting nonconforming use.
(a) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any
other person interested in any land upon which a
nonconforming use or structure exists may apply in writing for
the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or structure
existed before the adoption of this chapter which rendered the
use or structure nonconforming.
(b) For purposes of this section, the date of the adoption of the
first Zoning Ordinance in Franklin Township shall be October
30, 1958.
(c) The applicant shall have the burden of proof.
(d) Application pursuant hereto may be made to the
Administrative Officer within one year of the adoption of the
ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming
or at any time to the Board of Adjustment.
(e) Denial by the administrative officer shall be appealable to the
Board of Adjustment.
§ 112-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-67
1:353

ARTICLE IX
Flag Lots
§ 112-68. Purpose.
To permit the subdivision of land which is:
§ 112-69. Intent.
The intent of this article shall be:
§ 112-70. Regulations.
§ 112-71. Definitions.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FLAG LOTS — A lot or parcel created by subdivision which:
A. Located in the lower density residential zones;
B. Has an area more than 2 1/2 times the minimum required by the zone;
and
C. Has relatively narrow frontage in relation to depth.
A. To allow only one flag lot per subdivision;
B. To prevent the continuous subdivision of the original parcel of land into
flag lots, thereby avoiding sound planning principles and the
development of properly engineered transportation routes for access
and emergency response; and
C. To prevent the creation of long narrow lots with the intent of further
subdivision into flag lots.
A. Flag lots shall be a subdivision option in the R-40, RR3, RR5, and A
Districts. The development of one flag lot behind another flag lot is
prohibited. No more than one flag lot may be assigned to a flagpole.
B. Before any subdivision option for a flag lot development is to be
granted, the Planning Board shall determine that:
(1) Flag lot development will not significantly reduce property values
in the neighborhood. In determining whether property values will
be significantly reduced, the Planning Board will consider the size
of the nearby lots in comparison with the proposed flag lot.
(2) The terrain or topography of the area or the shape of the lot in
which the flag lot is proposed is such that subdivision of said lot in
accordance with this chapter is not feasible.
A. Does not have the required length of frontage on a public street;
§ 112-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-71
1:355
FLAG LOT DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision of land for the creation of not
more than one flag lot. The subdivision may be deemed to be either a major
or minor subdivision as determined by ordinance.
FLAGPOLE — A narrow strip or projection of land extending from the public
right-of-way to the buildable portion of a flag lot.
FRONTING LOT — That remnant portion of the original lot that was subject
to a flag lot subdivision, which fronts on a public street.
§ 112-72. Standards.
B. Is connected to a public street by means of a flagpole; and
Is located behind a lot or portion of a lot which has frontage on a public
street.
C.
A. Flag lot.
(1) The minimum area of the flag lot to be created shall be 1.5 times
greater than that required in the zone. The area of the flagpole
shall not be included in calculating the area of the flag lot.
(2) The minimum building setbacks shall be equal to the minimum
front yard setback of the zone and shall be observed from all
property lines.
(3) A flag lot subdivision shall not be approved which would create a
flagpole that would be generally parallel to a public or private road
unless the flagpole is separated from either road by not less than
1.5 times the minimum lot frontage of the zone.
B. Fronting lots. The original lot shall conform in all respects to the
frontage standards of the zone. After subtracting the frontage for the
flagpole, the fronting lot shall be no less than the minimum frontage
minus 30 feet.
C. Flagpole.
(1) The minimum width shall be 30 feet. The maximum length of the
flagpole from the public street to the buildable portion of the flag
lot shall not exceed two times the minimum lot frontage of the zone.
(2) The flagpole shall not cross a live stream, stream bed, ravine,
wetlands or similar topographic features without provision of an
adequate structure approved by the Township Engineer or
appropriate outside agencies.
(3) The flagpole shall lie along a property line which is significantly
perpendicular to the public street. In no instance will one flagpole
be adjacent to another flagpole.
(4) Parking of vehicles shall be prohibited in any portion of the
flagpole.
§ 112-71 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-72
1:356
§ 112-73. Prohibitions.
(5) The flagpole may be used to serve as an access drive for the
fronting lot resulting from the flag lot development. In such
instance, an access easement/maintenance agreement is required.
D. Access driveway.
(1) The access drive shall be contained within the flagpole.
(2) The access drive shall have a minimum width of 12 feet.
(3) The access drive shall be paved from the front yard setback of the
zone to the edge of the pavement in the public right-of-way.
(4) As a minimum, the remainder of the access drive shall be surfaced
with three-fourths-inch quarry processed stone to a minimum
depth of six inches compacted over a firm subbase.
(5) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a tracking pad of stone
1 1/2 inches in diameter shall be emplaced from the public street
for a distance of 50 feet.
(6) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the access drive
shall be constructed to the point necessary to provide access to the
affected lot.
(7) A visual buffer beginning at the front yard setback line from the
public right-of-way extending to the buildable portion of the flag lot
shall be planted on the side of the access drive nearest the property
line of the adjacent lot which was not the subject of the flag lot
development. The planting shall consist of evergreen material
capable of sustaining a visual barrier. Plants shall be a minimum of
four to five feet in height at the time of installation, planted three
feet on center.
A. No lot created as a result of a flag lot subdivision shall be further
subdivided.
B. No lot created as a result of a subdivision subsequent to the passage of
this chapter shall be further subdivided under the flag lot development
provisions.
§ 112-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-73
1:357

ARTICLE X
Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
§ 112-74. Mandatory set-aside requirements.
As required in §§ 112-39 and 112-49, a developer shall provide or cause
others to provide low-income dwelling units which shall be not less than
5% of the total number of dwelling units specified in the development plan.
The developer shall also provide the number of moderate-income dwelling
units which, when added to the number of low-income dwelling units, shall
not be less than 15% of the total number of dwelling units specified in the
development plan.
§ 112-75. Phased development requirements.
Low- and moderate-income housing developers must demonstrate to the
Planning Board that their development shall be timed and phased in
accordance with regulations adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing
as same may be amended from time to time.
§ 112-76. Affordability controls.
In order to ensure that low- and moderate-income housing units will remain
economically feasible upon resale to persons within the applicable income
range developers shall be required to comply with all provisions of
regulations adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing as same may be
amended from time to time.
§ 112-77. Density bonus.
A density bonus of two units per gross residential acre will be given to the
developer who provides low- and moderate-income dwelling units equal to
20% or more of the total number of dwelling units in a development plan
for garden apartment development, or residential cluster development or
townhouse development pursuant to §§ 112-39 and 112-49, respectively.
§ 112-78. Number of bedrooms.
The average number of bedrooms proposed for low- and moderate-income
dwelling units shall comply with regulations adopted by the Council on
Affordable Housing as same may be amended from time to time.
§ 112-79. Compliance with state regulations required.
A. In order to provide low- and moderate-income dwelling units, all
applicants for development shall make proposals which comply with
regulations adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing as same may
be amended from time to time.
§ 112-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-79
1:359
§ 112-80. Administration of affordability controls.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.3, the Township of Franklin
shall enter into a contract with the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency or its designee in order to provide an appropriate
administrative mechanism or entity responsible for assuring that low- and
moderate-income housing units remain affordable to low- and moderateincome
households.
B. All plans for providing low- and moderate-income housing units shall
comply with regulations promulgated by the Council on Affordable
Housing as same may be amended from time to time.
§ 112-79 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-80
1:360
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking and Loading76
§ 112-81. Issuance of building and occupancy permits contingent
upon compliance. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4009-13]
Off-street parking, unloading and service requirements of this article shall
apply and govern in all present and future zoning districts. Except as
provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be
approved unless there is included with the plan for such building,
improvement or use a plot plan showing the required space reserved for
off-street parking, unloading and service purposes. An occupancy permit
shall not be given unless the required off-street parking, unloading and
service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on
the approved plan. For residential properties, where weather conditions
preclude paving, a certificate of occupancy may be issued on the condition
that the applicant will complete the required paving and site improvements
within a specified period of time to be stated on the certificate of occupancy,
and further provided that in no event shall such period of time be more than
six months. Bonding will be required to ensure completion, and the amount
shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 112-82. Off-street parking and loading required.
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be designed,
created, altered, used or occupied unless off-street parking and loading
facilities are provided as required by this article; provided, however, that
any use in operation on the effective date of these regulations is not affected
by the provisions of this article until such time as the existing gross floor
area is increased.
§ 112-83. Design standards.
Each off-street parking space shall measure nine feet in width by 18 feet
in length. Parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be in accordance
with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) or the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable.
§ 112-84. Provision for proper drainage, maintenance and
construction.
All off-street parking, off-street loading, and service facilities shall be so
drained as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets
and shall be constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant
to erosion. Such drainage and materials shall be installed as required by the
Township design standards. All such areas shall be at all times maintained
at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly and dust-free
condition.
76.Editor's Note: See Schedule 4, Parking Requirements, attached to this chapter.
§ 112-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-85
1:361
§ 112-85. Separation from walkways and streets.
All off-street parking, off-street loading and service areas shall be separated
from walkways, sidewalks, streets or alleys by curbing or other protective
devices in accordance with Township design standards.
§ 112-86. Private walks adjacent to business buildings.
A private walk, if provided, adjacent to a building shall not be less than four
feet in width.
§ 112-87. Screen required when adjoining property is residential.
Where off-street parking, loading or service areas are to be located closer
than 50 feet to a lot in any residential zoning district or to any lot upon
which there exists a dwelling as a permitted use under these regulations,
and where such parking, loading or service areas are not entirely screened
visually from such lot by an intervening building or structure, there shall be
provided along the lot line a continuous planting screen at least six feet in
height. No such screen shall extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than
the established building line of the adjoining residential lot, and no screen
shall be required along the line of a public street except for local streets
proximate to the HBD.
§ 112-88. Interior driveways. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4009-13]
Interior driveways shall be at least 26 feet wide where used with ninetydegree
angle parking and at least 18 feet wide where used with sixtydegree
or forty-five-degree parking. In the HBD District, interior driveways
widths may be reduced to 24 feet wide where used with ninety-degree angle
parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least
fifteen feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 22 feet wide for
two-way traffic movement.
§ 112-89. Connection to public right-of-way. [Amended 3-27-2013
by Ord. No. 4009-13]
A. Each off-street parking, loading or service area shall be connected to a
public street by means of a driveway constructed in accordance with
Township design standards. Such parking, loading or service areas in
the HBD may be connected to a public street through an adjacent
property, provided that the adjacent property is also in the HBD.
B. No access driveway or private street that is accessory to a business or
industrial use shall be established in any residence zone.
C. The driveway shall include a paved or concrete apron which extends
from the roadway/curb line to the right-of-way line. In the case of
residential driveways, this requirement shall be applied at the time of
§ 112-85 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-89
1:362
§ 112-90. Size and grading of driveways. [Amended 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3708; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4009-13]
§ 112-91. Location of driveways.
§ 112-92. Off-street parking space within buildings.
Garage space or space within buildings, basements or on the roofs of
buildings may be used to meet the off-street parking requirements of this
chapter, provided that such space is designated to serve as off-street
parking space.
§ 112-93. Pavement markings and signs. [Amended 3-27-2013 by
Ord. No. 4009-13]
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked with white striping
(blue striping for handicapped parking spaces), and pavement directional
arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional
arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their
maximum efficiency.
§ 112-94. Lighting or night use.
Adequate lighting shall be provided if the off-street parking facilities abut
residential land. The lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to
reflect or cause glare on the abutting residential land in accordance with
provisions of §§ 112-120 and 112-184 of this chapter.
applications for new driveways or for applications involving driveway
modifications in or near the right-of-way.
D. Unless otherwise approved by the Township Engineer, driveway
approaches to the public right-of-way must be constructed
perpendicular to the roadway/curb line.
A. A driveway, exclusive of curb return radii, shall be not less than 12 feet
in width. The maximum width of a driveway, exclusive of curb return
radii, shall not exceed 36 feet except for unusual circumstances.
B. The maximum permissible grade shall not exceed 15%. Gradients up to
20% may be allowed with extenuating circumstances as determined by
the Township Engineer.
A. At the intersection of streets in residential zones, no driveway shall be
located closer than 25 feet to the intersection of two street lines. At the
intersection of streets in all other zones, no driveway shall be located
closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two street lines.
B. No driveway entrance shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other
driveway entrance located on the same lot.
§ 112-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-95
1:363
§ 112-95. Reduction in size prohibited.
No off-street parking area shall be reduced in size or encroached upon by
buildings, vehicle storage, loading or unloading, or any other use, where
such reduction or encroachment will reduce the off-street parking and
loading space below that required by this chapter. For permitted parking
area reductions in the HBD, see § 112-105.
§ 112-96. Joint parking facilities.
The off-street parking requirements for two or more neighboring uses of the
same or different types, may be satisfied by the allocation of the required
number of spaces for each use in a common parking facility, provided that
the number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of individual
requirements; and provided further that there be compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. For permitted parking area reductions in the
HBD, see § 112-105.
§ 112-97. Location of parking spaces in relation to main building.
[Amended 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3708]
Off-street parking areas shall be located on the same lot as the main
building or principal use to be served.
§ 112-98. Sharing of parking facilities.
Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing
the required facilities for any other use, except that 1/2 of the off-street
parking space required by any use whose peak attendance will be at night
or on Sundays (such as but not limited to churches, theaters and assembly
halls) may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays.
For permitted parking area reductions in the HBD, see § 112-105.
§ 112-99. Requirements for combined uses.
The number of off-street parking spaces required by land or buildings used
for two or more purposes shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses.
§ 112-100. Computing number of employees.
For the purpose of this article, the number of employees shall be computed
on the basis of the average number of persons to be employed on the
maximum work shift, taking into consideration day, night and seasonal
variations.
§ 112-101. Fractional spaces required.
When units of measurement determining the number of required off-street
parking and off-street loading spaces result in the requirement of a
fractional space, such fraction shall be disregarded.
§ 112-95 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-102
1:364
§ 112-102. Off-street parking and loading space within required
setback.
Off-street parking areas and loading spaces shall be located subject to the
following provisions:
A. R-40: No parking area for use by other than residents and guests of the
premises shall be located in the required front yard area nor closer than
10 feet to a side or rear property line.
B. R-20 and R-15: No parking area for use by other than residents and
guests of the premises shall be located in the required front yard area
nor closer than five feet to a side or rear property line.
C. C-R: No parking area for uses other than single-family and two-family
dwellings shall be located in the required front yard area nor closer
than 15 feet to a side or rear property line, and further that no parking
area may be located in a required buffer area.
D. G-B and N-B: No parking area shall be located closer than five feet to a
front property line nor closer than three feet to a side or rear property
line, and further that no parking area may be located in a required
buffer area.
E. OP: No parking area shall be located closer than 25 feet to the front
property line nor closer than 10 feet to a rear property line nor closer
than five feet to a side property line, and further no parking area may
be located in a required buffer area.
F. ROL: No parking area shall be located closer than 50 feet to a front
property line nor closer than 100 feet to a side property line.
G. C-B and M-1: No parking area shall be located in the required front yard
area nor closer than 50 feet from a residence zone nor closer than five
feet from a side or rear property line. Ingress and egress shall be
provided by not more than two driveways, each not less than 20 feet nor
more than 36 feet in width.
H. M-2: No parking area shall be located in the required front yard area
nor closer than 25 feet from a residence zone nor closer than five feet
from a side or rear property line. Ingress and egress shall be provided
by not more than two driveways, each not less than 20 feet nor more
than 36 feet in width.
I. No required off-street loading space, including maneuvering area for
such off-street loading space shall be established in the area between
the front building setback line and the street right-of-way line in any
industrial district unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
J. HBD: No parking shall be located in any required setback area. No
parking area shall be permitted between front building line and the
front yard line.
§ 112-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-103
1:365
§ 112-103. Other uses of off-street parking spaces prohibited.
No off-street parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair,
dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies.
§ 112-104. Size of loading berth.
§ 112-105. Parking in HBD District. [Amended 8-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 3708; 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 4115-15]
A. A loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide with at least 15 feet
overhead clearance. The length of the loading berth shall be at least 48
feet or shall be a length such that the horizontal distance from the front
of a dock for back-in parking to the limiting boundary of the loading and
unloading area shall not be less than twice the overall length of the
longest vehicle expected to use the facility.
B. A loading space need not be necessarily a full berth but shall have a
minimum plan dimension of at least 10 feet overhead clearance. The
Township Engineer shall determine the sufficiency of the off-street
loading operation required by the given use, but in no case shall the use
of such space hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians
over a street, sidewalk or alley.
A. Parking requirements.
(1) Commercial and other nonresidential uses in the HBD shall provide
a minimum of three parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
area.
(2) Residential portions of mixed-use buildings shall provide parking in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvements Standards
(RSIS). The approving board may reduce the parking requirements
for one-bedroom and/or two-bedroom units below that required by
RSIS, provided the applicant proves, to the satisfaction of the
board, that a lower parking ratio is warranted based upon the
expected occupancy of the development and/or other relevant
factors. The approving board may place conditions on the approval
of the development it deems necessary to ensure that the factors
presented in support of the lower parking ratio remain in place
(e.g., deed restriction on occupancy).
(3) Off-street parking shall not exceed minimum requirements by more
than 20%.
B. Parking location.
(1) Off-street parking spaces for residential uses and handicap
accessible spaces shall be located on the same lot as the main
building to be served.
§ 112-103 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-105
1:366
(2) Parking for commercial and other nonresidential uses shall be
provided by one of the following means:
(a) Providing the required spaces on site.
(b) Providing the required spaces on other properties within 1,500
feet walking distance to the site.
(c) For every space not provided by alternatives in Subsection
B(2)(a) and/or (b) above, an in-lieu contribution shall be made
to a capital improvement fund dedicated by the Township for
the purpose of constructing on-street and off-street public
parking facilities to serve the needs of the HBD. The amount of
the contributions shall be equivalent to the costs of
constructing the parking spaces on site, as calculated by the
Township Engineer.
§ 112-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-105
1:367

ARTICLE XII
Sign Regulations
[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591; 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 3629;
11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 3854]
§ 112-106. Statement of purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to create the legal framework by which
the Township of Franklin may regulate signs. More specifically, these
regulations are intended to:
§ 112-107. Permit procedure; fee; administration.
A. Promote signs which are:
(1) Orderly, readable and appropriate to the activity to which they
pertain (time, place and manner).
(2) Compatible with surroundings.
(3) Expressive of the identity of individuals or proprietors.
(4) Complementary to the character of the community.
(5) Nondistracting to motorists so as not to contribute to traffic
accidents.
B. Discourage and render unlawful signs which:
(1) Represent an overloaded, overstated system of graphics that
defeats its communicative purpose.
(2) Contribute to visual pollution and clutter.
(3) Are in disrepair or of faulty construction, thereby threatening the
safety and welfare of persons and property.
(4) Advertise, identify or promote an activity no longer in existence or
operation.
C. Otherwise control the size, location, character, and pertinent features
of all signs in order to meet the expressed purposes stated above.
A. Permit application. To obtain a sign permit, a zoning permit application
shall be filed. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
B. Procedural requirements. Each application shall be accompanied by
plans showing the exact location of the proposed sign, the sign size and
character, the method of illumination, if any, and the color and materials
to be used. In the case of projecting signs, each application shall show
the proposed method of fastening such sign to the building, the vertical
distance between such sign and the curb and the distance between the
sign and the right-of-way.
§ 112-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-107
1:369
§ 112-108. Substandard signs. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No.
3959]
C. Permit fee. Before the issuance of any sign permit required by this
chapter, the Department of Planning and Zoning shall collect a fee in
accordance with Township ordinance. After a permit period expires, any
renewal of said permit shall constitute a new permit subject to the
permit fee. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
D. Administration. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit only for the
erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of this
article.
E. Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or alter any
sign or other advertising structure as defined in this chapter without
first obtaining a permit as further required in Subsection A of this
section and Chapter 146, Construction Codes, Uniform.
A. Signs may be removed by the Township for the following reasons:
(1) Signs unsafe by virtue of construction.
(a) Whenever a sign becomes dilapidated, structurally unsafe or
endangers the safety of life or property, the Township of
Franklin Construction Official or designee shall give a written
notice that the sign either be made safe or removed.
Compliance with the written notice shall be within 10 days of
receipt of this order.
(b) The Construction Official or designee may remove said
hazardous sign in the event that the individual, corporation or
other entity responsible for same cannot be found or refuses to
repair or remove it. The Township may charge the owner of the
sign for any costs incurred in removing hazardous signs.
(2) Signs unsafe by reason of placement. Signs that are unsafe by
reason of placement within a sight line, within a sight easement, or
which otherwise create a hazard by virtue of their placement shall
be removed. Signs which pose an imminent hazard to the public
may be removed by the Township without notice; otherwise the
Township shall give a written notice that the sign be removed and
compliance with the written notice shall be within 10 days of
receipt of this order. The Township may charge the owner of the
sign for any costs incurred in removing hazardous signs. All
determinations with respect to this section shall be made by the
Chief of Police or the Township Engineer or their designee.
(3) Signs placed on public property. Signs placed on public property,
including but not limited to lands owned by the Township, county or
state, public open space lands and lands owned by the School
District, may be removed by the Township. Such signs may be
removed by the Chief of Police, Township Engineer or the Director
§ 112-107 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-108
1:370
§ 112-109. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are not permitted within the Township of
Franklin:
of Planning or their designee. Pursuant to § 112-111B(3), this
section shall not apply to temporary political or charitable signs
placed within the non-travel portion of any Township right-of-way,
provided such signs comply with § 112-108A(1) and (2) above and
provided such signs are not placed within the right-of-way abutting
lands owned by the Township, county or state, public open space
lands and lands owned by the School District.
(4) Off-premises signs not otherwise permitted by this chapter.
B. Removed signs. When identifiable, the owner of sign(s) removed by the
Township without prior notice shall be subsequently notified by the
Township of such removal and the location from which the signs were
removed. Signs removed by the Township shall be stored at the
municipal complex, in good order, for 30 days prior to disposal.
C. Abandoned signs. Any individual, corporation or entity who owns or
leases a sign shall remove said sign within 30 days after the party
advertises that business is no longer conducted in or on the premises,
or the party vacates the premises.
D. Illegal signs. Any sign erected or applied in violation of this chapter
shall be removed immediately by the owner upon notice by the
Township.
A. Signs tacked, pasted, painted or otherwise attached to utility poles,
posts, trees, fences, sidewalks, curbs, rocks, water towers, tanks,
culverts or bridges, except that any signs forbidding trespassing,
hunting, fishing or trapping as authorized by the fish and game laws
may be affixed to trees or fences located on the subject property and
except that temporary political or charitable signs as permitted by
§ 112-110D and E may be attached to posts and fences. [Amended
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
B. Exterior signs using moving parts except clocks.
C. Animated, flashing, and illusionary signs.
D. Signs using mechanical or electrical devices to revolve, flash or display
movement, or the illusion of movement.
E. Portable signs which are fixed on a movable stand; self-supporting
without being firmly embedded in the ground; supported by other
objects; mounted on wheels or movable vehicles; or made easily
movable in any other manner, unless specifically permitted or exempted
elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 112-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-109
1:371
§ 112-110. Exempt signs.
The following shall not be subject to the permit provisions of this chapter
nor require the payment of any fee, but are subject to all other provisions of
this chapter:
F. Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene or indecent character.
G. Signs maintained at any location where, by reason of color, illumination,
position, size or shape, as determined by findings of the Chief of Police
or his designee, may obstruct, impair, obscure or be confused with any
traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with,
mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic.
H. The following advertisements are specifically prohibited: any
advertisement which uses a series of two or more signs placed in a line
parallel to the highway or in similar fashion, all carrying a single
advertisement or message, part of which is contained on each sign.
I. Any sign which advertises or publicizes an activity, use, business,
product, real estate, or service not located or conducted on the
premises upon which such signs are located unless specifically
permitted by other provisions of this chapter.
J. No sign or portion thereof shall rotate, move, produce noise or smoke,
display video or other changing imagery, automatically change, or be
animated or blinking, nor shall any sign or portion thereof have any
electronic, digital, tri-vision or other animated characteristics except as
permitted in § 112-111M. [Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3875;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 4267-19]
A. Professional signs indicating the name and profession of the occupant
of a dwelling, provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet on
any one side.
B. Temporary signs inside windows of commercial establishments not
covering more than 25% of the window area.
C. Any signs forbidding trespassing, hunting, fishing or trapping as
authorized by the fish and game laws.
D. Signs indicating a political preference or a political cause, provided that
such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area per face. Such signs
shall be removed no later than 10 days after the event or election to
which they relate. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
E. Temporary signs of charitable organizations, provided that such signs
do not exceed 32 square feet per face. Such signs shall be removed no
later than 10 days after the event to which they relate. [Amended
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
F. Real estate signs ("for sale," "for rent," or "sold"), provided that:
§ 112-109 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-110
1:372
(1) Said sign does not exceed four square feet in area on any one side,
and also provided that no more than one such sign for each 200 feet
of frontage of the property to which such sign applies shall be
exempt.
(2) In the event of the property having less than 200 feet of frontage,
only one such sign shall be exempt.
(3) With respect to the aforementioned "sold" signs, such signs shall
only be exempt for a period of 21 days after the date the applicable
property is sold.
(4) No more than eight open house directional signs, per property for
sale, not located on the subject property, to be erected on the date
of the open house, no earlier than dawn and no later than dusk, and
removed on that same day.
G. Signs required by law or government order, rule or regulation,
including signs forbidding dumping or signs erected by the municipality
or government for public purposes.
H. Seasonal decorations permitted for display purposes on public or
private property providing such decorations are safely maintained.
I. Signs displayed for the direction or convenience of the public, including
those to identify rest rooms, emergency exits and the like, with a total
sign area not exceeding five square feet.
J. Signs denoting responsible contact persons or firms placed on
construction sites and not exceeding 32 square feet in total sign area.
They shall be removed when construction is completed. [Amended
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
K. Information, identification and directional signs, provided:
(1) The sign is for street number designation, postal box, on-site
directional or parking sign, warning sign or sign posting property
as private property, or similar signs. No such signs shall contain
corporate logos or other corporate identification.
(2) Such signs are not to be considered in calculating sign area.
(3) No such sign shall exceed three square feet in area.
L. Residential name plates consisting of one nonilluminated or shieldedlighted
not to exceed 25 watts and not exceeding two square feet in
total sign area shall be permitted for each single-family residence.
M. Rescue companies, first aid squads and fire houses shall be permitted
signs announcing membership drives, fund-raising drives and events,
public functions and other such events, provided such sign is no more
than 32 square feet per face. [Added 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
§ 112-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-110
1:373
§ 112-111. General requirements.
N. Section 112-109J notwithstanding, digital display of fuel prices shall be
permitted in association with gasoline filling stations provided: [Added
3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 3970]
(1) Such digital display consists solely of the display of fuel prices with
characters no greater than 24 inches in height;
(2) Such digital display is contained wholly within, and is as an integral
part of, the freestanding site identification sign(s);
(3) The price display of each fuel grade shall be limited to a single
color on a contrasting background;
(4) Fuel prices shall be changed no more frequently than as permitted
by N.J.S.A. 56:6-2 or as otherwise permitted by New Jersey State
Law;
(5) Such digital display consists of a static digital display and provided
no portion shall rotate, move, produce noise or smoke, display
video or other changing imagery, or be animated or blinking;
(6) Such digital display consists of no more than 50% of the sign area;
(7) No other signage shall be permitted on the property; and
(8) No other signage advertising the price of fuel shall be permitted.
A. Maintenance of signs. All signs shall be properly maintained such that:
(1) All signs together with all their supports, braces, hooks, guys and
anchors shall be of durable construction, and shall be printed and
cleaned as often as necessary so that they do not become
dilapidated.
(2) The area surrounding the sign shall be kept neat, clean, and
landscaped.
(3) The owner of the property upon which the sign is located shall be
responsible for maintaining the condition of the area.
(4) These provisions shall apply to signs existing on the effective date
of this chapter, as well as those hereafter erected, enlarged or
reconstructed.
(5) In the case of existing freestanding signs, the owner will not be
required to landscape the area surrounding the sign unless
required as part of the site plan review process.
B. Building codes, local, state, federal regulations applicable. All signs
shall comply with county, regional, state, and federal regulations, with
the strictest regulation prevailing. All signs shall conform to the
Township of Franklin Building Code and this chapter.
§ 112-110 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-111
1:374
(1) No sign may obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or
opening intended to provide light or ingress and egress to or from
any building or structure with the exception that 25% of any
window may be occupied by a sign or signs, subject to the further
provisions of this chapter.
(2) In order to secure and maintain reasonable traffic safety, no sign
shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free
and clear vision or to distract the attention of the driver of any
vehicle by reason of the position, shape or color thereof.
(3) No sign shall be placed within or suspended over a public right-ofway,
public property or publicly owned open space property, except
that temporary political or charitable signs as permitted by
§ 112-110D and E shall be permitted in the non-travel portion of
any Township right-of-way with the permission of the owner of the
property abutting said right-of-way and provided such signs are not
placed within the right-of-way abutting lands owned by the
Township, county or state, public open space lands and lands
owned by the School District. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No.
3959]
C. Illumination. Illumination devices, such as but not limited to flood or
spotlights, shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays of
illumination thereof from being cast into neighborhood dwellings and
approaching vehicles.
D. Sign location. No sign shall be located on a building above the roof or
projecting from the wall, or placed above the eaves of a building or
structure or on a flat roof, or extending from the wall face, unless
provided for in these regulations.
E. Encroachment on critical natural features. In order to protect an
historic, scenic, institutional or special natural area such as a park,
signs used within the area should enhance its natural beauty.
F. Encroachment on architectural design features. No sign shall be
erected, relocated, or maintained in such a manner as to cover or
intrude upon any architectural features of a building such as windows,
columns, moldings, or any major decoration or structural feature.
G. Banners and pennants. Banners shall only be permitted to announce
limited events such as sales, grand openings, or change of tenant; or for
public functions or fund-raising events for charitable, educational, civic,
religious, or similar purposes in any zone, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The erection of a banner shall require a permit from the Zoning
Officer and a fee as established in Schedule 7, Fee Schedule, at the
end of this chapter. A separate permit is required for each display
period, and a separate fee is to be paid for each permit.
§ 112-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-111
1:375
(2) The application for a banner or pennants shall require a completed
application form and a dimensioned sketch of the banner or
pennants, including the type and color of material and the language
of the advertisement. A dimensioned elevation of the building
facade upon which the banner or pennants is to be located shall
also be provided and a copy of a plot plan dimensioning the
proposed locations where the banner or pennants are not mounted
flush on the building. The information may be prepared by the
applicant, provided that it is clearly legible and accurate.
(3) "Grand opening" banners may be displayed for one thirty-day
period. Any subsequent banner for the same business and property
in the same twelve-month period shall be limited to one fourteenday
period. Any subsequent banner in any other twelve-month
period for the same business and property shall only be displayed
for two fourteen-day periods.
(4) All other banners may only be displayed for two fourteen-day
periods in any twelve-month period.
(5) The dimensions of a banner may not exceed six feet in height or 16
feet in length, with a maximum area of 32 square feet.
(6) The highest portion of a building-mounted banner shall not exceed
16 feet. The highest portion of a ground-mounted banner shall not
exceed eight feet.
(7) The minimum clearance of building-mounted banners above the
finished grade level shall be eight feet.
(8) Banners shall not be lighted.
(9) Banners for commercial and industrial uses may be located flush on
the building or ground-mounted and shall only be located on the
site or building which is the subject of the advertisement. Banners
for public functions and fund-raising events may be located off
premises. Banners to be displayed over public streets shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 333, Streets and Sidewalks, of
the Code of the Township of Franklin.
(10) Change of tenant or use shall be determined by the issuance of a
new certificate of occupancy.
(11) Ground-mounted banners shall comply with the setback
requirements applicable to permitted freestanding signs.
(12)No more than one banner shall be displayed at any one time for any
single use, event, business or tenant. For sites containing multiple
businesses or tenants, the number of banners permitted to be
displayed at any one time shall be limited to one sign per 100 feet
of roadway frontage up to a maximum of three banners total for the
site.
§ 112-111 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-111
1:376
(13) Pennants shall be permitted for grand openings for one thirty-day
period. No more than 200 linear feet of pennants, consisting of no
more than four strands, shall be displayed at any one time for any
single use, business or tenant. For sites containing multiple
businesses or tenants, no more than three such sets of pennants
may be displayed at any one time.
H. Flags.
(1) A maximum of four flags shall be permitted per site, only one of
which may be for an established commercial entity.
(2) The maximum flagpole height shall be 30 feet.
(3) Setbacks for flagpoles shall be the same as set forth in Schedule 5
for freestanding signs.
I. Schedule of sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be as set forth in
the schedule entitled, Schedule 5, Sign Regulations.77
J. Subject to the following conditions, sandwich board signs shall be
permitted within the Hamilton Street Business District; the
Neighborhood Business District; the General Business District; the
Retail Overlay District; and other zones in association with retail goods
and service stores, professional and medical offices, and eating and
drinking establishments.
(1) Signs shall only be placed directly in front of the front/main
entranceway of the building and shall be removed at the close of
the business day.
(2) The maximum size of such sandwich board signs shall not exceed
five square feet in area. If such a sign is two-sided, only one side
shall be used for the purpose of calculating the permitted sign area.
(3) Such signs shall be located within four feet of a building entrance
to the business they advertise and shall not be placed to interfere
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow or sight distance on a
street, sidewalk or public right-of-way. An unobstructed pathway of
at least four feet in width shall be maintained on the sidewalk at all
times.
(4) Such signs shall be constructed of wood, slate, board and/or
finished metal.
(5) Information contained on such signs shall be limited to
advertisements for special promotions, sales and other such similar
nonpermanent sales promotions.
(6) Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all times.
77.Editor's Note: Schedule 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-111
1:377
(7) In a building with multiple business occupants who share a
common entrance, no more than two sandwich board signs shall be
permitted, which may be shared among the applicable businesses
entitled to a portable special promotion sign under the provisions
of this article.
(8) No sign shall be displayed when the business it relates to is not
open for business.
(9) Sandwich board signs shall not be illuminated.
(10) Maximum height and width of letters, numbers or other characters
or images on the signboard shall not exceed 12 inches.
(11) Any business use that places or installs such sign, pursuant to this
article, shall be required to conform to all other applicable
provisions of this article; otherwise, such business shall be
prohibited from displaying such sign.
K. (Reserved)78
L. Signage requirements in the Renaissance Redevelopment Area are
contained in Article XXXV, Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan.
Signage requirements in the D & R Canal Redevelopment Area are
contained in Article XLII, D & R Canal Area Redevelopment Plan.
M. Digital signage. Digital signage shall be permitted in conformance with
the below regulations: [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 4267-19]
(1) Digital signage shall only be permitted for schools, fire houses, first
aid squads, public libraries and federal, state, county and local
governments.
(2) For the purposes of this section only, schools are defined as public,
private and parochial schools recognized and licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Education and have as their prime purpose
the general education of students in a full curriculum in the arts
and sciences and does not include preschools, daycare, trade
schools, correctional, health or any other institution not primarily
concerned with the general education of students in the arts and
sciences.
(3) When digital signage is permitted on sites where other uses/
activities are also occurring the digital sign shall only advertise the
activities permitted in Subsection M(1) above.
(4) Only one digital sign display area shall be permitted per sign
structure.
(5) Digital signage shall only be permitted on freestanding signs.
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding rescue companies, first aid squads and fire
houses, was repealed 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959.
§ 112-111 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-111
1:378
(6) No digital sign or digital sign display area or portion thereof shall
rotate, move, blink, scroll, flash, produce noise or smoke or give the
illusion of movement.
(7) No digital sign shall display pornographic or sexually indecent and/
or obscene pictures, depictions, or images, whether such images
are actual pictures, illustrations, or computer generated. For the
purposes of this section, pornographic or sexually indecent and/or
obscene pictures, depictions, or images shall include, but not be
limited to, images of unclothed humanoid genitalia, humanoid
breasts, humanoid buttocks, and other sexually explicit imagery
such as gratuitous humanoid breast cleavage. No billboard shall
display obscene, vulgar, or profane words or symbols, which shall
include, but not be limited to, words, phrases and symbols that are
commonly restricted from public broadcast pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
§ 1464.
(8) No digital sign shall display any words or symbols that connotes
traffic control commands, including, but not being limited to,
"STOP" or "DANGER," or which may be confused as a sign
displayed by a public authority.
(9) No digital sign shall be erected so as to cause any visual
obstruction to traffic or impair traffic control devices.
(10) The minimum display duration shall be 15 minutes.
(11) When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished
instantaneously such that no blanking of the display screen can be
perceived.
(12) There shall be no visual "special effects" of any kind during the
transition between successive messages. The screen shall
transition from one message to the next with no perceptible
dimming, swiping or blanking of the display, and with no visible
effects such as fade, dissolve, or other animated transition
methods. The change in message shall consist of a seamless,
imperceptible transition from one image to the next.
(13) Message sequencing shall be prohibited. Message sequencing is a
term used to describe a single thought, idea, concept, message, or
advertisement for a product or service that is divided into segments
and presented over two or more successive display phases of a
digital sign or across two or more individual signs.
(14) Digital signage shall not advertise or publicize any activity, use,
business, product, real estate or service not located or conducted
on the premises upon which such signs are located unless
specifically permitted by other provisions of this chapter.
(15) Digital signage shall be equipped with a sensor that automatically
determines the ambient lighting conditions and programmed to
§ 112-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-111
1:379
§ 112-112. Real estate signs larger than four square feet in area.
§ 112-113. Performance standards.
§ 112-114. Signs in HBD District.
automatically dim the digital display according to ambient light
conditions such that the digital sign illumination is no greater than
0.3 footcandles over ambient lighting conditions.
A. Real estate signs used to advertise the sale, rental, or lease of a
premises or portion thereof that are larger than four square feet in area
on any one side shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Any such sign shall require a permit.
(2) No more than one sign shall be permitted per road frontage.
(3) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet on any one side.
(4) The minimum lot line setback shall be 10 feet.
(5) The maximum total height of any temporary sign shall be eight feet.
(6) The minimum outside dimension of any side of a temporary sign
shall be two feet.
(7) Application for a temporary sign permit shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer.
(8) The fee for a temporary sign as indicated in Schedule 7, Fees.
[Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4261-19]
(9) Temporary signs shall not be lighted.
A. Every sign shall be in good scale and proportion in design and visual
relationship to structures, buildings and other surroundings.
B. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the
structure, building and site to which it principally relates. As an
architectural element, a sign shall be in harmony with the structure,
building or site's character and use.
C. The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious
with the structure, building and site to which it principally relates.
D. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be limited to a minimum
needed to convey the sign's main message, and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.
§ 112-111 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-114
1:380
A. Wall-mounted attached sign.79 One wall sign is permitted for each
ground-floor business use maintaining street frontage and is regulated
as follows:
(1) The sign shall be located on the wall at the main public entrance or
centered along the street frontage.
(2) The maximum height from ground level to the uppermost portion of
the sign shall not exceed the height of the sill or bottom of any
second-story window or 16 feet, whichever is less. In the case of
single-story buildings, the maximum height shall not exceed 14 feet
or the top of the wall, whichever is less.
(3) The minimum height from ground level to the lowermost portion of
the sign shall be no less than eight feet.
(4) Maximum permitted sign area shall be no greater than 1.2 square
feet per linear foot of building frontage occupied by the use on that
particular building face, not to exceed 60 square feet.
(5) Maximum permitted horizontal sign dimension shall be no greater
than 75% of the width of the building frontage occupied by the use
on that particular building face, not to exceed 30 feet.
(6) Maximum vertical sign dimension shall not exceed five feet.
(7) The sign may be internally or indirectly illuminated.
B. Secondary wall-mounted signs.
(1) Ground-floor business uses located on corner lots and having a
second facade with a display window fronting on a public street
shall be permitted to have one additional sign on the facade of the
building facing the side street. The secondary wall-mounted sign
shall meet all of the standards for the primary wall sign with the
following exceptions:
(a) The maximum permitted sign area shall be no greater than 24
square feet.
(b) All sign elements shall be placed in a position directly above
the display window facing the secondary frontage (the
maximum horizontal dimension shall be no greater than the
width of the display window).
(2) Ground-floor business uses having a side or rear public entrance
fronting on a parking lot shall be permitted to have one additional
sign on the facade of the building facing the parking lot, provided
that such sign meets all of the following standards:
79.Editor's Note: See Figure 2, Primary Wall-Mounted Attached Sign, and Figure 3, Building-
Mounted Sign Types, at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-114
1:381
(a) The sign shall be centered above the secondary public
entrance.
(b) The maximum height from ground level to the uppermost
portion of the sign shall not exceed the height of the sill or
bottom of any second-story window or 16 feet, whichever is
less. In the case of single-story buildings, the maximum height
shall not exceed 14 feet or the top of the wall, whichever is
less.
(c) The minimum height from ground level to the lowermost
portion of the sign shall be no less than eight feet.
(d) Maximum sign area shall not exceed nine square feet.
(e) Maximum horizontal sign dimension shall not exceed five feet.
(f) Maximum vertical sign dimension shall not exceed three feet.
(g) The sign may be internally or indirectly illuminated.
C. Freestanding signs. Not permitted. [Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
4115-15]
D. Projecting sign.80 One projecting sign is permitted for each ground-floor
business use maintaining street frontage and is regulated as follows:
(1) The sign shall be attached to the front of a wall or below a fixed
canopy along the building face such use occupies.
(2) Such sign face and all signage must be oriented in a position that is
perpendicular to the front facade of the business establishment
being identified.
(3) No such sign shall have a thickness that exceeds nine inches.
(4) Maximum size of each sign face shall not exceed eight square feet
in area.
(5) Minimum height from ground level to the lowermost portion of the
sign shall be eight feet.
(6) Maximum height from ground level to the uppermost portion of the
sign shall not exceed the height of the sill or bottom of any secondstory
window or 16 feet, whichever is less. In the case of singlestory
buildings, said maximum height shall not exceed 14 feet or
the top of the wall, whichever is less.
(7) Maximum horizontal projection from the building wall, including
any sign appurtenances, shall not exceed six feet. Such sign may
80.Editor's Note: See also Figure 4, Projecting Sign Dimensions, included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 112-114 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-114
1:382
project over a public sidewalk only and shall not extend over any
other portion of any other public right-of-way.
(8) Maximum horizontal dimension of sign shall not exceed four feet.
(9) Maximum vertical dimension of sign shall not exceed six feet.
(10) Maximum height of letters, individual numbers or other characters
or images on the signboard shall not exceed 18 inches.
(11) Maximum width of letters, individual numbers or other characters
or images on the signboard shall not exceed 18 inches.
E. Awning signs. Ground-floor business uses may display signs on
awnings, provided that the following standards are met:
(1) Awning signs shall only be permitted on first-story awnings that
provide roof-like shelter and/or solar shielding above doorways and
windows.
(2) The dimensions of the awning shall be in conformance with
applicable regulations set forth elsewhere herein for awnings.
(3) The sign shall only be located on the front portion of the awning
that is generally parallel to the building wall face to which it is
attached. This portion is more commonly known as the "valance."
(See Figure 1 at the end of this chapter.) In the case of dome,
convex or long dome awnings, where a valance might not be
provided, the sign graphics shall be restricted to the lowest 14
inches of the awning, which must be shown to be nearly parallel to
the building wall face. In the case of dome awnings, the sign
graphics shall additionally be restricted to the middle 1/5 of the
awning, when viewed from the front elevation, which must be
shown to be nearly parallel to the building wall face.
(4) An awning sign shall be professionally sewn or painted.
(5) The maximum vertical dimension of the sign face (valance) shall
not exceed 14 inches.
(6) The maximum height of letters, individual numbers or other
characters or images on the awning shall not exceed 12 inches.
(7) The total aggregate horizontal dimension (width) of all individual
letters, numbers or other characters shall not exceed 60% of the
length of the awning occupied by the use.
(8) Maximum width of individual letters, numbers, or other characters
or images on the awning shall not exceed 18 inches.
(9) The awning shall be limited to a total of two colors plus white,
including the color of sign lettering and all other graphics. (See
Figure 5 at the end of this chapter.)
§ 112-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-114
1:383
§ 112-114.1. Billboards in the M-2 District. [Added 4-27-2010 by
Ord. No. 3875]
Billboards shall be permitted as a conditional use in the M-2 District and
shall be subject to the requirements provided in Article V of Chapter 112.
(10)No single awning shall contain sign messages for more than two
business establishments.
F. Wall-mounted directory sign. For buildings containing more than one
nonresidential tenant, one wall-mounted directory sign for each
ground-floor entrance to a building shall be permitted whether such
entrance fronts on a street or parking lot.
(1) The maximum size of the directory sign shall not exceed six square
feet in area.
(2) Such sign may identify all building occupant names and their
addresses; however, no individual business shall occupy greater
than one square foot in area of such sign.
(3) A wall-mounted directory sign may not be illuminated.
G. Portable sidewalk sign. Sandwich board signs and other types of
portable signs shall be permitted within the HBD District pursuant to
the requirements of § 112-111J subject to the following conditions:
H. Signage in the HBD Zone shall also be subject to applicable design
standards in Article XXVI.
§ 112-114 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-114.1
1:384
ARTICLE XIII
Performance Standards
§ 112-115. Evidence of full compliance required.
As a condition to construction or continuance of any commercial or
industrial use or process in any zone, the applicant shall supply evidence,
satisfactory to the Planning Board or to its designated representative, that
the proposed use will conform fully with all of the applicable performance
standards stated herein. As evidence of compliance, the Board may require
certification of tests by appropriate governmental agencies or by
recognized testing laboratories, any cost thereof to be borne by the
applicant. The Planning Board may require that specific devices be installed
and that operating procedures be followed if governmental agencies or
testing laboratories determine that the use requires such in order to assure
compliance with performance standards.
§ 112-116. Smoke.
§ 112-117. Dust and dirt; fly ash and fumes; vapors and gases.
§ 112-118. Noise.
The sound pressure level of any operation shall not exceed the described
levels in the designated octave bands shown below for the districts
indicated.
A. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source as visible
grey greater than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published
by the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
B. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Smoke
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes.
C. These provisions, applicable to visible grey smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
A. No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health, to
animal or vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any
excessive soiling at any point.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point.
C. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500% excess air.
§ 112-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-118
1:385
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels
(in decibels)
Octave Band
(in cycles per second)
Along Agricultural or
Residential District
Boundaries
At Any Other Point on
Boundary
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
§ 112-119. Offensive odors.
There shall be no emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to be
offensive. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any
odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that control
will be maintained. As a guide in determining offensive odors, Table II (Odor
Thresholds) in Chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual, copyrighted
1951 by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, DC, shall
be used.
§ 112-120. Glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat such as to adversely affect
the physical health or welfare of persons in the vicinity shall be performed
within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such a manner as to
be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot line.
§ 112-121. Vibration.
There shall be no vibration which is discernible to human sense or feeling
at any point beyond the lot line.
§ 112-122. Radioactivity or electrical disturbances.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity.
There shall be no disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any
equipment located beyond the property of the creator of such disturbance.
§ 112-123. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
A. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
§ 112-118 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-123
1:386
§ 112-124. Industrial waste or sewage.
No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or
untreated sewage or industrial waste treatment and disposal except as shall
be approved by the Health Officer and Sewerage Authority.
§ 112-125. Provision and use of water.
All water requirements shall be stated in the application. Water shall be
supplied from wells only after approved or accepted geologic study
furnished by the applicant and certification by a professional geologist that
the underground water supply and levels will not be appreciably altered in
such a way as to endanger the water level or supply of other properties.
directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from
this provision.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a
fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties.
C. Materials or wastes shall not be deposited upon a lot in such form and
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
E. The outdoor storage of any material in connection with construction is
permitted subject to the following regulations:
(1) The outdoor storage of any material is permitted, provided that
such materials stored outdoors shall be kept in an orderly manner
at all times and shall not include any discarded or abandoned
materials and further providing that the height of the material
stored shall not exceed six feet.
(2) Any material stored outdoors shall be located in conformance with
the rear and side yard setback requirements for accessory
buildings in the zone.
(3) If the Zoning Officer determines that construction at the site has
not been actively and diligently pursued for a period of 30 days, the
Zoning Officer may order the removal of any material from the site
(order of removal). Upon issuance of the order of removal, the
disturbed areas of the site shall be graded and reseeded with grass
within 10 days, weather permitting.
§ 112-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-126
1:387
§ 112-126. Temporary construction trailers at construction sites.
The use of temporary construction trailers in any zone in connection with
site construction shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions and
regulations:
A. Temporary construction trailer ("trailer") shall mean a transportable
trailer, installed on a nonpermanent foundation if a foundation is
required, temporarily erected or parked within an approved
development for use by the contractor(s) for construction offices and/or
for storage of construction material.
B. Trailers and one sign not exceeding 32 square feet, advertising the
prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and
similar data for the period of construction beginning with the issuance
of a construction permit or start of site work in accordance with an
approved development plan and concluding with the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever is less, are permitted,
provided said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where the construction
is taking place and are not on any right-of-way, easement or within any
critical area. The Township Construction Official may issue one-year
extensions upon written request by the developer for the continuation
of the trailer(s) and sign.
C. The trailer(s) shall be set back in accordance with side and rear setback
requirements for an accessory structure within the zone and not within
a sight triangle. No clearing or grading for the trailer(s) shall be
permitted.
D. A permit shall be required for a temporary office construction trailer.
No site plan approval is required, provided that:
(1) The initial location of the trailer(s) and sign shall be shown on the
final grading plans submitted with the final site plans to be
reviewed by the Board; or
(2) All necessary information is provided to the Township Zoning
Officer and Construction Official with the application and final plot
plan for the trailer(s) and sign in compliance with the provisions of
Subsections A, B and C above.
E. The developer shall be required to remove any improvements
associated with the Trailer(s) and restore the site in accordance with
the final construction, grading and landscaping plans approved by the
Board, at the time the trailer(s) is removed in accordance with
112-9H(13) c. above.
F. If the Zoning Officer determines that construction at the site has not
been actively and diligently pursued for a period of 30 days, the Zoning
Officer or Construction Official may order the removal of the Trailer(s)
from the site. The Zoning Officer may make allowance for weather or
§ 112-126 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-126
1:388
other conditions that prevent active and diligent construction by the
permittee.
§ 112-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-126
1:389

ARTICLE XIV
Landscaping Requirements
§ 112-127. Purpose.
Recognizing the fact that land development necessitates the destruction
and removal of natural vegetation, specific landscaping requirements are
hereafter specified and required for the purpose of soil conservation,
ensuring proper visual and audio separation of uses, and to promote
individual privacy and further to enhance the public health and economic
value of the Township of Franklin.
§ 112-128. Minimum and additional requirements.
Schedule 6 at the end of this chapter represents minimum landscaping and
buffer requirements for each zone. In addition to those requirements, the
approving authority, when reviewing applications for site plan approval,
may request additional landscaping pursuant to § 112-192D(19) of this
chapter.
§ 112-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-128
1:391

ARTICLE XV
Quarrying Requirements
§ 112-129. Policy.
The Township of Franklin has deposits of natural materials that have the
potential for productive economic exploitation. It is the declared policy of
the Township to encourage the proper utilization of such natural resources
through the establishment of this zone, which limits such activity to ensure
that it does not adversely affect adjoining lands.
§ 112-130. Site plan required. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4007-13]
Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy
for any use in the M-3 Mining Zone, a site plan shall be submitted to
the Township Planning Board in accordance with the governing site
development plan procedure and other applicable requirements of
Township ordinances.
§ 112-131. General requirements for site plans.
Where mining operations and their accessory uses are involved, the site
plan submitted shall include the site layout, plan of construction,
topographic details and such other information and material as may be
required to indicate the full scope of the operation. The site plan and any
supporting plans shall be drawn accurately and to scale.
§ 112-132. Site plan and supporting documentation.
The site plan and supporting documentation must include the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; the name,
residence and business address of each partner, if a partnership; or if a
corporation, the name, date and state in which it was incorporated,
whether authorized to do business in New Jersey and the names of
directors, principal officers and local representatives, their residence
and business address.
B. Information showing ownership of the tract involved and the written
consent of the owner thereof, if the applicant is not the owner.
C. Topographic detail adequate to show existing and proposed grading of
the land.
D. Plans showing the places on the tract where quarrying and accessory
uses shall be conducted. All entrances or exits and fences or gates
erected or to be erected must be shown.
E. Plans for the rehabilitation of the property in question, showing how it
may be restored to a productive use after mining operations have been
completed, in keeping with the Master Plan adopted for the Township.
§ 112-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-132
1:393
§ 112-133. Site rehabilitation plan.
Site rehabilitation plans shall indicate measures to be taken during the
course of the operation which will lead to rehabilitation of the site as well
as showing a plan for the ultimate rehabilitation. These plans shall include
the following provisions:
F. The hours during which the various operations of the quarry will be
operated.
A. Provision shall be made for the restoring of all slopes to a grade not to
exceed 30°, except however where slopes exist as of the date of this
chapter which are of such degree that it is impractical to rehabilitate
the same to a grade not in excess of 30°. The rehabilitation plan may
provide for such slopes to remain as they are, provided that adequate
safety and erosion controls are incorporated into said plan.
B. Where topsoil is removed, provisions shall be made for the setting aside
and retention on the premises of sufficient arable soil to be
redistributed over the premises to a depth capable of supporting
vegetation. Where the final contour is of such slope to make impractical
the replacement of topsoil, such slopes shall be planted with rootable
plant material in sufficient number and of sufficient size to minimize
erosion.
C. Provisions shall be made for reasonable portions of initial or existing
quarrying operations to be rehabilitated prior to the opening of new
areas. To the extent practicable, the rehabilitation plan shall make
provision for simultaneous quarrying and rehabilitation.
D. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to the rehabilitation and
restoration of other areas where the quarrying of rock is in process or
has been terminated or where stone or other material is being or has
been removed such as, but not limited to, the case in any road
realignment program.
E. Provisions shall be made for performance guaranties by the applicant
sufficient to insure the completion of the rehabilitation plan or parts or
stages thereof in such form as may be approved by the Township
Attorney and in such amount as may be approved by the Township
Council.
F. When approving plans for rehabilitation and reclamation submitted in
accordance herewith, the Planning Board shall specify a time limit
within which such reclamation shall be commenced and terminated as
to the entire rehabilitation/reclamation plan or any stage or part
thereof. Periodic inspections shall be made by representatives of the
Township Engineer and/or Health Office or other proper Township
officials to evaluate the performance of the applicant with respect to
rehabilitation/reclamation procedures.
§ 112-132 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-133
1:394
§ 112-134. Hours of operation.
§ 112-135. Road dust control.
The roads or rights-of-way within the quarry premises which do not have
permanent pavement shall be treated as is determined to be necessary by
the Township Engineer. Those roads or rights-of-way which are permanently
paved shall be wetted down periodically to sufficiently control dust or
spillage.
§ 112-136. Waste disposal.
G. In order to evaluate the foregoing, the Planning Board and/or the
Township Council may solicit information from the Township Health
Officer, Township Environmental Commission and other relevant
municipal employees and/or consultants.
A. Mining and related activities are prohibited on Sunday.
B. Mining operations including but not limited to stripping and drilling are
restricted to the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
C. Igniting of explosives, commonly known as "blasting," is restricted to
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
D. Primary crushing operations, including in-plant hauling and loading,
are restricted to the hours of 5:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. Secondary
crushing operations, including in-plant hauling and loading, are
restricted to the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
E. Operations of accessory uses, including but not limited to bituminous
concrete and portland cement concrete production, are restricted to
the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. except when a written contract or
subcontract with federal, state, county or municipal government or
public authority specifically requires delivery at other times.
F. The transporting of materials produced or processed on premises in the
M-3 Zone by vehicles entering and leaving said premises is restricted to
the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., except when a written contract of
subcontract with federal, state, county or municipal government or
public authority specifically requires delivery at other times.
A. Stone or other products of quarrying shall not be deposited as waste,
spillage or storage in any manner on adjacent properties or on roads of
the Township, except that the deposition of excavated mining materials
shall be permitted within the RR5 Zoning District only on lands that are
contiguous to lands within the M-3 Zoning District and shall only be
permitted within 300 feet of the M-3 Zoning District boundary and
within 300 feet from the edge of quarrying activity as approved as part
of a quarry reclamation and rehabilitation plan approved by the
Township, provided that such deposition shall only be permitted for the
purpose of building an earthen berm for screening purposes, and
§ 112-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-136
1:395
§ 112-137. Fences.
A fence shall be erected around the quarrying area to assure nonaccess
thereto by unauthorized persons, whether such area is being used presently
or whether it has been used for such purposes in the past. Said fence shall
be woven wire of chain link type at least six feet high, or such other fence of
a type to afford adequate protection against intruders. Any entrance or exit
through said fence shall be by means of gates of equal height. Such gates
shall be locked shut when not in actual use. Said fence shall have three
strands of barbed wire placed on top of same.
§ 112-138. Handling of explosives.
All explosives must be handled strictly in accordance with state regulations.
§ 112-139. Material stockpiles.
Where conveyors discharge material, the average size which is less than 3/8
of an inch in diameter, onto stockpiles of such materials, the following shall
be adhered to:
§ 112-140. Safety procedures.
Processing areas shall be maintained in the safest practicable conditions at
all times. In no case shall permitted processing menace the physical safety
of persons or property on public streets or adjoining property.
§ 112-141. Air pollution control.
provided that such deposition is approved as part of a quarry
reclamation and rehabilitation plan approved by the Township. Fencing
required by § 112-137 shall be erected around the perimeter of such
deposited materials. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
B. Provisions shall be made for the disposal of any waste products
resulting from any of the mining operations on the premises thereof,
and a landfill cover method shall be employed periodically to
accomplish that objective.
A. The free fall of the material being stockpiled from the conveyor to the
highest point of the stockpile shall not exceed a distance of six feet.
B. A high-pressure mist water spray shall be directed on said material as it
falls from the conveyor to the stockpile so as to reduce the possibility of
dust.
C. Where screenings are stockpiled, same shall be enclosed within a
building or structure.
A. Dust and smoke from processing operations shall be minimized by the
installation and use of appropriate mechanical and electrical devices.
§ 112-136 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-141
1:396
§ 112-141.1. Quarry-related uses permitted in the RR5 Zone.
[Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4007-13]
The following quarry-related accessory uses shall be permitted on Block
5.02, Lot 172.04, within the RR5 Zoning District: administrative and sales
offices related to permitted quarry operations; buildings and facilities for
the repair and storage of motor vehicles and equipment used in permitted
quarry operations; indoor and outdoor storage of raw materials and
machinery related to permitted uses and on-site fuel storage related to
permitted quarry uses; transportation of stone and gravel extracted from
the quarry; parking of trucks and vehicles and indoor and outdoor storage
of such vehicles related to permitted quarry operations; signs pursuant
to Article XII; renewable energy facilities pursuant to § 112-33.3; and site
restoration and stabilization, including installation of landscaping and
berms associated with restoration and stabilization associated with
quarrying operations before, during and after such operations. All other
quarry-related activities shall be limited to the M-3 Zone, including: the
excavation of stone and gravel; the handling and processing of stone and
gravel extracted from the quarry; storage, crushing, grinding, pulverizing
and mixing of the extracted raw materials; mixing or batching plant for
concrete; and manufacture of prestressed concrete, bituminous concrete,
concrete mixes and other products.
B. Anything to the contrary not withstanding, all mining operations,
principal and accessory, shall comply with the requirements of the New
Jersey State Department of Health.
§ 112-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-141.1
1:397

ARTICLE XVI
Canal Preservation District
§ 112-142. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 8-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3777; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4008-13]
The following area and yard requirements shall apply to single-family
dwellings in the Canal Preservation District:
Requirements Standard Lot Lot Size Averaging
Principal building minimum:
Lot area 6 acres 3 acres
Lot frontage 400 feet 250 feet
Lot frontage on Canal Road 400 feet 400 feet
Lot width 400 feet 250 feet
Lot depth 400 feet 350 feet
Front yard 100 feet 75 feet
Rear yard 200 feet 75 feet
Side yard (each) 75 feet 75 feet
Accessory building minimum:
Distance to side line 50 feet 25 feet
Distance to rear line 150 feet 75 feet
Maximum:
Building coverage of principal
building
3% 5%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
1% 2%
Building height 2 1/2 stories/35
feet
Density 1 unit per 6
acres
Impervious coverage 10% 15%
NOTE: Every lot created shall be capable of containing an "effective
square" as indicated in § 112-33.4 for a "standard lot" or "lot size
averaging" in the CP District.
§ 112-143. Lot size averaging.
The minimum lot size may be reduced to three acres, provided that the
average lot size throughout the development shall be at least six acres.
Any lots larger than six acres shall be permanently deed restricted from
further subdivision and development in the future other than use for either
agriculture or a combination of agriculture and one dwelling unit. In
§ 112-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-143
1:399
addition, any land area in excess of the minimum lot size may be donated
or transferred to the Township or its designee for the purposes outlined
in § 112-8 and provided further that the Township shall have the right of
first refusal for any such land that is offered. The proposed lots shall meet
all requirements for safe septic system operation established by applicable
Township, county, and state regulations.
§ 112-144. General requirements.
The following general requirements shall apply to all structures in the Canal
Preservation District:
A. Setbacks.
(1) The following minimum setbacks shall be maintained for all
structures: 250 feet from the D&R Canal Park.
(2) Exceptions to the above setbacks may only be granted upon a
demonstration that existing, adjacent development is within the
required setback areas and the proposed development is
architecturally consistent with the 19th Century architecture that
is prevalent in the area, as approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission. No development may be any closer to the Canal and
Canal Road than the average setback of development on the
adjoining lots.
B. Street alignment. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of new streets in the Canal Preservation District:
(1) Linear streets are incompatible with the topography and landscape
of the District and are discouraged, except in situations where they
are appropriate or necessary so that adjoining lots can share a
street.
(2) Curvilinear streets are more suitable to minimize the topographic
modification associated with their construction and to visually
shield the street cut from view from the Canal. Curvilinear streets
shall be incorporated into the design of the subdivision where
possible.
(3) Where it is impossible to shield the new street from view through
the use of existing topography, the applicant shall provide sufficient
landscaping and/or berming to completely screen the new street
from the Canal.
C. Access. The following standards shall apply to subdivisions in the Canal
Preservation District:
(1) Street design and location shall include provisions for street access
to adjoining properties where required by the Planning Board.
(2) Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary
building lots, such parcels, unless deed restricted against further
§ 112-143 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-144
1:400
subdivision, shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets
and logical subdivisions.
(3) No cul-de-sac shall provide access to more than 10 lots. Any cul-desac
in excess of 1,000 feet shall provide a midpoint turnaround as
determined by the Planning Board, and shall incorporate provisions
for street access to adjoining properties.
(4) Where a tract has access to a street other than Canal Road, the
proposed subdivision shall utilize such alternative access for its
primary access.
(5) Adjacent lots shall share access wherever feasible, and shall
incorporate provisions for street access to adjoining properties.
D. Vegetation removal. No more than 15% of the wooded area of a
proposed lot shall be cleared for development.
E. Landscaping. The following landscaping standards shall apply to all
new development in the Canal Preservation District.
(1) General. Landscape plans shall conform to the following general
principles:
(a) Use landscaping to accent and compliment dwellings and
garages. For example, groupings of tall trees to break up long,
low buildings and lower plantings for taller buildings.
(b) Locate landscaping to provide for climate control. For example,
shade trees on the south to shield the hot summer sun and
evergreens on the north side for windbreaks.
(c) Provide for a variety and mixture of landscaping. The variety
shall consider susceptibility to disease, colors, season,
textures, shapes, blossoms, and foliage.
(d) Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered
in the choice of landscaping.
(e) Consider the impact of any proposed landscaping plan at
various time intervals so that, for example, shrubs do not grow
and eventually block sight distances or encroach upon roads or
sidewalks.
(f) All landscape plants shall be typical full specimens conforming
to the American Association of Nurserymen Standards and/or
Landscape Plans and Specifications for quality and installation.
(g) Assure that no aspect of the landscape design inhibits access to
the development by emergency vehicles.
(2) Street trees. Street trees shall be provided for all streets and shall
be in accordance with the following standards for location, species
selection and spacing:
§ 112-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-144
1:401
(a) Vary street varieties, with spacing two feet to three feet from
the right-of-way and sizes two inches to three inches caliper.
(b) The total number of street trees shall average one for every 35
linear feet measured at the street or curbline.
(c) Planting design shall accentuate views and integrate
contrasting landscape elements.
(d) No street trees shall be located within a sight triangle.
(3) Culs-de-sac. Landscaped islands shall be provided on each cul-desac.
Cul-de-sac islands provide an opportunity to create visual
interest, soften the harshness of a large paved area, increase
groundwater recharge, screen headlight glare into residences, and
preserve existing vegetation.
(a) The following general standards shall apply to the landscape
treatment of culs-de-sac:
[1] All plants shall be tolerant of harsh, dry roadside
conditions.
[2] Ground cover plantings shall be consistent with the degree
of maintenance expected for the culs-de-sac and of
sufficient density to entirely cover the ground plane.
(b) One of the following cul-de-sac planting concepts, or an
alternative concept complying with the standards set forth
above, shall be used:
[1] The preferred alternative is to use cul-de-sac islands to
preserve existing stands or groves of trees. Assure
protection during construction. Indicate ground cover
treatment. If the existing trees do not merit preservation,
then the concepts in Subsection E(3)(b)[2] or [3] may be
utilized.
[2] Use a specimen tree of five inches to six inches caliper
with low shrub or ground cover planting.
[3] Use three or more trees of varying size (2 1/2 inches to six
inches caliper) with low shrub, or ground cover and gentle
berming.
[4] Stormwater management areas include drainage ditches
and swales, retention and detention basins, and wetland
areas. Sensitively designed swales and basins can benefit
the health, welfare, and safety of Franklin Township
residents. This may involve integration of these areas as
aesthetic landscape features, naturalized wetland areas,
or active and passive recreation areas, in addition to their
stormwater management function.
§ 112-144 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-144
1:402
(4) Stormwater.
(a) Stormwater management by use of roadside swales and
ditches shall be the preferred alternative where established by
drainage calculations. Such channels shall follow the general
design detail of two feet of stone surrounded by permeable
filter fabric, overlain with six inches of sand and soil.
(b) The following landscape concept for stormwater detention
areas, or an alternative and equivalent concept complying with
these standards, shall be used if swales are found to be
ineffective, and the stormwater detention area cannot be put to
agricultural or horticultural use:
[1] The area shall be graded creatively to blend into the
surrounding landscape and imitate a natural depression
with an irregular edge. This shall include gentle berming.
Linear, geometric basins are unacceptable.
[2] The quantity of trees to be planted on the interior of the
basins shall be equal to the number of trees that would be
necessary to cover the entire area, based upon a grid, 20
feet by 20 feet, to the high-waterline or outflow elevation.
Of this number, 10% shall be 2 1/2 inches to three inches
caliper, 20% shall be one inch to two inches caliper, and
70% shall be six feet to eight feet height whips.
[3] The trees shall be planted in groves and spaced five feet to
15 feet on center.
[4] The ground plane shall be seeded with a naturalization,
wildflower, and/or meadow grass mix. The specific blend
shall be approved by the Township Landscape Architect.
[5] All woody and herbaceous plants shall be species
indigenous to the area and/or tolerant of typical wet/dry
floodplain conditions.
[6] Plantings shall not be located within 20 feet of low-flow
channels to allow for maintenance.
[7] The perimeter area (slopes above the high-waterline) shall
include shade trees (approximately 80 per 1,000 linear
feet), evergreen trees (approximately 40 per 1,000 linear
feet), ornamental trees, and shrubs screening drainage
structures and creating visual interest.
[8] Provision for emergency access as well as general
maintenance of the basins shall be reviewed by the
Township Engineer. Plantings shall be designed to disguise
yet not hinder vehicular access.
§ 112-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-144
1:403
[9] Plantings are not permitted upon any dikes associated
with a detention basin unless approved by the Township
Engineer.
F. Screening. Screening shall be required around the perimeter of
structures visible from the D&R Canal Park.
(1) The following standards shall apply:
(a) Provide landscape buffer area of 25 feet in width. The buffer
area shall be planted in a double row of four feet to five feet
evergreens planted 10 feet on center, or an equivalent.
(b) Preserve existing trees within the landscape buffer area. If
existing vegetation is insufficient, the landscape strip shall be
supplemented with new understory plantings of shade-tolerant
coniferous and ornamental trees in naturalistic groupings.
(c) In areas of necessary disturbance, existing quality vegetation
shall be relocated for use in other areas. Detailed plans for tree
removal and relocation must be made on plans and in the field
(tag trees) for review and inspection.
(2) In areas devoid of existing vegetation, the following standards shall
apply:
(a) Provide gentle berming with masses and groupings of
evergreen shade, and ornamental trees and shrubs. The
planting may be predominantly mixed varieties of shade trees
and evergreen shrubs. Parked cars shall be screened from view
from the D&R Canal Park and Canal Road. Shrubs used to
screen headlight glare shall be spaced a minimum of two feet
on center as a double row.
(b) The landscape design shall provide shade for parking areas
and evergreen and ornamental trees to screen nuisances and
emphasize appropriate views.
(c) All plants shall be tolerant of harsh roadside conditions.
(d) If a landscaped strip of 25 feet cannot be provided, a row of
evergreen trees or a combination of a low wall and berm with
planting may be required.
(e) Minimum plant sizes shall be shade trees two inches to 2 1/2
inches caliper, evergreen and ornamental trees four feet to five
feet in height and shrubs two feet in height.
G. Steep slopes. The following standards shall apply to areas with slopes in
excess of 12% and 25%, respectively.
(1) In areas with slopes of 12% to 25%, no more than 15% of such
areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation
§ 112-144 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-144
1:404
and, for purposes of subdivision or the issuance of a building
permit for a new dwelling, each lot must include a minimum of
one contiguous acre of land with less than 15% slope on which all
development shall occur.
(2) In areas with slopes of 25% or more, no development, regrading or
stripping of vegetation will be permitted.
H. Viewsheds. The following standards shall apply to new structures in
order to protect the view into the proposed lot from the D&R Canal Park
and Canal Road:
(1) New structures should be sited behind visual barriers, such as
trees, rock outcroppings, vertical cliff faces and ridge lines.
(2) On sloping hills new structures should be located at any point in the
foreground to midground of the hill to not create a barrier which
will be visible from the D&R Canal Park or Canal Road, or will block
the view of distant hills.
§ 112-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-144
1:405

ARTICLE XVII
Lot Size Averaging
§ 112-145. RR-3 District.
A. Purpose.
(1) In some situations the overall planning for a tract may better
respond to the intent and purpose of this chapter if flexibility in the
design of a subdivision is permitted. The applicant must clearly
demonstrate to the Board that the lot size averaging plan is
preferable to the conventional plan in the achievement of the goals,
objectives and purposes of this chapter and the Township's Master
Plan.
(2) Factors to be considered in this demonstration include, but are not
limited to, stream corridor and wetlands preservation, soil
suitability, steep slope protection, woodland protection, habitat
protection, overall site design, reduced impervious coverage, and
improved circulation. The Planning Board shall have the authority
to determine whether the lot size averaging plan is preferable.
B. The minimum tract area shall be 20 acres.
C. The lot size averaging development plan shall not result in a greater
dwelling unit density than if the property in question were developed as
a conventional subdivision. For purposes of determining the maximum
number of lots permitted under lot size averaging, either of the
following methods may be employed:
(1) The applicant shall submit a concept plan of conventional
subdivision layout. The concept plan shall be in sufficient detail to
permit the Planning Board to make an informed decision as to the
subdivision satisfying all ordinance requirements and in a form that
would be acceptable to the Planning Board as a conventional
subdivision without the need for any lot area or lot dimension
variances or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The
number of lots shown on an accepted concept plan shall be the
maximum number of lots permitted under lot size averaging; or
(2) The maximum number of lots shall be equal to 80% of the area of
the tract divided by the minimum conventional lot size of three
acres.
D. The minimum lot size may be reduced to two acres, provided that the
average lot size throughout the development shall be at least three
acres. Any lots larger than three acres shall be permanently deed
restricted from further subdivision and development in the future other
than use for one dwelling unit. In addition, any land area in excess of
the minimum lot size may be offered to the Township or its designee for
the purposes outlined in § 112-8B, at the option of the Township
Planning Board and Council. The Township shall have the right of first
§ 112-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-145
1:407
§ 112-146. RR-5 District.
refusal for any such land that is offered. The proposed lots shall meet all
requirements for safe septic system operation established by applicable
Township, county and state regulations.
A. Purpose.
(1) In some situations the overall planning for a tract may better
respond to the intent and purpose of this chapter if flexibility in the
design of a subdivision is permitted. The applicant must clearly
demonstrate to the Board that the lot size averaging plan is
preferable to the conventional plan in the achievement of the goals,
objectives and purposes of this chapter and the Township's Master
Plan.
(2) Factors to be considered in this demonstration include, but are not
limited to, stream corridor and wetlands preservation, soil
suitability, agricultural retention, steep slope protection, woodland
protection, habitat protection, overall site design, reduction of
impervious coverage, and improved circulation. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to determine whether the lot size
averaging plan is preferable.
B. The minimum tract area shall be 30 acres.
C. The lot size averaging development plan shall not result in a greater
dwelling unit density than if the property in question were developed as
a conventional subdivision. For purposes of determining the maximum
number of lots permitted under lot size averaging, either of the
following methods may be employed:
(1) The applicant shall submit a concept plan of conventional
subdivision layout. The concept plan shall be in sufficient detail to
permit the Planning Board to make an informed decision as to the
subdivision satisfying all ordinance requirements and in a form that
would be acceptable to the Planning Board as a conventional
subdivision without the need for any lot area or lot dimension
variances or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The
number of lots shown on an accepted concept plan shall be the
maximum number of lots permitted under lot size averaging; or
(2) The maximum number of lots shall be equal to 80% of the area of
the tract divided by the minimum conventional lot size of five acres.
D. The minimum lot size may be reduced to three acres provided that the
average lot size throughout the development shall be at least five acres.
Any lots larger than five acres shall be permanently deed restricted
from further subdivision and development in the future other than use
for one dwelling unit. In addition, any land area in excess of the
minimum lot size may be offered to the Township or its designee for the
purposes outlined in § 112-8C, at the option of the Township Planning
§ 112-145 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-146
1:408
Board and Council. The Township shall have the right of first refusal
for any such land that is offered. The proposed lots shall meet all
requirements for safe septic system operation established by applicable
Township, county and state regulations.
§ 112-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-146
1:409

ARTICLE XVIII
Preservation Area Markers
[Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4011-13]
§ 112-147. Requirements.
In addition to any relevant requirements of the New Jersey Map Filing Act,
N.J.S.A. 46:23 et seq., and as required for stream corridors elsewhere in this
chapter, preservation areas, including cluster, common, usable and public
open space, Delaware & Raritan Canal Commission, NJDEP, and all other
preservation areas, shall have:
A. Approved survey markers conforming to Engineering Department
details and specifications located at all boundary corners of
preservation areas and intersecting property lines and such other
locations as shall be determined by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment; and
B. Preservation area markers located at all boundary corners of
preservation areas and other such locations as shall be determined by
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, in accordance with the
following specifications:
(1) Preservation area plaques shall be made of aluminum, 3 1/2 inches
by 3 1/2 inches, and shall conform in design and color with a
sample plaque available for sale at a cost of $10 in the office of the
Township Clerk. Preservation area plaques shall be secured to the
upper faces of the posts facing the preservation area boundary.
(2) Preservation area plaques shall be placed on four inches by four
inches by five feet long pressure-treated lumber posts. Posts shall
be embedded into concrete to a depth of two feet, leaving three feet
exposed above the final grade or existing grade of the surrounding
land. Posts shall be located one foot inside of the preservation area
boundary line adjacent to all monuments and other approved
survey markers set in compliance with N.J.S.A. 46:23 and as
required by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(3) Preservation area boundary lines shall be established by a licensed
land surveyor and shall be shown on the final subdivision or final
site plan map. Bearings and distances around the preservation area
and proposed or existing locations of preservation area markers
shall also be shown on the map.
(4) All costs for the establishment of location, marking, purchase and
installation of approved survey markers and preservation area
markers shall be borne by the applicant/developer.
(5) If boundary lines are in excess of 300 feet, preservation area
markers shall be equally spaced at maximum intervals of 300 feet.
§ 112-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-147
1:411
(6) Where preservation area boundaries overlap (i.e., wetland
transition areas and floodplain areas) the most-restrictive
boundary limits shall be established as the Township preservation
area boundary line.
(7) Existing survey markers shall not be removed to be replaced by
preservation area survey markers. Lumber posts with preservation
area plaques shall be set adjacent to the existing survey markers as
directed elsewhere in this article. Where preservation area survey
markers coincide with proposed concrete monuments, the
monuments shall be set along with the lumber post with plaque.
(8) Preservation area easements shall be shall be dedicated to the
Township by deed filed in the County Clerk’s office in addition to
the requirements of any other agency.
§ 112-147 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-147
1:412
ARTICLE XIX
Senior Citizen Village District
§ 112-148. Establishment of districts. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 4271-19]
There is hereby permitted and authorized the establishment of the Senior
Citizen District in the locations reflected on the Official Zoning Map81 of the
Township of Franklin.
§ 112-149. Applicability. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 4271-19]
The provisions of this article shall only apply to the Senior Citizen Village
District as herein defined and in accordance with the provisions and
requirements of this article.
§ 112-150. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT COMMUNITY — A planned community designed to meet the needs
of and exclusively for, the residents of an age restricted segment of the
population where the head of the household is, at a minimum age of 55
years of age, except that due to death, a remaining spouse of less than 55
years of age shall be permitted to continue to reside and further, provided
that no person under 19 years of age shall reside in any dwelling unit for
more than 90 days in any calendar year.
ASSISTED LIVING — A coordinated array of supportive personal and health
services available 24 hours per day to residents who have been assessed
to need these services, including residents who require formal long-term
care. Assisted living promotes resident self-direction and participation in
decisions that emphasize independence, individuality, privacy, dignity and
homelike surroundings.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility
which is licensed by the Department of Health to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a
private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the units entrance.
COMPREHENSIVE PERSONAL CARE HOME — A facility which is licensed
by the Department of Health to provide room and board and to assure that
assisted living services are available when needed, to four or more adults
unrelated to the proprietor. Residential units in comprehensive personal
care homes house no more that two residents and have a lockable door on
the unit entrance.
81.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is available in the Clerk's office or through the Township's
online version of the Code (eCode 360®).
§ 112-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-150
1:413
CONGREGATE-CARE FACILITY — Housing for independent and
semidependent living which provides support services, including but not
limited to religious, recreational, housekeeping, laundry, transportation,
dining and health care facilities which are contiguous to or included within
the facility.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility so defined in N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.,
and amendments thereto.
§ 112-151. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the District is to enable the planned development,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 to 40:55D-45.8, of a Senior Citizen Village
District which shall also provide for recreational, medical and shopping
facilities and similar services required by the residents thereof in
accordance with a comprehensive site development plan approved by the
Planning Board of the Township.
§ 112-152. Required tract size.
§ 112-153. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. For the Planned Senior Citizen District, the tract size shall be a
minimum of 200 contiguous acres. For the purposes of this section, the
existence of a public street right-of-way shall not be deemed to
interrupt contiguous acreage.
B. For the Planned Senior Citizen District Overlay, the tract size shall be a
minimum of 70 contiguous acres.
A. Independent residential dwelling units.
B. Single-family detached and semiattached dwellings.
C. Multifamily structures containing three or more dwellings including
triplex, quadraplex, townhouse and multifamily apartment buildings.
D. Recreational and support facilities including club house, swimming
pool, tennis courts, etc.
E. Licensed and other residential health care facilities such as but not
limited to assisted living/congregate care facilities, nursing homes and
adult day care.
F. Shopping and service facilities including but not limited to grocery
store, book and stationary, pharmacy, restaurant, doctor and dentist
office, places of worship, retail goods and service stores of a
neighborhood service type including but not limited to food, drugs,
drink, household supplies, hardware stores, barbershops and beauty
shops, shoe repair and tailor shops, dry cleaning shops, professional
offices, banks and restaurants.
§ 112-150 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-153
1:414
§ 112-154. Gross density.
Gross density shall be 3.8 dwelling units per gross acre of tract. Gross
density shall not include assisted living residential units, congregate
housing, comprehensive personal care home or nursing beds.
§ 112-155. Height, area and bulk requirements for independent
living residential dwellings.
Height, area and bulk requirements for independent living residential
dwellings shall be as follows:
G. Eating and drinking establishments.
H. Quasi-public or private club or fraternity.
I. Community or civic facilities included but not limited to community
residences, eleemosynary uses, and outpatient clinic.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Minimum lot size: 4,500 square feet (not to exceed 33% of the total
number of single-family lots, and further provided that no less than
50% of all single-family lots shall be 5,500 square feet or greater.
(2) Lot width (at set back line): 45 feet.
(3) Front yard: 20 feet from curb face and further provided that no
driveway shall be less than 20 feet in length measured from the
garage door to the sidewalk or curb as the case may be.
(4) Side yard: five feet.
(5) Both side yards: 15 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 15 feet.
B. Semidetached.
(1) Minimum lot size: 3,750 square feet.
(2) Lot width (at setback line): 35 feet.
(3) All other bulk standards: same as above, except one side yard: 0
feet.
(4) Both side yards: 10 feet.
C. Triplex/Quadraplex (three to four single-family units in one structure).
[Note: No front-to-back building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Front yard: 20 feet from curb face.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings or five feet to
lot line, whichever the greater.
§ 112-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-155
1:415
§ 112-156. Height, area and bulk requirements for commercial and
senior citizen support uses.
Height, area and bulk requirements for commercial and senior citizen
support uses, including assisted living residential health care facilities,
comprehensive personal care home and nursing home shall be as follows:
§ 112-157. Commercial and senior citizen support facilities and
uses.
Requirements and restrictions for commercial and senior citizen support
facilities and uses shall be as follows:
(3) Rear yard: 30 feet back to back of adjacent buildings or 15 feet to
lot line, whichever the greater.
D. Townhouse (five to eight units in one structure). [Note: No front-to-back
building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Front yard: 20 feet from curb face.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet back to back of adjacent buildings.
E. Multifamily structure (more than eight units in one structure). [Note:
No front-to-back building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Maximum height: 3 stories/50 feet maximum height.
(2) Maximum units per structure: 60 units.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings.
(4) Rear yard: 50 feet back to back of adjacent buildings.
A. Minimum lot size: two acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
C. Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
E. Minimum both side yards: 50 feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
G. Maximum height: 50 feet.
H. Maximum percent lot coverage by buildings: 40%.
I. Maximum percent impervious coverage by buildings and pavement
(total impervious surface): 80%.
§ 112-155 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-157
1:416
§ 112-158. Housing type mix.
Required housing type mix of independent living residential dwellings shall
be as follows:
Type Percent of Total
Detached 50 - 80
Semiattached 0 - 25
Triplex/Quadroplex 0 - 25
Townhomes 0 - 25
Apartments/Condo Flats 5 - 35
§ 112-159. Other requirements.
A. Commercial retail and service uses shall not be permitted in any
structure containing a dwelling unit.
B. The required minimum/maximum percent of gross project area to be
developed for commercial purposes shall be 0% minimum/3%
maximum, and for senior citizen support facilities shall be 0%
minimum/5% maximum. Such uses shall be separate and apart from
common area proposed, except that limited retail/service uses of no
more than 10,000 square feet of floor area may be located within a
structure(s) owned by the owners' association.
A. Clubhouse facility or facilities providing pool, tennis, and other
activities including game rooms and general multipurpose space: a
minimum of 14 square feet of floor area per independent living unit
shall be provided.
B. Open space/recreation facilities and area: 20.0% of the gross acreage of
the tract shall be open space and improved recreation areas of which a
minimum of 7.5% of the gross acreage shall be improved recreational
facilities including but not limited to clubhouse, tennis, pool, bikeways,
village parks, play field areas and support facilities. Open space/
recreation areas shall not include paved roadways, parking areas
provided for attached residential dwellings or any portion of a lot in fee
simple individual ownership. Pedestrian walkways shall be included in
the open space/recreation area calculation.
C. Pedestrian paths/bikeways: Each dwelling shall have immediate access
to a pedestrian path (sidewalk) or bikeway located to the front, side or
rear of the dwellings. Bikeways shall be required along main access
roadways. An off-site bikeways shall connect the senior citizen village to
state, county, or Township open space/recreation facilities adjacent to
or in close proximity to the tract.
D. Off-street parking: 1.8 spaces per attached independent residential
living unit. All detached dwellings shall have a garage and a private
driveway.
§ 112-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-159
1:417
§ 112-159.1. Properties in SCV Zone not included in SCV
development. [Added 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 4271-19]
The following properties located within the SCV Zoning District but not
included in the Canal Walk development (i.e., the lands encumbered by Lots
1.01, 2.01, 3, 4.01, 12.02, 13.02, 16 and 17) shall be subject to the use and
bulk requirements of the R-40 (Single-Family Residential) Zoning District.
E. Provision for emergency services: A developer of licensed health care
facility as defined and provided herein shall own, lease, rent or have
immediately available by other arrangement an ambulance for the
conveyance of nonambulatory as well as emergency patients.
F. Site transition areas, security and access.
(1) For Planned Senior Citizen Village Districts: A buffer shall be
provided of 50 feet in width along the tract boundary and shall be
increased to 250 feet where any portion of the tract abuts the D&R
Canal, except that existing dwellings shall be permitted to remain
within any required buffer area. Earth berms, landscaping,
ornamental fencing and security stations shall be provided within
the required buffer areas.
(2) For planned senior citizen village district overlays: An average
buffer shall be provided of 50 feet in width along the tract boundary
and may be modified by the Planning Board during the review
process, with a minimum width of 35 feet. Earth berms,
landscaping, ornamental fencing and security stations shall be
provided within the required buffer areas.
§ 112-159 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-159.1
1:418
ARTICLE XX
Planned Adult Community (PAC) District
§ 112-160. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall only apply to the Planned Adult
Community (PAC) District as herein defined and in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of this section.
§ 112-161. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLANNED ADULT COMMUNITY (PAC) — A planned adult community
designed to meet the needs of an age-restricted segment of the population
where the head of the household is, at a minimum, 55 years of age, except
that due to the death a remaining spouse of less than 55 shall be allowed to
remain; no person under 19 years of age shall reside in any dwelling unit for
more than 90 days in any calendar year; and where an equivalent of at least
10% of all units, including non-age-restricted, shall be provided for low- and
moderate-income households. The PAC District shall also include 150 of the
total units as non-age-restricted units. Further, a minimum of 5% shall and
up to 10% of the tract may be developed for commercial uses.
§ 112-162. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the PAC District is to enable the planned
development, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 to 40:55D-45.8, of a PAC
District which shall also provide for recreational, medical and shopping
facilities, employment opportunities and similar services required by the
residents thereof in accordance with a comprehensive site development
plan approved by the Planning Board of the Township.
§ 112-163. Required tract size.
For the PAC District, the required tract size shall be a minimum of 150
contiguous acres. For the purposes of this section, the existence of a public
street right-of-way shall not be deemed to interrupt contiguous acreage.
§ 112-164. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. Independent residential dwelling units.
B. Single-family detached and semiattached dwellings.
C. Multifamily structures containing three or more dwellings including
triplex, quadraplex, townhouse and multifamily apartment buildings.
§ 112-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-164
1:419
§ 112-165. Gross density.
A gross density of 6.0 dwelling units per gross acre of the tract shall
be permitted for independent residential dwelling units including common
areas, except that no more than 900 units including COAH eligible
affordable units shall be permitted.
§ 112-166. Height area and bulk requirements for independent
living residential dwellings.
Height area and bulk requirements for independent living residential
dwellings shall be as follows:
D. Recreational and support facilities including clubhouse, swimming
pool, tennis courts, etc.
E. Shopping and service facilities including but not limited to grocery
store, book and stationery, pharmacy, restaurant, doctor and dentist
office, places of worship, retail goods and service stores of a
neighborhood service type including but not limited to food, drugs,
drink, household supplies, hardware stores, barbershops and beauty
shops, shoe repair and tailor shops, dry cleaning shops, professional
offices, banks and restaurants.
F. Eating and drinking establishments.
G. Quasi-public or private club or fraternity.
H. Community or civic facilities included but not limited to community
residences, eleemosynary uses, and outpatient clinics.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Minimum lot size: 4,500 square feet.
(2) Lot width (at set back line): 45 feet.
(3) Front yard: 20 feet from curb face and further provided that no
driveway shall be less than 20 feet in length measured from the
garage door to the sidewalk or curb which ever is closer.
(4) Side yard: five feet.
(5) Both side yards: 15 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 20 feet.
B. Semidetached.
(1) Minimum lot size: 3,750 square feet.
(2) Lot width (at set back line): 35 feet.
(3) All other bulk standards: same as above, except side yard: 0 feet.
§ 112-164 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-166
1:420
§ 112-167. Commercial height, area and bulk requirements.
Commercial height, area and bulk requirements shall be as follows:
(4) Both side yards: 10 feet.
C. Triplex/quadraplex (three to four single-family units in one structure).
[Note: No front-to-back building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Front yard: 20 feet from sidewalk or curb, whichever is closer.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings or five feet to
lot line, whichever the greater.
(3) Rear yard: 30 feet back to back of adjacent buildings or 15 feet to
lot line, whichever the greater.
D. Townhouse (five to eight units in one structure). [Note: No front-to-back
building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Front yard: 20 feet from sidewalk or curb, whichever is closer.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet back to back of adjacent buildings.
E. Multifamily structure (more than eight units in one structure). [Note:
No front-to-back building arrangement shall be permitted.]
(1) Maximum height: three stories/50 feet maximum height.
(2) Maximum units per structure: 80 units.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet side to side of adjacent buildings.
(4) Rear yard: 50 feet back to back of adjacent buildings.
A. Minimum lot size: two acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
C. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
E. Minimum both side yards: 50 feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
G. Maximum height: 50 feet.
H. Maximum percent lot coverage by buildings: 40%.
I. Maximum percent impervious coverage by buildings and pavement
(total impervious surface): 65% subject to compliance with the New
§ 112-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-167
1:421
§ 112-168. Requirements and restrictions for commercial and
senior citizen support facilities and uses.
Requirements and restrictions for commercial and senior citizen support
facilities and uses shall be as follows:
§ 112-169. Housing type mix.
Required housing type mix of independent living residential dwellings shall
be as follows:
Type Percent of Total
Detached 0-50
Semiattached 0-25
Triplex/Quadraplex 0-25
Townhomes 0-50
Apartments/Condo Flats 25-75
§ 112-170. Other requirements.
Jersey Elimination Discharge System and Stormwater Regulations
(N.J.A.C. 7:14A1-25) and to no increase in runoff from the site.
A. Commercial retail service uses and light manufacturing shall not be
permitted in any structure containing a dwelling unit.
B. The maximum percent of gross project area to be developed for
commercial purposes shall be 10%.
C. The maximum percent of gross project area to be developed for senior
citizen support facilities shall be 5%.
D. Such uses shall be separate and apart from common area proposed.
A. Clubhouse facility or facilities providing pool, tennis and other activities
including game rooms and general multipurpose space: a minimum of
14 square feet of floor area per independent living unit shall be
provided.
B. Open space/recreation facilities and area: 20.0% of the gross acreage of
the tract shall be open space. Improved recreation areas shall be an
additional 5% of the gross acreage and shall be improved recreational
facilities including but not limited to clubhouse, tennis, pool, bikeways,
village parks, play field areas and support facilities. Open space/
recreation areas shall not include paved roadways, parking areas
provided for attached residential dwellings or any portion of a lot in fee
simple individual ownership. Pedestrian walkways, exclusive of
sidewalks along streets, shall be included in the open space/recreation
area calculation.
§ 112-167 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-170
1:422
C. Pedestrian paths/bikeways: Each swelling shall have immediate access
to a pedestrian path (sidewalk) or bikeway located to the front, side or
rear of the dwellings. Bikeways shall be required along main access
roadways. An off-site bikeway shall connect the PAC to state, county or
Township open space/recreation facilities or existing bikeways
connecting to such facilities, that are adjacent to or in close proximity
to the tract.
D. Off-street parking: 1.8 spaces per attached independent residential
living unit shall be provided. All detached dwellings shall have a garage
and a private driveway.
E. Provision for emergency services: A developer of licensed health care
facility as defined and provided herein shall own, lease, rent or have
immediately available by other arrangement an ambulance for the
conveyance of nonambulatory as well as emergency patients.
F. Site transition areas, security and access: An average buffer shall be
provided of 50 feet in width along the tract boundary and may be
modified by the Planning Board during the review process, with a
minimum width of 35 feet. Earth berms, landscaping, ornamental
fencing and security stations shall be provided within the required
buffer areas.
G. Access to Weston Canal Road prohibited: No private or public roadway
shall connect to Weston Canal Road except that the Planning Board, in
its sole discretion, may permit emergency access.
H. Provision of low- and moderate-income housing; mandatory set-aside
requirements. A developer shall provide or cause others to provide lowand
moderate-income dwelling units which shall be equivalent to not
less than 10% of the total number of dwelling units specified in the
development plan and further provided that 50 of the required low- and
moderate-income units shall be dedicated to the Township by fee simple
deed or other instrument acceptable to the Township. All units or
equivalents shall be provided in accordance with §§ 112-75, 112-76,
112-78, and 112-79.
§ 112-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-170
1:423

ARTICLE XXI
Right to Farm
§ 112-171. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
COMMERCIAL FARM —
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.
FARM MARKET — A facility used for the wholesale or retail marketing of
the agricultural output of a commercial farm, and products that contribute
to farm income, except that if a farm market is used for retail marketing,
at least 51% of the annual gross sales of the retail farm market shall be
generated from sales of agricultural output of the commercial farm, or at
least 51% of the sales area shall be devoted to the sale of the agricultural
output of the commercial farm, and except that if a retail farm market
is located on land less than five acres in area, the land on which the
farm market is located shall produce annually agricultural or horticultural
products worth at least $2,500.
PICK-YOUR-OWN OPERATION — A direct marketing alternative wherein
retail or wholesale customers are invited onto a commercial farm in order
to harvest agricultural, floricultural or horticultural products.
§ 112-172. Farming declared a permitted use in all zones.
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually,
and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.; or
A.
A farm management unit less than five acres, producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.
B.
A. The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist in this Township and is
hereby declared a permitted use in all zones of this Township. This right
to farm includes, but not by way of limitation:
(1) Production of agricultural and horticultural crops, trees, apiary and
forest products, livestock, poultry and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture,
forestry, fishing and trapping.
§ 112-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-172
1:425
(2) Housing and employment of necessary farm laborers.
(3) Erection of essential agricultural buildings, including those
dedicated to the processing and packaging of the output of the
commercial farm and ancillary to agricultural and horticultural
production.
(4) The grazing of animals and use of range for fowl.
(5) Construction of fences.
(6) The operation and transportation of large, slow-moving equipment
over roads within the Township.
(7) Control of pests, including but not limited to insects and weeds,
predators and diseases of plants and animals.
(8) Conduction of agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm and permission of the farm owner and lessee is
obtained.
(9) Use of any and all equipment, including but not limited to irrigation
pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and spraying,
tractors, harvest aids, and bird control devices.
(10) Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the
commercial farm.
(11) The operation of a farm market with attendant signage, including
the construction of building and parking areas in conformance with
Township standards.
(12) The operation of a pick-your-own operation with attendant signage.
(13) Replenishment of soil nutrients and improvements of soil tilth.
(14) Clearing of woodlands using open burning and other techniques,
installation and maintenance of vegetative and terrain alterations
and other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and
surface water control in wetland areas.
(15) On-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
(16) The application of manure and chemical fertilizers, insecticides
and herbicides.
(17) Installation of wells, ponds and other water resources for
agricultural purposes such as irrigation, sanitation and marketing
preparation.
B. Commercial farm operators may engage in any other agricultural
activity as determined by the State Agriculture Development
§ 112-172 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-172
1:426
§ 112-173. Adherence to accepted practices.
Commercial farm operators are strongly advised to adhere to generally
accepted agricultural management practices that have been:
§ 112-174. Conformance with federal and state law.
The foregoing activities must be in conformance with applicable federal and
state law.
§ 112-175. Time and days of activities not restricted.
The foregoing practices and activities may occur on holidays, weekdays
and weekends by day or night and shall include the attendant or incidental
noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with these practices.
§ 112-176. Nuisance factor offset by benefits.
It is hereby determined that whatever nuisance may be caused to others
by these foregoing uses and activities is more than offset by the benefits of
farming to the neighborhood community and society in general.
§ 112-177. Filing of complaints.
Any person aggrieved by the operation of a commercial farm shall file a
complaint with the applicable County Agriculture Development Board or
the State Agriculture Development Committee in counties where no county
board exists prior to filing an action in court.
§ 112-178. Additional purpose.
An additional purpose of this chapter is to promote a good neighbor policy
by advising purchasers and users of property adjacent to or near
commercial farms of accepted activities or practices associated with those
neighboring farms. It is intended that, through mandatory disclosures,
Committee and adopted by rule or regulation pursuant to the provisions
of the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A.52:14B-1
et seq.).
A. Promulgated as rules by the State Agriculture Development Committee;
B. Recommended as site-specific agricultural management practices by
the County Agriculture Development Board;
C. Approved by the local Soil Conservation District in the form of a farm
conservation plan that is prepared in conformance with the United
States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) Field Office Technical Guide (FOTG), revised April 20,
1998, as amended and supplemented; or
D. Recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station.
§ 112-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-178
1:427
purchasers and users will better understand the impacts of living near
agricultural operations and be prepared to accept attendant conditions as
the natural result of living in or near land actively devoted to commercial
agriculture or in an agricultural development area, meaning an area
identified by a County Agriculture Development Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-18 and certified by the State Agriculture
Development Committee. The disclosure required by this section is set forth
in the form attached hereto as Appendix A.82
82.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Real Estate Transfer and Disclosure Statement, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 112-178 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-178
1:428
ARTICLE XXII
Subdivision of Land
[Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4008-13; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4012-13; 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4261-19]
§ 112-179. Administration of subdivision approval.
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Township of Franklin in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 112-180. Administration of requirements.
§ 112-181. Minor subdivision.
A. Rules and regulations. These rules, regulations and standards shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Franklin.
Applications for subdivision approval shall seek to comply with the
applicable requirements and design standards of this chapter and the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
B. The Township hereby adopts, and incorporates herein, the Subdivision
Submission Checklist contained in Schedule 10.83
C. Minor Subdivision Committee. A Minor Subdivision Committee is
hereby created, consisting of three members of the Planning Board
appointed by the Chairman of the Planning Board.
D. Simultaneous approval. The Planning Board shall have the power to
grant preliminary and final subdivision approval simultaneously,
provided that all application requirements have been met.
A. Submission of minor subdivision application. A submission for minor
subdivision approval shall include all applicable forms, data,
information, fees, etc. outlined on the Subdivision Submission Checklist
contained in Schedule 10.
B. Review and approval of minor subdivision applications.
(1) Conforming minor subdivision application. An application for minor
subdivision that does not require variance relief from the
requirements of Chapter 112 and that is not accompanied by
another application (e.g., site plan application) shall be reviewed by
the Minor Subdivision Committee and the applicant shall not be
required to provide public notice. Approval by the Minor
Subdivision Committee shall be deemed to be final approval. The
Minor Subdivision Committee shall subsequently report the results
of their review to the Planning Board.
83.Editor's Note: Schedule 10 is attached to this chapter.
§ 112-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-181
1:429
§ 112-182. Preliminary and/or final major subdivision.
(2) Nonconforming or concurrent minor subdivision application. An
application for minor subdivision that require variance relief from
the requirements of Chapter 112 and that is accompanied by
another application (e.g., site plan application) shall be reviewed by
the Planning Board.
C. Deadline for Board decision, effect of approval, length of approval,
extension of approvals. The applicable requirements of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) shall apply.
A. A submission for preliminary and/or final major subdivision approval
shall include all applicable forms, data, information, fees, etc. outlined
on Subdivision Submission Checklist contained in Schedule 10.
B. Deadline for Board decision, effect of approval, length of approval,
extension of approvals. The applicable requirements of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 112-181 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-182
1:430
ARTICLE XXIII
Site Plan Review
[Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3729; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4012-13; 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 4199-17; 2-26-2019 by Ord. No.
4261-19]
§ 112-183. Purpose.
This article establishes a site plan review process for proposed development
in Franklin Township. The purpose of the review is to ensure:
§ 112-184. General requirements; administrative site plan approval
of minor site plan applications.
A. Preservation of existing natural resources on the site;
B. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, loading
and access for emergency vehicles;
C. Adequate screening, landscaping and location of structures;
D. Exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in addition to any
requirements for streetlighting;
E. Efficient, safe and aesthetic land development;
F. Harmonious use of land;
G. Compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure adequate light
and air, proper building arrangements, and minimum adverse impact on
surrounding property;
H. Adequate water supply, drainage and stormwater management,
sanitary facilities, and other utilities and services; and
I. Adequate recreation, open space and public use areas.
A. Site plan review. All site plans as defined in this chapter are subject to
the review procedures and time periods for decision specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. and the following provisions:
(1) Site plan review and approval is required for any new structure or
for an addition or alteration to an existing structure, for any
material change to the external site plan configuration, and/or for
any change of use of an existing structure, with the following
exceptions:
(a) A single-family detached dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling
unit and/or their accessory building(s) or accessory uses on a
lot;
(b) Permitted accessory structures to residential and agricultural
uses;
§ 112-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-184
1:431
(c) There is a change of use from one permitted nonresidential use
to another permitted nonresidential use whereby the Zoning
Officer determines that the site meets the requirements of this
chapter for the new use; and
(d) Buildings which are part of a farming operation as defined
herein, which comply with all provisions of this chapter and
where the proposed activity is exempt pursuant to the Right to
Farm Act.84
B. Simultaneous review.
(1) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or
deny conditional uses or subdivisions simultaneously with review
for site plan approval. The longest time period for action by the
Planning Board pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) whether it be for subdivision, variance,
conditional use or site plan approval shall apply.
(2) Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested, the applicant
shall provide a completed application for site plan approval (which
includes a section addressing conditional use approval).
C. The Township hereby adopts, and incorporates herein, the Site Plan
Submission Checklist contained in Schedule 9.85
D. Administrative site plan approval of minor site plan applications.
(1) Administrative site plan approval. Site plan approval from the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be
required for applications for minor site plans as defined herein
where the proposed disturbance or structure is less than 5,000
square feet or 10% of the gross lot area (whichever is less) and
where the Technical Review Committee (TRC) determines that no
adverse impacts will occur from such proposed development and
the application does not require any variance relief from any
provisions of this chapter. Site plan approval from the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for applications in excess of
5,000 square feet or 10% of the gross lot area may not be required
if the TRC determines that no adverse impact will occur from such
proposed development, the application does not require variance
relief from any provisions of this chapter and the Chairperson (or
designee) of the Board that has jurisdiction consents to waiving site
plan approval by the Board. If the lot that is the subject of the
application has received TRC approval(s) within the last two years,
the square footage of the prior approval(s) and the square footage
of the subject application shall be totaled to determine whether the
5,000 square feet or 10% requirement has been exceeded.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: Schedule 9 is attached to this chapter.
§ 112-184 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-184
1:432
§ 112-185. Preliminary and/or major site plan approval.
§ 112-186. Improvements or guaranties.
See Article XXIV, § 112-194 et seq.
§ 112-187. Board of Adjustment review of site plan and/or
subdivision application.
Approval with variance application. The Board of Adjustment shall have the
power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Planning Board, site plan and/or subdivision approval whenever the
Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and appropriate sections of the Zoning
Ordinance of Franklin Township. All requirements of this chapter with the
exception of time period for approval shall apply to the Board of Adjustment
(a) There is hereby established a Technical Review Committee
(TRC) whose purpose is to review and approve/disapprove
minor site plans that are exempt from site plan approval from
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as per
§ 112-185C.
(b) The membership of the Technical Review Committee shall
consist of the following (or their designees): Director of
Planning, Economic Development Director, Franklin Township
Sewerage Authority Executive Director, Township Engineer,
Health Department Director, Fire Prevention Director, and
Head of Police Safety Traffic Bureau.
(c) The Technical Review Committee shall be subject to the
following rules and regulations:
[1] All seven members of the TRC must vote to approve an
application for a site plan to receive approval.
[2] The applicant shall be informed in writing of the TRC's
decision, including any required amendments to the
application or conditions imposed by the TRC.
A. A submission for preliminary and/or major site plan approval shall
include all applicable forms, data, information, fees, etc. outlined on the
Site Plan Submission Checklist contained in Schedule 9.
B. Deadline for Board decision, effect of approval, length of approval,
extension of approvals. The applicable requirements of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) shall apply.
C. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant preliminary and final
approval simultaneously, provided that all application requirements
have been met.
§ 112-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-187
1:433
when acting as the reviewing board for a and/or subdivision site plan
application.
§ 112-188. Principles and standards for site plan and subdivision
review.
The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the
adequacy of proposed development in the Township. The Planning Board
shall review the site plan and/or subdivision for compliance with all
applicable ordinances and the Master Plan; for harmony with surrounding
uses and the overall plan for development of the Township; for the
promotion of the health, safety, order, efficiency and economy of the
Township; and for the maintenance of property values and the general
welfare. Based upon its review and the degree to which it can make positive
findings, the Board may approve, conditionally approve, request
modifications or deny approval of the site plan and/or subdivision based on
evaluation of the site plans details with respect to:
A. The site plan's compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including
but not limited to off-street parking and loading, signs, lighting, open
space and the generation of objectionable smoke, fumes, noise, odors,
dust, glare, vibration or heat.
B. The site plan's compliance with all requirements and standards of
Article XXII, Subdivision of Land, including, but not limited to,
standards for construction, layout, dimensions and materials.
C. The environmental impact of the development relating to the
preservation of existing natural resources on the site and the impact on
the natural resources of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
D. The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of
harmonious use and design, setbacks, maintenance of property values
and negative impacts.
E. The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation system.
F. The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to
ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently
arranged.
G. The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed
to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for
firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
H. The coordination of streets so as to compose a convenient system
consistent with the circulation element of the Master Plan.
I. The design and location of buildings in an efficient and aesthetically
pleasing manner.
J. The use of landscaping and screening to:
§ 112-187 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-188
1:434
§ 112-189. through § 112-193. (Reserved)
(1) Provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement or
activities from adjacent properties when necessary; and
(2) Complement the design and location of buildings and be integrated
into the overall site design.
K. Exterior lighting to ensure safe movement and for security purposes,
which shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on
adjacent properties.
L. The location, size and configuration of open space areas to ensure that
such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
M. Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or
from excavation or grading.
N. Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas subject to
flooding.
O. The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, garbage disposal
and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
P. The design and location of signs so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 112-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-189
1:435

ARTICLE XXIV
Performance Guaranties and Improvements
§ 112-194. Performance guaranty.
Before recording of final subdivision plat or as a condition of final site plan
approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
subsection N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the Planning Board may require and shall
accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract and offtract
improvements:
A. The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Township in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation which cost shall
be determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, Chapter 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4), for improvements which the Planning Board may deem
necessary or appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments as shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law, P.L. 1960, Chapter 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains,
culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation
control devices, public improvements of open space, open space
markers, and in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements
and landscaping. The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost
estimate of the improvements covered by the performance guaranty,
which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guaranty posted by the obligor.
B. The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
Township Council for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the improvement, which cost shall be determined by the
Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, Chapter 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). In the event
that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be,
shall be required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
C. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
of P.L. 1991 Chapter 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the
passage of the resolution.
§ 112-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-194
1:437
D. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements
shall not be subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local
Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) as
long as no public monies are expended for the completion or correction.
E. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the Township Council in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of
the Township Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to § 112-194A of this
chapter, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy
of the request to the Township Engineer. The request shall indicate
which improvements have been completed and which improvements
remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the
Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with
the Township Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to
the obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
F. The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for,
the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to
be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be
made in the performance guaranty relating to the completed and
satisfactory improvement. In accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to § 112-194A of this chapter.
G. The Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guaranty relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to § 112-194A of this
chapter. This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after
receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon
§ 112-194 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-194
1:438
adoption of the resolution by the Township Council, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty,
with respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of
the performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion
and acceptability of all improvements.
H. If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as
requested by the obligor pursuant to § 112-194A(5) of this chapter
within 45 days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the
court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Township
Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost
of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
I. If the Township Council fails to approve or reject the improvements
determined by the Township Engineer to be complete and satisfactory
or reduce the performance guaranty for the complete and satisfactory
improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the Township
Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time,
approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval
of a reduction in the performance guaranty for the approvable complete
and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to § 112-194A of this chapter; and the
cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may
be awarded to the prevailing party.
J. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the Township
or Planning Board as part of the performance guaranty, then any partial
reduction granted in the performance guaranty pursuant to this section
shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the
original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance
guaranty.
K. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Township
Council may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
L. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Township Council or the Township Engineer.
M. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Township may require of the
developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed,
except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of
§ 112-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-194
1:439
the cost of improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
N. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
O. The Township shall not require that a maintenance guaranty required
pursuant to Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53) be in
cash or that more than 10% of a performance guaranty pursuant to that
section be in cash. A developer may, however, provide at his option
some or all of a maintenance guaranty in cash, or more than 10% of a
performance guaranty in cash.
P. The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of Section
41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53) shall be estimated by the
Township Engineer based on documented construction costs for public
improvements prevailing in the general area of the Township. The
developer may appeal the Township Engineer's estimate to the
Township Council. The Township Council shall decide the appeal within
45 days of receipt of the appeal in writing by the Township Clerk. After
the developer posts a guaranty with the Township based on the cost of
the installation of improvements as determined by the Township
Council, he may institute legal action within one year of the posting in
order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness
and reasonableness of the amount of the guaranty.
Q. The Township Council shall, for the purposes of Section 41 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53), accept a performance guaranty or
maintenance guaranty which is an irrevocable letter of credit if it:
(1) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Township for an express initial period of time
in the amount determined pursuant to Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53);
(2) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and
doing business in this state;
(3) Is for a period of time of at least one year; and
(4) Consistent with the furnishing of an irrevocable letter of credit,
there shall be provided by the obligor, an irrevocable letter of
credit in the form set forth in Appendix B at the end of this chapter.
Obligor must use the preprinted form which is available from the
Township Engineering Department. The Township Attorney may
revise the preprinted form from time to time, but such revisions
may not alter the substance of such form unless authorized by an
ordinance implementing the revision.
§ 112-194 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-194
1:440
§ 112-195. On-tract improvements.
§ 112-196. Off-tract improvements.
R. If the Planning Board includes as a condition of approval of an
application for development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) the installation of streetlighting on a dedicated public
street connected to a public utility, then upon notification in writing by
the developer to the Planning Board and Township Council that 1) the
streetlighting on a dedicated public street has been installed and
accepted for service by the public utility and 2) that certificates of
occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling units and
50% of the floor area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated public
street or portion thereof indicated by section pursuant to Section 29 of
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the Township shall, within 30
days following receipt of the notification, make appropriate
arrangements with the public utility for, and assume the payment of, the
costs of the streetlighting on the dedicated public street on a continuing
basis. Compliance by the Township with the provisions of this section
shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance of the street by the
Township.
A. Prior to granting of final approval of all subdivisions and site plans, the
applicant shall have installed or shall have furnished performance
guaranties for the ultimate installation of all on-tract improvements
including but not limited to the following:
(1) Streets, driveways, parking lots, curbing and sidewalks.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Utilities (water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, cable television).
(4) Fire hydrants.
(5) Stormwater management facilities.
(6) Streetlighting and other exterior lighting.
(7) Landscaping and shade trees.
B. Provision of all improvements shall be in conformance with Township
design standards.
A. The Planning Board and/or the Board of Adjustment shall require, as a
condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, that the developer
pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing only reasonable and
necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of
the development but necessitated or required by construction or
improvements within such development. Such contribution for a
developer's pro rata share shall only be required where the off-tract
§ 112-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-196
1:441
improvements are to be constructed pursuant to provisions of the
circulation and comprehensive utility service plans included in the
Franklin Township Master Plan. The developer shall contribute his pro
rata share of the costs, except that in the case where all costs for the
required improvements can be properly allocated to the developer, he
may be required to install the improvement.
B. The developer shall pay the full cost or shall be required to construct
off-tract improvements that are wholly necessitated by the proposed
development where said improvements do not benefit any land other
than the land within the subdivision or site plan.
C. The developer shall provide for payment of its pro rata share, as
determined in Subsection B(5) and (6) of this section of all off-tract
improvements required by the Planning Board if such improvements
are wholly or partially necessitated by the proposed development
where said improvements benefit lands other than those within the
subdivision or site plan.
D. The developer shall deposit with the Township a percentage of the total
cost of the necessary improvements equal to the percent of benefit
which said development will receive from the necessary improvements
in relation to the total benefit resulting from the necessary
improvement to all properties as developed or potentially developed.
E. In apportioning the benefits of off-tract improvements as between the
developer, and other property owners and the general public, the
Planning Board shall be guided by the following factors:
(1) The increase in market values of the properties affected and any
other benefits conferred;
(2) The needs created by the application;
(3) Population and land use projections for the land within the general
area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to be served by
the off-tract improvements;
(4) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract improvements;
and
F. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning Board
may take into account the following specific factors:
(1) With respect to street widening, alignment, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streetlights, street signs, and traffic signalization
improvements, the Planning Board may consider:
(a) Traffic counts;
(b) Existing and projected traffic patterns;
(c) Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area; and
§ 112-196 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-196
1:442
(d) Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the needs
created by the proposed development.
(2) With respect to drainage facilities, the Planning Board may
consider:
(a) The relationship between the areas of the subdivision or site
plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which the
subdivision or site plan is a part;
(b) The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site plan
and the amount of land area to be covered by impervious
surfaces on the land within the subdivision or site plan; and
(c) The use, condition or land status of the remaining land area in
the drainage basin.
(3) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of § 112-196 to the contrary,
this subsection shall govern sanitary-sewerage-related
improvements. In cases where off-tract sewerage improvements
are necessitated by the construction of improvements proposed in
a subdivision or site plan application, the Township Council
delegates to the Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority
(hereinafter the "Franklin Township Sewerage Authority") the
determination of costs to be imposed upon the applicant or
developer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. The Franklin
Township Sewerage Authority shall adopt rules and regulations
based upon the comprehensive sanitary sewer plans of the Franklin
Township Sewerage Authority or of the Township Planning Board,
adopted as part of the utility service plan element of the Master
Plan, which shall include the following:
(a) The Franklin Township Sewerage Authority shall establish fair,
reasonable and rational standards to determine the
proportionate amount of the costs of the sewerage facilities
which are to be imposed upon each developer within a related
common area. Such standards shall not be altered subsequent
to the time of preliminary approval. The Franklin Township
Sewerage Authority shall also develop applicable rules and
regulations to determine whether the improvement is to be
constructed by the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority as
an Franklin Township Sewerage Authority capital
improvement, or whether the improvement is to be
constructed by the developer, with or without a formula for
partial reimbursement from other properties also specially
benefited by the improvement. The Franklin Township
Sewerage Authority may consider, but is not limited to:
[1] Flow measurements,
[2] Projected future loadings to the system.
§ 112-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-196
1:443
[3] Condition of the existing sewerage facilities.
[4] Amount of infiltration and inflow in the existing system.
[5] The use, condition or status of the remaining land in the
sanitary sewer service area.
[6] The remaining useful capacity of the system.
G. Deposit of money; return to developer.
(1) Any money received by the Township for off-tract improvements to
be constructed or installed by the Township pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be deposited in a suitable depository
therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for which
they are deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose. If
construction of improvements for which the Township is
responsible has not commenced within 10 years from the date of
deposit, the amount deposited, together with any interest thereon,
shall be returned to the developer or his successor in interest.
(2) Any money received by the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority
for off-tract improvements to be constructed or installed by the
Franklin Township Sewerage Authority pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall be deposited in a suitable depository therefor
and shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose. If
construction of the off-tract improvements within the included
subsystem, or any portion thereof, has not been commenced within
20 years from the date of deposit, the amount deposited, together
with any interest thereon, shall, upon written request from the
developer, be returned to the developer or his successor in interest.
(a) The Franklin Township Sewerage Authority shall develop rules
and regulations pertaining to the disposition of any
contribution paid by the developer in the event the
improvements are not constructed within a given time period.
(b) If the developer pays his proportionate share of construction
costs of the off-tract improvement under protest or agrees to
construct the off-tract improvement under protest, the
developer shall be required to institute legal action within one
year of the earliest of the following dates in order to preserve
the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of the amount:
[1] The date of such payment; or
[2] The date of the execution of the agreement imposing the
requirements; or
[3] The date of commencement of construction.
§ 112-196 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-197
1:444
§ 112-197. Inspection of improvements.
A. Deposits required to offset costs of inspection.
(1) Prior to the construction of any improvement required by virtue of
a site plan or subdivision approval and specifically the
commencement of any preparatory site work, including but not
necessarily limited to clearance of the property, grading or
excavation or the signing of the final subdivision or site plan,
whichever occurs first the developer shall initially deposit with the
Township a sum equal to 5% of the cost of the improvements but
not more than $4,999, which shall be used to pay the costs of
inspection incurred by the Township. In the event that the cost of
inspections are less than the amount deposited, the balance shall
be refunded to the developer. If the costs are greater than the
amount deposited, the Township shall require additional deposits
as necessary in accordance with Subsection A(2) of this section.
The fees to be charged shall be in accordance with the following
schedule: [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3683]
(a) Township employees. In accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, shall be 200% of the sum of the products
resulting from multiplying the hourly base salary by the
number of hours spent on the project.
[1] Inspector, weekdays from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
[2] Inspector, overtime, which is any time before 7:30 a.m.
and after 3:30 p.m. on weekdays.
[3] Inspector, any approval work on Saturday, Sunday or legal
holidays.(a)
[4] Administrative aide.
[5] Assistant Township Engineer.(b)
[6] Township Engineer.(b)
§ 112-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-197
1:445
Notes:
(a) Township shall not be obligated to provide these
inspection services. The ability to provide these services
will be strictly based on the availability of personnel.
Entities requesting these services must have submitted
a written request not less than one week prior to the
date when services are requested. If the Township can not
provide the inspection service, then no work may be done.
(b) These fees shall be charged in those cases where these
individuals are requested and/or required to make site
visits and the time shall be computed on a portal-to-portal
basis.
(b) Testing. Costs for any type of testing that may be required by
the Township, at any time during the course of the work, shall
be paid by the developer. The developer shall submit a list of
testing laboratories that they wish to use to the Township
Engineer's office, for review and approval, before engaging
such laboratory.
(c) Outside consulting services. When the Township Engineer
deems it is necessary to retain outside professional inspection
services, the developer shall be notified and shall reimburse
the Township for all reasonable professional consulting fees.
Billing for outside services will be based on the fee schedule
provided by the consultant and on file in the office of the
Township Engineer.
(2) For those subdivision and site plans where the reasonably
anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount
deposited shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated
fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by the amount expended for inspection and associated
administrative costs, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the anticipated inspection fees. For those developments for
which the reasonably anticipated inspection fees are $10,000 or
greater, fees may, at the developers option, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be
25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because
the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by the
amount expended for inspections and associated administrative
costs, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. The Township Engineer shall not
permit any construction requiring inspection to proceed if
sufficient funds to pay the cost of those inspections and associated
administrative costs are not on deposit.
§ 112-197 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-197
1:446
(3) Inspections:
(a) Prior to construction, the developer shall arrange a
preconstruction conference which shall include the developer
and all site work contractors, the Township Engineer and/or his
designee and, where appropriate, representatives of any other
municipal, federal, state of county agencies having jurisdiction
over or an interest in the work. The Township Engineer shall be
notified by the developer, by certified mail, at least five
business days in advance of the planned start of any
construction of any nature.
(b) No improvements shall be installed without having an
approved site plan, an approved subdivision plan, required
permits and without having been inspected by the Township
Engineer's office. The Chief Engineering Inspector is
authorized to issue a summons in the event any developer,
owner, agent, individual or corporation refuses to honor a stopwork
notice. No underground installation shall be covered,
partially covered or backfilled until the installation has been
inspected and approved. The Township Engineer's office shall
be notified a minimum of 24 hours before each of the following
phases of the work is started so that the work may be inspected
by the Township. The work requiring inspection by the
Township Engineer's office and/or such outside professional
inspection service which the Township may retain, shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to:
[1] Site clearing.
[2] Grading, soil erosion control methods and devices.
[3] Excavation and embankment.
[4] Pavement subgrade.
[5] Curb forms.
[6] Curbs.
[7] Sidewalks.
[8] Driveway aprons.
[9] Storm sewers and appurtenances.
[10]Water mains, hydrants, valves and appurtenances.
[11] Bedding materials and placement.
[12] Trench backfill materials and compaction.
[13] Detention/retention basins and associated structures.
§ 112-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-197
1:447
[14] Pavements including stone base, intermediate course(s),
and final wearing course, landscaping, topsoil and
seeding.
[15] Street trees.
[16] Street signs.
[17] Traffic control signs.
[18] Pavement markings.
[19] Conservation easement markers and survey monuments.
(c) Unless given prior written approval, based upon a written
request received by the Township one week in advance of the
date of such work, no work or the construction of
improvements requiring same day inspection shall be
performed on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays, or at any
other time except weekdays between the hours of 7:30 a.m.
and 3:30 p.m.
(d) Inspection fees shall be charged only for the inspection of the
actual improvements shown on an approved subdivision plan,
an approved site plan or any approved plan revision and/or as
required by an approving resolution. The Township Engineer's
office and/or an outside professional inspection service shall
charge only for inspections and administrative costs that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the
work and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the
approved development plans and documents. Administrative
costs to be charged may include but not necessarily be limited
to those necessary to prepare written reports, correspondence,
and statements, obtain job photos and similar and usual
activities associated with construction projects.
(e) Streets shall not receive the finished surface course paving
until all heavy construction is completed, as determined by the
Township Engineer. Shade trees shall not be planted until all
grading and earthmoving is completed and only when
seasonally appropriate.
(f) All inspections relative to the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey shall be made by
the subcode officials and/or appropriately licensed inspectors.
Final occupancy permits may be issued by the Construction
Official after he has determined that all provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code and any conditions of the
construction permit(s) have been complied with; has
determined that all improvements including grading, splash
blocks, sump pump drains and other appurtenances within
eight feet of the foundation wall of residential buildings have
§ 112-197 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-197
1:448
been properly installed; the Construction Official receives
notification of approval of the site improvements from the
Township Engineer's office and has obtained approval of all
other state, county or municipal authorities having jurisdiction
or an interest.
B. Inspection by Sewerage Authority.
(1) All improvements to the sanitary sewerage system shall be subject
to inspection and approval by the Franklin Township Sewerage
Authority who shall be notified by the subdivider or developer at
least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the
Franklin Township Sewerage Authority or other agencies having
jurisdiction over the particular installation. If such installation is
covered prior to inspection, it shall be uncovered or such other
inspection means used, such as television or other pipeline camera
as may be deemed necessary by the Franklin Township Sewerage
Authority, and any charges therefor shall be paid for by the
developer.
(2) Inspection of any work by the Franklin Township Sewerage
Authority or other agencies having jurisdiction shall not be
considered to be final approval or rejection of the work, but shall
only be considered to be a determination of whether or not the
specific work involved was done to Franklin Township Sewerage
Authority specifications or other required standards at the time of
installation. Damage to such work or other unforeseen
circumstances such as the effect of weather, other construction,
changing conditions, settlement, etc., between the time of
installation and the time that the developer wishes to be released
from his performance bond shall be the full responsibility of the
developer and shall not be considered accepted work until the
performance bond is released. The developer shall not enter into
any contract requiring the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority,
or any of its agents, employees or other representative to make any
declarations, written or otherwise, as a condition of payment of
said developer to a contractor as to the acceptance or rejection of
the work.
(3) Modification of improvements. At any time, whether as a result of
inspection of the work or otherwise, the Franklin Township
Sewerage Authority may recommend to the approving authority or
other agency having jurisdiction that the subdivider be required to
modify the design and extent of the improvements required.
(4) The approving authority may act in accordance with such
recommendation; provided, however, that it must first afford the
subdivider an opportunity to be heard. Similarly, the approving
authority may grant the applicant permission to effect such
modification upon his own application with the approval of the
§ 112-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-197
1:449
§ 112-198. Maintenance of detention/retention basins.
Franklin Township Sewerage Authority and any other agency
having jurisdiction.
C. Engineering review and inspection fees for a single-lot application.
Review and inspection for residential development involving two or
more units and subdivisions creating two or more lots are subject to the
fees and deposits as set forth in Subsection A(1) of this section and in
Article XXVIII, § 112-210 et seq. [Amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No.
3767]
A. All detention/retention basins for stormwater drainage in any
multifamily residential use development or nonresidential use
developments shall be owned and maintained by a condominium,
homeowners' association or other private individual or group. All
detention/retention basins for stormwater drainage located within or as
a part of a solely single-family residential use development shall be
dedicated to the Township of Franklin. Prior to the acceptance of any
stormwater facility by the Township of Franklin, same shall be certified
by the Township Engineer to have been constructed in accordance with
the requirements and specifications of this section. In addition, prior to
the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the developer shall post
with the Township of Franklin an amount to be determined in
accordance with the formula set forth below for maintenance for 26
years to be placed in an escrow account maintenance, which funds shall
be utilized for the maintenance of such detention/retention facility.
B. Technical standards for the construction of improvements.
(1) The fees required by Appendix C set forth at the end of this chapter
shall be for the purpose of reimbursing the Township for direct
fees, costs, charges and expenses for the maintenance of a
detention/retention facility including, but not limited to routine
mowing, maintenance of landscaping, general maintenance
concerning inlets, cleaning of property and long range
maintenance on a periodic basis.
(2) The escrow amount required by Appendix C shall be deposited with
the Township prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy.
All funds shall remain in an interest-bearing escrow account. The
entire amount of any interest shall be applied to the purposes for
which it was originally deposited.
(3) All costs, expenses, charges and fees incurred by the Township for
the maintenance of a detention/retention basin shall be charged
against the escrow fund established for the maintenance of such a
basin.
§ 112-197 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-198
1:450
(4) The Township will conduct maintenance programs at its discretion
and shall maintain liability insurance on the basin out of the funds
so created. The maintenance programs may include:
(a) Routine mowing of the property. Mowing costs shall be
estimated at the rate of one acre per hour. The cost per hour
for the Township labor and equipment shall be multiplied by
the number of acres to be mowed. A base number shall also be
included for the mobilization and the maintenance of the
equipment.
(b) Maintenance of landscaping. The cost shall be based upon the
number of hours for landscape maintenance multiplied by a
rate per hour for labor and equipment. Any and all additional
stock which shall be necessary to replace approved
landscaping shall also be charges against the fund.
(c) General maintenance. The cost for general maintenance shall
be based upon a one-hour mobilization time together with the
total number of hours expended times the rate per hour for
Township labor and equipment.
(d) Long-term maintenance. The long-term maintenance shall be
calculated on cost per acre and applied against the assumption
that a residential detention/retention basin needs rejuvenation
every 15 years. These amounts are reduced thereto an
annualized cost.
(e) Insurance. The Township shall assume liability for the property
and a portion of the fund shall be used for purchase of
insurance for the detention/retention basin.
(5) Calculation of the developer fund. The amount of money to be
placed in escrow shall be calculated in accordance with the
worksheet set forth in Appendix C. The first year costs are
multiplied by the factor of 26.48. Said calculation provides for the
Township to receive sufficient funding for 25 years based upon an
assumption of a 6% increase per year and 5.5% return on
investment earnings added to the account. The cost for the
maintenance by the Township employees shall be based upon the
amount of time services are performed and the unit (i.e., per diem
or hourly fee) of the professional, expert, employee or staff in
accordance with the contracts or as prescribed by the Salary
Ordinance of the Township of Franklin.
§ 112-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-198
1:451

ARTICLE XXV
Environmental and Historic Resources
§ 112-199. Requirements for environmental assessment.
A. Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to
provide proper guidelines and requirements for the environmental
assessment to be filed with an application for development and prior to
preliminary subdivision plan approval, or site plan approval by the
Franklin Township Planning Board. It is also the intent of this section to
provide guidelines for the historic overlay district and the D&R Canal
design regulations.
B. Applicability of provisions. An environmental assessment shall be
required for site plans and subdivisions wherein one or more of the
following conditions exist:
(1) The plan proposes to cover more than 75% of the site with
buildings, pavement, or other improvements.
(2) The plan proposes the construction of buildings with 5000 or more
square feet in area.
(3) The plan proposes the construction of 5,000 or more square feet of
paved area. Notwithstanding the above provisions, an
environmental assessment shall not be required for principal
permitted uses in an agricultural district.
C. The applicant must provide written information to the Planning Board
at the time the environmental assessment is submitted as to the
qualifications and experience of such consultants, firm, agency,
individual or person selected by the applicant. [Amended 1-23-2007
by Ord. No. 3652]
D. Submittal. One copy of such environmental assessment shall be
attached to each copy of the completed application when said
application is submitted. Each environmental assessment shall include
a title page which contains the name, address, zip code and phone
number of the applicant.
E. Documentation. The environmental assessment shall include
documentation of all supporting evidence used in the assessment.
Documentation may include studies or portions of studies conducted by
others, explanations based on field visits, conversations with experts
and maps used as the basis of the conclusions.
F. Format for the environmental assessment report. The environmental
assessment (EA) shall include the following required data:
(1) Project data. A description of the project covered by the EA. The
description shall mention each separate activity included in the
project, i.e., acquisition, demolition, removal, construction and
§ 112-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-199
1:453
relocation. The description must be adequate to enable the reader
to envision the general nature of the project and the magnitude of
the project.
(2) Mapping. Locate the project in a regional, municipal and
neighborhood setting. Include a site plan of the project.
(3) Existing environmental features. Describe the environment as it
presently exists in and around the site. The description should be a
comprehensive discussion of the following features as they exist
without the project:
(a) Natural resources: Identify and describe the existing geologic
character, soil characteristics, topography, surface and
subsurface hydrological features, vegetation and wildlife of the
site and the surrounding area.
(b) Man-made resources: Describe the present land use, adjacent
land use, noise levels (if the proposal is for residential or
institutional use), access and transportation patterns, zoning,
Master Plan delineation, community facilities (sewer, water,
waste removal, schools, police, fire and roads) of the site and
the surrounding area.
(c) Human resources: Discuss the existing cultural and social
factors as they affect the proposed project site including
unique aesthetic features and historical character of the site
and surrounding area.
(d) Pollution problems: Identify and describe existing pollution
problems in the area including water, sewer and air quality as a
basis for assessing cumulative problems that may result from
the project.
(4) Construction phase. Identify the development schedule and
construction phasing including projected construction traffic, site
preparation including clearing, excavating, filling and cutting and
blasting.
(5) Required approvals. Include a list of all licenses, permits and other
approvals required by municipal, county or state law and the status
of each. The approvals and permits are required before final
consideration of the site plan is taken.
(6) Impact of the proposed project. An assessment of the probable
impact of the project upon each of the conditions set forth in
Subsection F(3). Particular attention must be given to traffic
(automobile and/or truck) generated by the project, circulation
within the site and projected impact of the project on the Township
road system.
§ 112-199 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-199
1:454
(7) Adverse impacts. List all probable adverse effects which may result
from the project, including:
(a) Water quality.
(b) Air quality.
(c) Noise.
(d) Undesirable land use patterns.
(e) Damage or destruction of significant plan or wildlife systems.
(f) Aesthetic values.
(g) Destruction of natural resources.
(h) Displacement of people and business.
(i) Displacement of viable farms.
(j) Employment and property tax.
(k) Destruction of man-made resources.
(l) Disruption of desirable community and regional growth.
(m) Traffic impacts.
(n) Health, safety and well-being of the public.
(8) Project alternatives. A list of alternatives to the proposed project
which might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental
impacts of the proposed project including:
(a) No project or no action.
(b) Description of alternative road alignments (if applicable).
(c) Analysis of the costs and social impact of the alternatives
including construction problems and traffic service. Include
the reasons for acceptability and nonacceptability of each of
the alternatives.
(9) Ameliorative measures. A listing of steps proposed to minimize
environmental damage to the site and region during construction
and operation. The consideration of soil erosion, dust,
sedimentation, preservation of trees, protection of watercourses,
protection of air resources, and noise control are some factors to be
considered here.
G. Review and inspections. Upon submission of the environmental
assessment to the Secretary of the Planning Board and distribution to
the various officials, with three copies available in the Municipal
Engineer's office (or other designated place) for any person to review,
the following reviews and inspections will be conducted within 30 days,
§ 112-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-199
1:455
§ 112-200. Historic Preservation Advisory Commission. [Amended
8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 3943; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 4147-16]
except that where the assessment is a part of subdivision, or site plan
approval, the approval shall be part of the overall approval and time
limits shall be as specified for those approvals.
(1) The Planning Board Administrator (or other designated official)
will, within seven days of receipt of applicant's environmental
assessment make a field inspection to verify the environmental
conditions and make a report to the Planning Board with a copy to
the Environmental Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer will, within 30 days of receipt of the
applicant's environmental assessment, review all maps and
documents and make a site inspection and then follow with a report
to the Planning Board and a copy to the Environmental
Commission.
(3) The Township Environmental Commission will, within 30 days of
receipt of the Planning Board Administrator's and Engineer's
reports, present its review and recommendations to the Planning
Board for final determination.
(4) The Township Planning Board shall analyze and review the
applicant's environmental assessment along with the reviews from
the Planning Administrator, Engineer, Environmental Commission
and any other interested party within 14 days of the Commission's
report and give written notice of approval or rejection to the
applicant, indicating the reasons therefor; and the decision will be
officially published within 10 days. Where the assessment is part of
a subdivision, planned unit development (PUD) or site plan
application, assessment approval shall be part of the overall
application approval.
H. Issuance of permit. A permit shall be issued upon review by the
Planning Administrator, Engineer and other such officials and final
approval by the Planning Board that all requirements of the chapter
have been complied with, and upon payment of all fees to be paid
hereunder. The Planning Board shall obtain a reasonable time limit for
all work to be done.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as part of an
existing improvement when such new improvement changes the
exterior architectural appearance of any individually designated
historic site or any structure within a designated historic district.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior facade features of any
building, structure, object or improvement which is an individually
§ 112-199 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:456
designated historic site or an improvement located within an historic
district.
APPLICATION — A request to the Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission made pursuant to this section for the purpose of obtaining
a certificate of appropriateness or other action by the Commission
hereunder specified.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed with exterior walls or firewalls,
built, erected and framed of component structural parts, designed for
the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, animals or
property of any kind. When used herein, "building" and "structure"
shall be interchangeable, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The certificate issued by the
Director of Planning or designee setting forth the approval or
disapproval of rehabilitation, restoration, alteration or demolition work
undertaken within an historic district or on an individually designated
historic structure and accessory buildings or structures on the property
pursuant to this section of the Township ordinances.
CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION — Those standards used to determine
the historical, archaeological, architectural, aesthetic, or cultural value
of a building, structure, object or site.
DEMOLITION — The complete or partial razing, dismantling or
destruction of any property. Demolition includes the removal of a
building, object, or structure from its site or the removal or destruction
of the facade or surface.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographic area with distinctly definable
boundaries composed of several buildings or sites which has acquired
a unity of character through the interrelationships of the component
buildings and sites and has been designated as having historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic, architectural or other significance
pursuant to the provisions of this section and properties within 1,000
feet of the Delaware and Raritan Canal. Resources within an historic
district shall be classified as either key, contributing or
noncontributing, which are defined as follows:
KEY — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects which, due to
their significance, would individually qualify for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places.
(1)
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are integral components of the historic district either
because they date from a time period for which the district is
significant, or because they represent an architectural type, period,
or method for which the district is significant. Such buildings,
structures, sites or objects would not independently meet the
criteria for inclusion on the New Jersey Register set forth in N.J.S.A.
7:4-2.3 nor the National Register criteria as adopted by the U.S.
(2)
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:457
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMISSION (COMMISSION)
— The body which, for the purposes of this section, acts as the Historic
Preservation Advisory Commission as cited in the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and as set forth in § 112-200 of the
ordinances of Franklin Township.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real estate, public or private property where a
significant event or pattern of events occurred and shall also include
such primary and accessory buildings and structures having historical,
cultural and/or architectural significance. It may be the location of
prehistoric or historic occupations or activities that may be marked by
physical remains; or it may be the symbolic focus of a significant event
or pattern of events even if the actual site was not physically occupied.
A site may also be the location of a ruined building, structure, or object
if the location itself, or the objects found thereon, possesses historic,
cultural, or archaeological significance.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof installed upon real
property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the location
of such construction of installation for a period of not less than 120
continuous days.
IN-KIND REPLACEMENT — The replacement of a missing or damaged
architectural element or feature, employing the same material and
configuration or form as the missing or damaged element or feature.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined by Franklin
Township to meet the criteria of designation as specified herein.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for
evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4 et. seq.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — The official list,
maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant
in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and
culture.
Secretary of the Interior, and as administered by the Keeper of the
National Register of Historic Places.
NONCONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are not integral components of the historic district because
they neither date from a time period for which the district is
significant nor represent an architectural type, period or method
for which the district is significant. Such buildings, structures, sites
or objects would not independently meet the criteria for inclusion
on the New Jersey Register set forth in N.J.S.A. 7:4-2.3 nor the
National Register criteria as adopted by the U.S. Secretary of
the Interior, and as administered by the Keeper of the National
Register of Historic Places.
(3)
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:458
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic, or
scientific value that may be, by nature of design, movable yet related to
a specific setting or environment.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Actions taken to prevent deterioration,
wear, damage or the need for repair of a structure or any part thereof in
order to return the same to nearly as practicable to its condition prior
to the occurrence of such deterioration, wear, damage repair with inkind
replacement and quality of workmanship.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary
to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of a historic
property. Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize
the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and
repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive
replacement and new construction. New exterior additions are not
within the scope of this particular activity; however, the limited and
sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems,
and other code-required work to make properties functional, is
appropriate within a preservation activity.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of depicting, by means of
new construction, the form, features and detailing of a nonsurviving
site, landscape, building, structure or object, for the purpose of
replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic
location.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of making possible a
compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions
while preserving those proportions or features which convey its
historical, cultural or architectural values.
REMOVAL — The change of all or part of a structure to another
location, position, station or residence.
REPAIR — The restoration to a good or sound condition of materials,
systems and/or components that are worn, deteriorated or broken using
materials or components identical to or closely similar to the existing.
This term is further defined to mean any work done on any
improvement which is not an addition to the improvement and does not
change the exterior architectural appearance of any improvement.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately depicting the form,
features, and character of a property as it appeared at a particular
period of time by means of the removal of features from other periods in
its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration
period that is selected. The limited and sensitive upgrading of
mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required
work to make properties functional is appropriate within the scope of
restoration activities.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS — The publication
issued by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service,
entitled "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:459
of Historic Properties as the Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating,
Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings," issued in 1995 and
revised from time to time.
STREETSCAPE — The overall visual character of the street, including,
but not limited to, the architecture and architectural character, building
rhythms, setbacks and height, fences, and storefronts. The character
of a streetscape is also affected by signs, lighting, parking areas,
materials, pedestrian walkways, curbing and landscaping.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials used to form a
construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of land or water.
B. Purpose.
(1) To preserve and enhance the heritage of the Township through the
preservation of sites of specific historic, archaeological,
architectural, aesthetic, and cultural significance;
(2) To preserve the character and special sense of place of the
Township's historic villages that help create a sense of identity and
unity in the Township;
(3) To protect Franklin Township's historic resources from
deterioration or destruction and encourage proper maintenance,
rehabilitation, and appropriate use or adaptive reuse of these
historic resources;
(4) To protect the Township's historic resources from incompatible
design;
(5) To promote the use of historically, archaeologically, architecturally,
and culturally significant sites and areas for the education, welfare,
and pleasure of the residents of the Township and its visitors;
(6) To coordinate and work in conjunction with other governmental
agencies having a similar responsibility to protect the historic and
cultural resources of the Township;
(7) To foster civic pride and appreciation for the Township's heritage;
and
(8) To improve property values and to strengthen the Township's
economy.
C. Establishment and composition of the Commission; terms; removal and
vacancies; records and meetings.
(1) Membership.
(a) The Commission shall consist of nine members and two
alternate members who shall serve without compensation and
who shall be appointed by the Township Council. All
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:460
Commission members shall be residents of the Township of
Franklin, except as noted in Subsection C(3).
(b) To the extent available in the community, the Township Council
shall appoint professional members from the disciplines of
planning, cultural anthropology, conservation, landscape
architecture, architecture, history, architectural history, prehistoric
archaeology and historic archaeology who meet the
standards contained in the National Park Service Professional
Qualification Standards. The Township Council shall also
consider for appointment to the Commission individuals with
backgrounds in the fields of historic preservation, construction
trades, engineering and land use law. The Township Council
can request from the New Jersey State Historic Preservation
Office an exemption from this requirement by demonstrating
that a reasonable effort has been made to appoint qualified
professionals.
(c) Vacancies on the Commission are to be filled with qualified
members within 60 days.
(2) The initial terms of office of the first Commission members shall be
for one, two, three, and four years, to be designated by the
Township Council in making such appointments in the following
manner: Three of such members shall be appointed for terms of one
year, two of such members shall be appointed for terms of two
years, two of such members shall be appointed to terms of three
years, and two of such members shall be appointed to terms of four
years. The terms of each such member's shall expire on December
31 of the last year of each such member's term and upon the
appointment and qualification of such member's successor. The
terms of appointment of succeeding Commission members shall be
for four years each, to expire on December 31 of the last year of
such succeeding member's term and upon the appointment and
qualification of such member's successor. The initial terms of the
alternate members shall be one for a one-year term and a second
for a two-year term, and, thereafter, the term of an alternate
member shall be two years.
(3) Member classes.
(a) Members of the Commission shall include, in designating the
category of appointment, at least one member of each of the
following classes: Class A, a person who is knowledgeable in
building design and construction or architectural history and
who may reside outside of the municipality, and Class B, a
person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated interest
in local history and who may reside outside of the municipality.
(b) Of the regular members of the Commission, a total of at least
one less than a majority shall be Class A and B. Those regular
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:461
members who are not designated as Class A or B shall be
designated Class C. Class C members shall be citizens of the
municipality who shall hold no other municipal office, position
or employment except for membership on the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Open Space Advisory
Committee. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of
Class C members. At the time of appointment of the members
of the Commission, such members shall be designated by class
and the alternate members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2".
(c) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed so that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member.
(4) Information on the credentials of the Commission members and
consultants shall be kept on file and available to the public.
(5) Officers, staff and expenditures.
(a) The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from its members. The Commission shall also
appoint a Secretary, who shall be either a member or Township
employee. The Commission shall be governed by Robert's
Rules of Order. At least five members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business, in the form of bylaws, which shall provide for the
identification of the time and place of holding regular meetings
and for the calling of special meetings by the Chairperson or at
least five regular members of the Commission. All meetings of
the Commission shall be governed by the New Jersey Open
Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(b) The Township Council may provide for the Commission in its
budget and may appropriate such funds for the expenses of the
Commission as the Township Council, in its sole discretion,
shall determine, pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-108. The
Commission may employ, contract for and fix the compensation
of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary, except that the Commission shall obtain its legal
counsel from the Township Attorney at the hourly rate of
compensation set forth in the Township Attorney's contract
with the Township, unless the Township Council, by
appropriation, provides for separate legal counsel. The
services of the Township Attorney shall be compensated for by
the Township Council or from the Commission budget should
such funds have been appropriately budgeted for.
Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:462
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for the Commission's use. The Commission
shall not authorize expenditures that exceed, exclusive of gifts,
grants, or escrow fees, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
[1] The Township Council may establish, by ordinance,
reasonable fees necessary to cover the expenses of
administration and professional services to aid the
Commission in its review of an application.
(c) The Commission may appoint a consultant, who is a recognized
professional in the field of architectural history, historic
preservation and planning, or similar discipline, to advise the
Commission on matters before it, as the Commission may deem
necessary to assist in it rendering its decision, pursuant to this
section.
(d) The Commission Chairperson shall be responsible for serving
as the presiding officer for all Commission meetings, and
establishing the agenda for those meetings. The Chairperson
also shall serve as the primary spokesman for the Commission
regarding policies and decisions made by the Commission. In
the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall
assume the duties of the Chairperson.
(e) The Secretary may or may not be a member of the Commission
or a Township employee and shall be responsible for keeping a
record of the proceedings before the Commission, which shall
include the voting records of the members, their attendance,
resolutions acted upon by the Commission and any of its
findings, determinations and decisions. The Secretary shall
also be responsible for preparing all letters and other
correspondence for the Commission, having the appropriate
member(s) of the Commission sign the correspondence and
arranging for the mailing and/or distribution of such
correspondence.
D. Duties of the Commission. The Commission shall have the following
responsibilities, powers and duties:
(1) To assist the Township in establishing and maintaining the
designation as a certified local government and perform all the
requirements related to such certification.
(2) To prepare a comprehensive inventory of historic buildings,
objects, sites, and structures within Franklin Township that meet
the criteria for designation, which shall be compatible to and
coordinated with the State Historic Preservation Office state-wide
inventory.
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:463
(3) To provide written reports on the issuance of permits pertaining to
the historic resources of Franklin Township.
(4) To make recommendations to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment and Township Council, or other approving authority
concerning the acquisition of development rights, facade
easements, and the imposition of other restrictions and the
negotiation of historical property contracts for the purposes of
historic preservation.
(5) To make recommendations to the Planning Board and Township
Council on the historic preservation plan element of the Master
Plan and on the implications for preserving historic sites of any
other Master Plan element.
(6) To advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
applications for development, construction of an addition,
alteration or change in use of any historic site, building, structure,
or object requiring board approval.
(7) To collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and techniques and make available such materials to
interested citizens and applicants, and prepare and distribute a
design guidelines booklet addressing the specific design needs of
individually designated buildings and structures and such buildings
and structures within designated historic districts. Further, the
Commission shall increase the public awareness of the value of
historic, architectural and cultural preservation by developing and
participating in public information programs.
(8) To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
(9) To advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
applications for development when the development affects an
individually designated historic site or an improvement within a
designated historic district.
(10) To make recommendations to the appropriate Township officials
concerning the acquisition and utilization of grants, tax incentives
and other funding from federal and state agencies, private groups
and individuals and the utilization of budgetary appropriations to
promote the preservation of historic resources in Franklin
Township.
(11) To recommend to the Township Council what actions might be
considered to protect critical historic structures when private
preservation and/or funding from other sources are not feasible.
(12) To review and advise the Township Council on local historic
designation nominations.
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:464
(13) To recommend nominations of eligible properties and districts to
the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and the National
Register of Historic Places.
(14) Each year, all regular and alternate members of the Commission
must attend a conference or training workshop on historic
preservation issues or a related field.
(15) To act as a liaison on behalf of the Township government to
individuals and organizations concerned with historic preservation.
(16) To undertake an advisory review of all Section 106 applications for
projects within the Township and for those projects outside of the
Township but which may have a physical or visual impact on the
cultural resources of the Township. The Commission shall develop,
in a timely manner, a report on its findings and submit the same to
the State Historic Preservation Office, and the Township Planning
Board or the Township Zoning Board of Adjustment, depending on
which Board would be hearing the application for development.
(17) To ensure that when a discipline is not represented on the
Commission, and the Commission is considering an action (e.g.,
development application, National Register application, etc.) which
is normally evaluated by a professional in that specific discipline,
the Commission may obtain such professional expertise and advice
before rendering a decision.
(18) To report at least annually to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment and the Township governing body on the state of
historic preservation in the township and recommend measures to
improve the same. Such a report shall address any properties
added to either the New Jersey or National Registers of Historic
Places areas in the community that the Commission feels may be
experiencing development pressures that would impact historic
sites or historic districts, buildings or structures that the
Commission may be considering for local designation, etc.
E. Procedures to adopt regulations.
(1) The Commission shall have the authority to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out its function under the
provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be
constituted in the form of bylaws.
F. Permitted uses.
(1) Designated historic districts shall overlay the established zoning
districts and be bounded and defined as shown on the Zoning Map
of Franklin Township.86
86.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Clerk's office and is included in the
electronic version of the Code.
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:465
(2) The uses permitted on historic sites and in historic districts shall be
those designated on the Township's adopted zoning schedule for
the zoning district in which the property is located.
G. Designation procedures for historic sites and historic districts.
(1) The purposes of historic designation are to:
(a) Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general
welfare through the protection, enhancement, and
preservation of historic resources in Franklin Township;
(b) Preserve and retain a harmonious setting for historic and
architecturally significant buildings, structures, and places
within Franklin Township;
(c) Protect Franklin Township's historic resources and landscapes
from incompatible land uses;
(d) Manage change by discouraging alteration or new
construction not in keeping with historic sites and historic
districts;
(e) Avoid the unnecessary demolition of historic resources;
(f) Promote the conservation of individual historic sites and
historic districts; and
(g) Encourage compatible new construction on or near an historic
site that does not detract from the historic site without
requiring or prohibiting any particular architectural style or
requiring exact duplication of the style of the historic site.
(2) Survey. The Commission shall undertake and maintain a
comprehensive survey of the Township of Franklin to identify
historic sites and historic districts that are worthy of protection and
preservation.
(3) Criteria for designation. The criteria for evaluating and designating
historic sites, and historic districts shall be guided by the National
Register criteria. The Commission or any person may recommend
designation of historic sites or historic districts that are in
accordance with the National Register criteria or that possess one
or more of the following attributes:
(a) Character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the Township, state or
nation; or
(b) Association with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
(c) Association with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:466
(d) Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period
or method of construction, architecture, or engineering; or
(e) Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist,
architect or landscape architect whose work has influenced the
development of the Township, state or nation; or
(f) Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or
craftsmanship that render an improvement architecturally
significant or structurally innovative; or
(g) Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make
a district an established or familiar visual feature; or
(h) Ability or potential ability to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
(i) Ordinarily, cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical
figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for
religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their
original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties
primarily commemorative in nature and properties that have
achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be
considered eligible for the National Register. However, such
properties will qualify for designation hereunder if they are
integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if they fall
within the following categories:
[1] A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical
importance;
[2] A building or structure removed from its original location
but which is significant primarily for architectural value or
which is the surviving structure most importantly
associated with an historic person or event;
[3] A birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no other appropriate site or building
directly associated with his productive life;
[4] A cemetery that derives its primary significance from
graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age,
from distinctive design features or from association with
historic events;
[5] A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a
suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner
as part of a restoration master plan and when no other
building or structure with the same association has
survived;
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:467
[6] A property primarily commemorative in intent if design,
age, tradition or symbolic value has invested it with its
own historical significance; or
[7] A property achieving significance within the past 50 years
if it is of exceptional importance.
(4) Procedures for designation.
(a) All persons wishing to make a nomination shall contact the
Commission Secretary regarding consideration of a proposed
historic site or historic district. The Commission may also
initiate the designation of an historic site or historic district.
The Commission will schedule a hearing to review the
proposed historic site or historic district.
(b) A nomination to propose an historic site shall include the
following information which addresses the criteria for
designation as set forth herein:
[1] Two color photographs of the proposed site, taken from
different angles;
[2] A copy of the Township Tax Map showing the property on
which the proposed site is located;
[3] A written description of the physical condition and details
of the proposed site; and
[4] A written statement of significance, employing the criteria
set forth in this section.
(c) A nomination to propose an historic district shall include the
following information which addresses the criteria for
designation as set forth herein:
[1] A building-by-building inventory of all properties within
the proposed district;
[2] Color photographs of all properties within the proposed
district;
[3] A copy of the Township Tax Map that depicts the
boundaries of the proposed district;
[4] A written description of the physical condition of the
buildings in the proposed district, as well as a description
of the streetscapes in the proposed district; and
[5] A written statement of significance, employing the criteria
set forth in this section.
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:468
(d) Following receipt of a nomination to propose a local historic
site or historic district, the Commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the proposed designation.
(e) At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, the Commission
shall, by personal service or certified mail, perform the
following:
[1] Notify the owner(s) of record of a property that has been
proposed for historic site designation, or the owner(s) of
record of all properties located within a district that has
been proposed for historic district designation, that the
property or district, as applicable, is being considered for
such designation and the reasons therefor;
[2] Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance and
consequences of such designation, and the rights of the
owner(s) or record to contest such designation under the
provisions of this section;
[3] Advise the owner(s) of record of the date, time and
location of the hearing concerning the proposed
designation of the property or district; and
[4] Serve any further notices as may be required under the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(f) At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, the Commission
shall also cause public notice of the hearing to be published in
the official designated newspaper of the Township.
(g) At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, a copy of the
nomination report shall also be made available for public
inspection in the Township offices.
(h) At the public hearing scheduled in accordance with this
section, the Commission shall review the nomination report
and accompanying documents. Interested parties shall be
given the opportunity to be heard and to comment on the
proposed nomination for designation.
(i) If the proposed nomination is approved by the Commission,
then the Commission shall forward a report concerning the
proposed historic site or historic district to the Planning Board,
which shall contain a statement of the Commission's
recommendations and the reasons therefor. The Planning
Board shall review the report and then recommend to
Township Council whether an ordinance designating the site or
district as historic shall be prepared.
(j) Upon adoption of an ordinance by the Township Council
designating an historic site or an historic district, the said
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:469
designation shall supplement, rather than supersede, the
existing zoning district in which the affected historic site or
historic district is located. Designated properties shall be
noted as such on the records for those properties maintained
by the Township.
(k) Amendments to historic site or historic district designations
may be made in the same manner as that by which the site or
district was adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(l) The buildings, structures, districts, sites, objects, canal, and
railroad rights-of-way that have been designated by the
Township are contained in a list found in Appendix A87 of this
section.
H. Application design review of demolition, removal, alteration, and new
construction; certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Certificate of appropriateness.
(a) When required. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the
Planning Director, based on a decision made by the
Commission, shall be required before any work is commenced
on any historic site or improvement within an historic district,
including but not limited to the following:
[1] Changing the exterior appearance of any building,
structure, site, object or improvement by addition,
reconstruction, alteration or replacement, including the
replacement of windows and doors, except for the
activities described by Subsection H(1)(b) below.
[2] Demolition of any building, structure, site, object or
improvement.
[3] Removal of a principal or accessory building, structure,
object or improvement.
[4] Any addition to or new construction of a principal or
accessory building, structure, object or improvement.
[5] Changes in or addition of new signs, parking lots or
exterior lighting used for building illumination.
(b) When not required.
[1] A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for
changes to the interior of a structure. If such interior
changes affect the exterior of the building, then the
Commission shall review the proposed exterior changes.
87.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:470
[2] A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for
exterior or interior painting.
[3] A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required if, in
the opinion of the Director of Planning or designee, the
work contemplated constitutes ordinary maintenance or
repair or in-kind replacement as defined by this section.
(c) Procedures.
[1] Except for the circumstances described in Subsection
H(1)(b)[1] and [2] above, no work shall be performed on
any historic site or on any building, structure, object, site
or improvement located within an historic district until
either a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by
the Director of Planning or designee for such work, or a
determination has been made that no certificate of
appropriateness is necessary for such work due to the fact
that the proposed work constitutes ordinary maintenance
and repair pursuant to this section.
[2] The permit issuing entity (Zoning Officer, Construction
Official, etc.) shall not issue a permit that does not comply
with the recommendations in a certificate of
appropriateness applicable to that permit. [Amended
2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4180-17]
[3] All applicants for a certificate of appropriateness, or for a
determination of nonnecessity, shall complete a certificate
of appropriateness application as adopted by the
Commission. The application shall be made available in the
Township Planning and Zoning Office and on the Township
website. Completed applications shall be filed with the
Director of Planning or designee, who shall then forward
the application package to the Commission.
[4] Each application for a certificate of appropriateness or for
a determination of nonnecessity shall be accompanied by
sketches and/or drawings and/or photographs, both
historical (as available) and contemporary descriptions or
other information as may be required from the application
checklist and as required by the Commission or the
Director of Planning or his designee. The applicant will be
responsible for submitting 12 complete sets of documents
for a certificate of appropriateness and two copies for
determination of nonnecessity. The Director of Planning or
designee may waive submittal requirements for a
determination of nonnecessity. The information is to be
used to show the alterations, additions, changes or new
construction that is being proposed. Applications for
demolition shall include historical and contemporary
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:471
photographs of the exterior and interior of the building
or structure in question. The Commission may require
the subsequent submission of such additional materials as
it reasonably determines necessary to make an informed
decision. Digital submissions are required (except for
homeowners making submissions without assistance from
an architect, attorney or engineer, but digital submissions
are still recommended).
[5] The Commission shall review all applications at meetings
open to the public.
[6] The applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
required to appear before the Commission for the hearing
on the application. An applicant may also be represented
by an attorney or another individual who shall be
authorized, in writing, to represent the applicant.
[7] The Historic Preservation Advisory Commission shall have
the right to defer applications containing insufficient
information, as identified on the application checklist.
[8] Once it has been determined that an application is
complete and has sufficient information, the Commission
shall act within 45 days after the application has been
referred to the Commission, and the Commission shall
return to the Director of Planning, or designee, either a
certificate of appropriateness or a written report detailing
why a certificate cannot be issued. The Director or
Planning, or designee, will forward a copy of the certificate
or report to the applicant and if applicable the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[9] Failure of the Commission to issue a certificate or report
within the forty-five-day period shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the application.
[10] Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time by
mutual agreement of the applicant and the Commission.
[11] A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period
of one calendar year from the date of the Commission
action. The work approved by the certificate of
appropriateness must be commenced within the one-year
period. The certificate of appropriateness may be
extended by up to two one-year extensions, on
nondemolition applications, upon petition to and approval
by the Commission.
(2) Demolitions.
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:472
(a) With respect to applications for demolition, the Commission
shall first consider whether preservation of the historic site in
place is feasible or, failing that option, whether preservation of
the historic site at another location is feasible. In determining
whether preservation of the historic site in place is feasible,
the following factors shall be considered:
[1] Its importance to Franklin Township and the extent to
which its historical or architectural value is such that its
removal would be detrimental to the public interest.
[2] The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not
be reproduced or could be reproduced only with difficulty.
[3] The extent to which its retention would promote the
general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate
values, generating business, creating new jobs, attracting
tourists, students, writers, historians, artists and artisans,
attracting new residents, encouraging study and interest
and studying architecture and design, educating citizens
in American culture and heritage or making Franklin
Township a more attractive and desirable place in which to
live.
[4] If it is within an historic district, the probable impact of its
removal upon the character of the historic district.
[5] Whether the historic site represents the last or best
remaining example of its kind in the Township and that
possesses research potential or public education values.
[6] Whether the historic site can be preserved by protecting
its location from disturbance.
[7] Whether redesign of the development proposal to avoid
impact can result in the preservation of the building or
structure in question.
[8] The historic, architectural, aesthetic and social
significance of the building or structure and/or importance
and uniqueness to the Township and the extant
archaeological resources.
[9] Whether protective measures will result in the long term
preservation of the historic site.
[10] Whether the steps necessary to preserve the historic site,
as set forth in the Secretary of the Interior's standards, are
feasible and practical.
[11] The structural soundness and integrity of the building,
structure, object, or site, the technical feasibility of
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:473
structural rehabilitation, and the feasibility of its
restoration or rehabilitation to allow for its reasonable use.
[12] The threat to public health and safety as a result of
deterioration or disrepair of the building, structure,
object, or site.
(b) Following the Commission granting permission or denying the
demolition of the historic site, and prior to the issuance of a
demolition permit by the Construction Official, the applicant
shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to the
Commission a complete set of drawings and photographs of the
historic site. These drawings and photographs shall meet the
standards established by the Historic American Buildings
Survey (HABS), as administered through the U.S. Department
of the Interior, National Park Service and the Library of
Congress.
[1] The photographs shall be eight-inch-by-ten-inch true
black-and-white prints made on archival quality
photographic paper and be taken from large format
(minimum size of four inches by five inches) negatives. The
drawings and photographs shall be submitted to the
Commission for review and acceptance. The applicant
shall have submitted two sets of drawing prints and one
set of reproducible mylar prints; and two sets of eightinch-
by-ten-inch black-and-white photographic prints and
the large format negatives that the prints were made from.
The Commission may waive the requirement for submittal
of such drawings and photographs if the building or
structure in question is designated as noncontributing.
(c) In the event that the Commission grants permission for the
demolition of the historic site, the applicant will be required to
have an archaeological assessment of the property performed
prior to demolition activities being undertaken. This
assessment will be undertaken under the supervision of an
archaeologist who is a member of the Register of Professional
Archaeologists (ROPA) or qualified in accordance with the
professional qualification standards as set forth in 36 CFR 61,
and will consist of field and documentary research. The
archaeologist will consult with the Commission before
commencing work and the results of the field and documentary
research will be submitted in the form of a draft report to the
Commission for review within 30 calendar days of completion
of field work. The Commission will review the draft report and
make comments on the document within 30 calendar days.
Comments will be addressed by the archaeological consultant
within 30 calendar days of receiving them, after which the
Commission will have 30 days to review the final report. The
historic site will not be demolished until a final report is
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:474
accepted by the Commission. The archaeological assessment
may be waived for noncontributing sites.
(d) In the event that the Commission disapproves an application
for a certificate of appropriateness to demolish an historic site
or a building, structure, site, object or improvement located in
an historic district, the owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter
of right, be entitled to raze or demolish the same provided that
all of the following requirements have been fully met;
[1] For a period of at least 180 days (the "offer period"), and at
a price reasonably related to its fair market value, based
on its current zoning and related valid approvals, made a
bona fide offer to sell such building, structure, site, object
or improvement and the land pertaining thereto to any
person, entity, organization, government or political
subdivision thereof which gives reasonable assurance that
it is willing to preserve the building, structure, site, object
or improvement and the land pertaining thereto.
[2] Notice of any proposed demolition shall be posted on the
exterior premises of the building, structure, site, object or
improvement throughout the offer period in a location
such that it is clearly readable by the public. In addition,
the applicant shall cause to be published in the officially
designated newspaper of the Township a notice setting
forth the following:
[a] The applicant's intent to demolish, including a
description of the subject property (by block and lot
number, as well as by address) and a description of the
building, structure, site, object or improvement to be
demolished;
[b] The applicant's proposed use of the property following
demolition;
[c] The anticipated time frame(s) associated with the
demolition;
[d] A statement indicating that the applicant shall
consider any and all bona fide offers to sell the
property to any person who wishes to preserve the
building, structure, site, object or improvement; and
[e] The applicant's name and address, along with a
telephone number where the applicant may be
reached during normal business hours by any
interested person who wishes to discuss the proposed
demolition and/or make an offer to purchase the
property as set forth above.
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:475
[3] The notice shall be published as follows:
[a] At least once within the first 10 calendar days of the
offer period;
[b] At least once within the period of time that is not less
than 10 nor more than 15 calendar days prior to the
expiration of the offer period; and
[c] A least one other time, at least 20 calendar days after
the first notification and 20 calendar days before the
last notification.
[4] At the conclusion of the offer period, if the applicant still
wishes to demolish the subject building, structure, site,
object or improvement, it shall, prior to performing the
demolition, perform the following:
[a] Advise the Commission, in writing, by certified return
mail, of its intention to proceed with the demolition;
[b] Certify, in writing, to the Commission as to the
compliance with the provisions of Subsection
H(2)(d)[1] and [2] above relating to the one-hundredeighty-
day offer period;
[c] Provide the Commission with a copy of the notices that
appeared in the officially designated newspaper of the
Township and a listing of all of the dates on which the
said notice appeared in the newspaper;
[d] Advise the Commission, in writing, as to whether any
interested persons submitted an offer or offers to
purchase the property, whether during the onehundred-
eighty-day offer period or following the
newspaper notices referenced above, and set forth the
terms and conditions relating to said offer(s) and the
results of any negotiations pertaining thereto;
[e] File copies of the affidavits of publications relating to
all newspaper notices with the Commission; and
[f] Comply with the requirements of Subsection H(2)(b)
and (c).
(e) Assignment. No assignment of the rights granted by a
certificate of appropriateness to demolish shall be permitted.
(f) Expiration of approval. In cases where demolition is permitted,
the certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for one year
from the date of the Commission approval of the application.
Demolition must be completed within one year of the date of
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:476
approval granted by the Commission. The one year approval
shall not be extended.
(3) Removal of an historic site.
(a) In regard to moving an individually designated historic site or
any building or structure in an historic district to a new
location the following matters shall be considered in addition
to the criteria listed above:
[1] Whether the historic site can be relocated and still retain
its historic significance.
[2] Whether the historic site is sufficiently well-preserved and
structurally stable to sustain the removal.
[3] Whether alternative locations compatible with the historic
site are available.
[4] Whether it is feasible and practical to relocate the historic
site.
[5] Whether the removal will result in the long term
preservation of the historic site.
[6] The rationale for not retaining the historic site at its
present location and the probable impact of its removal
upon the character of the historic district. Also,
consideration must be given to the site where the building
or structure is to be relocated, including, but not limited
to, archaeological resources.
(4) Alterations and additions. In regard to an application for
alterations and/or additions affecting either an individually
designated historic site or a building or structure within a
designated historic district, the following factors shall be
considered, along with such applicable criteria as found in
Subsection H(5) below:
(a) Design and materials. The proposed design and materials will
be compatible with the building's original architectural style.
(b) Original qualities. The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment
shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any
historic material or distinctive architectural features shall be
avoided.
(c) Acquired significance. Changes that have taken place in the
course of time are evidence of the history and development of a
building, structure or site and its environment. These changes
may have acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected.
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:477
(d) Repair or replacement. Deteriorated architectural features
(e.g. windows, doors, shutters, trim, siding, etc.) shall be
repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible, using the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. In the
event replacement is necessary, the new material should match
the material being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of
missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplications of features substantiated by historic, physical, or
pictorial evidence rather than conjectural designs or the
availability of different architectural elements from other
buildings or structures.
(e) Design of alterations or additions. Contemporary design for
alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be
discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historic, architectural, or cultural material
and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color,
material, and character of the property, adjacent buildings or
structures, neighborhood, or environment.
(f) Character of alterations. Wherever possible, new additions and
alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if
such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the structure would be
unimpaired.
(g) Synthetic siding. Synthetic siding is not permitted on key or
contributing buildings. Synthetic siding may be used to
resurface facades of low public visibility on contributing
buildings that were originally wood-sided only if the substitute
siding is similar in design, width and texture to the original
siding and will not endanger the physical condition and
structural life of the building. Architectural trim must be
retained, and "packing out" of window and door frames is
specifically prohibited.
(h) Window and door openings. The number, size and locations of
original window and door openings shall be retained on a key
or contributing building or structure. Window and door
openings shall not be reduced to fit stock material. New
window and door openings shall not be added on elevations
that are subject to view from a public street for a designated
contributing building or structure, unless that area of the
building or structure has low public visibility.
[1] All vinyl, fiberglass-clad, vinyl-clad and aluminum-clad
windows and doors are not acceptable on key buildings.
Nonwood-surfaced window sashes, frames and doors and
door frames may be used on side and rear exposures of low
public visibility on contributing buildings that were
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:478
originally wood windows and doors when the substitute
windows and doors are similar in design, width, height
and texture to the original wood windows or doors and
will not endanger the physical condition and structural
life of the building or structure. Architectural trim and
adornments must be retained. Nonwood-surfaced window
sashes, frames and doors are acceptable on
noncontributing buildings. Pure vinyl and aluminum
windows are not permitted on contributing buildings and
are not recommended on noncontributing buildings unless
the windows were originally vinyl or aluminum.
(i) Secretary of the Interior's standards. In addition to the criteria
set forth above, the Commission shall also take into account
those sections of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and
Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings that are
appropriate to the application being considered.
(5) New construction replacements.
(a) In regard to an application for new construction or
replacements affecting an historic site, or an improvement
within an historic district, the following factors shall be
considered:
[1] Height. The height of the proposed buildings shall be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.
[2] Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of
the width of the building to the height of the front
elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings and
places to which it is visually related.
[3] Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship
of the width of windows to the height of windows in a
building shall be visually compatible with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
[4] Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship
of the building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings shall be visually compatible with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
[5] Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The
relationship of entrance and porch projections to the
street shall be visually compatible with the buildings and
places to which they are visually related.
[6] Relationship of materials, texture and color. The
relationship of materials, texture and color of the facade
and roof of a building shall be visually compatible with the
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:479
predominant materials used in the buildings to which they
are visually related.
[7] Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
[8] Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as
walls, open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses,
shall form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the
extent necessary to maintain visual compatibility of the
building with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
[9] Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door
openings, porches and balconies shall be visually related.
[10] Directional expression of front elevation. A building or
structure shall be visually compatible with buildings and/
or structures to which it is visually related in its vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
[11] Exterior features. A building or structure's related exterior
features such as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks,
driveways, and parking areas shall be compatible with the
features of those structures to which it is visually related
and shall be appropriate for the historic period for which
the structure is significant.
[12] Rhythm of solids to voids on facades fronting on public
places. The relationship of solids to voids in such facades
of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
[13] Archaeology. Any new construction that disturbs the
ground of an historic site or district may be required by the
Commission to complete a Phase I archaeological study,
under the supervision of a professional archaeologist
(member of ROPA). If a professional archaeologist is a
member of the Commission, the results of this Phase I
study will be submitted to the Commission for review. If no
qualified professional is a member, the study will be
submitted to the New Jersey State Historic Preservation
Office (NJSHPO) for review. The reviewing agency will
decide if the results of the Phase I study warrant further
Phase II and Phase III archaeological investigations.
I. Procedures for emergency repairs. When a building, structure, or
object located on an historic site or within an historic district requires
immediate repair to preserve its continued habitability and/or the
health and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs may be
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:480
performed in accordance with Township Codes without first obtaining
review by the Commission. Under such circumstances, the repairs
performed shall be only such as are necessary to protect the health and
safety of its occupants or others and/or to maintain habitability. All work
done under this section shall conform to the standards for rehabilitation
set forth in the Secretary of the Interior's guidelines.
(1) The property owner or designee shall make a request for the
Commission's review simultaneously with the onset of the
emergency work. The request shall be made to the Director of
Planning, or designee. Such emergency work shall be permitted
only if the Director of Planning, or designee, upon consultation with
the Construction Official, or designee, certifies the immediate
necessity for the work.
(2) Except for the emergency repairs, no work that requires
Commission review shall be performed on the structure until
Commission approval is obtained in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this section.
(3) The Director of Planning, or designee, shall report, in writing, to
the Commission when such emergency repairs have been approved
and the extent or nature of the work.
J. Administrative approval of minor applications.
(1) An application for a certificate of appropriateness for the following
specific work on an individually designated historic site or a
building or structure located in an historic district may be
considered for administrative approval by the Commission
Chairperson or the Chairperson's designated representative, which
will be based upon written recommendations of the staff or
consultant to the Commission who will be responsible for
undertaking the initial review of the proposed work.
(a) Replacement or installation of a screen door that would be
architecturally appropriate for the building or structure in
question.
(b) Replacement or installation of a storm door that would be
architecturally appropriate for the building or structure in
question.
(c) Replacement of an exterior front, side or rear door that would
be architecturally appropriate for the building or structure in
question.
(d) Replacement of three-tab asphalt roof shingles with real slate
shingles, faux slate shingles, wood shake shingles, synthetic
cedar shakes, or standing seam metal roofing, as are deemed
to be architecturally appropriate for the building or structure
in question.
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:481
(e) Replacement or installation of garage doors that would be
architecturally appropriate for the building or structure in
question.
(f) Replacement or installation of wood shutters and iron
hardware that would be architecturally appropriate for the
building or structure in question.
(g) Replacement of gutters and downspouts that would be
architecturally appropriate for the building or structure in
question.
(h) Business signage that is appropriate to the building or
structure with which it is associated.
(i) Replacement or installation of wooden fencing that would be
appropriate to the architecture of the building on the property
and the setting of the property.
(2) In addition, the proposed work cannot involve demolition or
removal of a building, structure, or object on an historic site or
within an historic district, or involve new construction or an
addition to a building, structure, or object on an historic site or
within an historic district.
(3) At each monthly meeting of the Commission, the Chairperson or
the Chairperson's designated representative shall be responsible
for providing the Commission with a written report on those
administrative approvals of a certificate of appropriateness that
were reviewed and acted upon during the preceding month. That
written report shall include the name and address of the applicant;
the name and address of the property owner if different than the
applicant; the tax block and tax lot numbers of the subject
property; a description of what was proposed and what was acted
upon; and the date the action was taken.
K. Informal review of concept plan.
(1) At the request of applicants considering action that may require
Historic Preservation Advisory Commission review, the
Commission may grant an informal review of a concept plan for the
proposed undertaking. Neither the applicant nor the Commission
shall be bound by any informal review.
L. Application procedures.
(1) The Director of Planning, or designee, shall refer all applications
for zoning, construction or other permits pertaining to regulated
actions as defined by this section, involving any buildings,
structures, or objects on historic sites or within historic districts, to
the Commission for its review.
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-200
1:482
(2) Applications shall include a completed certificate of
appropriateness form that contains a precise written description
(including a list of materials to be used) of the proposed work or
activity and any of the following as may be required by the
Commission:
(a) Photographs of the existing structure or lot.
(b) Scaled drawings showing site plan layout, facade elevations,
and specifications for materials.
(c) For new construction applications, a streetscape elevation
drawn to scale showing the new structure in the context of
neighboring buildings, structures, and sites.
(d) Any other additional information reasonably necessary to
reach an informed decision on the application.
(3) The Director of Planning, on designee shall refer all applications
made to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
applications for development, construction of an addition or
alteration of any historic site, building or structure to the
Commission for their review and recommendations prior to either
Board rendering a decision on the application. The Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall include in their resolutions
an explanation as to whether the Commission's recommendations
were accepted or rejected.
M. Violations and penalties.
(1) In the event that any person shall undertake or cause to be
undertaken any exterior work on an individually designated
historic site or any improvement within a designated historic
district for which a certificate of appropriateness is required
without first having obtained such a certificate of appropriateness,
such person(s) shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and
shall be subject to the fines and penalties as provided below.
(2) Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally
serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a
notice describing the violation in detail and giving the owner 10
calendar days to abate the violation by restoring the historic site or
improvement to its status quo ante. If the owner cannot be
personally served within the municipality with said notice, a copy
shall be posted on site and a copy sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner at his last known address as it
appears on the municipal tax rolls.
(3) In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 calendar days
of service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer
shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable in
the Municipal Court, charging violation of this chapter. Each
§ 112-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-200
1:483
§ 112-201. Scenic Corridor District Overlay.
separate day that the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new
and separate violation.
(4) The penalty for violation shall be as follows:
(a) For each day, up to 10 days: not more than $100 per day.
(b) For each day 11 days to 25 days: not more than $150 per day.
(5) In the event that any action which would permanently change
adversely the historic site or historic district, such as demolition or
removal, is about to occur without a construction permit and/or
certificate of appropriateness having been issued, the Zoning
Officer is hereby authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New
Jersey for such injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the
destruction of any individually designated historic site or any
improvement within an historic district.
N. Interpretative statement.
(1) Nothing contained within this section shall supersede the powers
of other local legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any
property owner of complying with the requirements of any other
state statutes or Township ordinances or regulations.
(2) In the event of any inconsistency, ambiguity or overlapping of
requirements between these provisions and any other
requirements enforced by the Township, the more restrictive shall
apply, to the effect that state and/or federal legislation has not
preempted the Township's power to enforce more stringent
standards.
(3) These section requirements should not be viewed as requiring or
prohibiting the use of any particular architectural style, rather the
purpose is to preserve the past by making it compatible with and
relevant to the present. To that end, new construction in or near a
historic building, structure, object or site should not necessarily
duplicate the style, rather it should be compatible with and not
detract from the building, structure, site, object, neighborhood and
its environment.
A. Statement of purpose. The purpose of the Scenic Corridor District
Overlay (hereinafter referred to as "scenic corridor") is:
(1) To protect the Township's aesthetic resources where they exist
along certain designated scenic roadways as identified in the
Township Master Plan;
(2) To direct the location and design of development so that it will
enhance the visual character of the Township, and to provide
§ 112-200 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-201
1:484
sufficient visual buffers and view sheds for future residential
development;
(3) To protect the Township's remaining open spaces from
conventional development patterns and measures that tend to
compromise the intrinsic value of farmlands, fields, hedgerows,
woodlands, mountain profiles or ridgelines, plateaus, and water
bodies and watercourses.
(4) To achieve consistency with the purpose and intent of the land use
and circulation elements of the Township Master Plan, and the New
Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
B. Definition. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SCENIC CORRIDORS — Areas that are visible from scenic roadways as
identified in the Township Master Plan that may exhibit one or more of
the following features:
(1) Panoramic vistas of natural or built environments.
Unique geologic or topographic features of natural or historic
significance.
(2)
(3) Extended, unobstructed viewsheds.
Mature woodlands, hedgerows, dense tree stands and substantial
individual trees.
(4)
(5) Fallow, open fields or active agricultural operations.
(6) Waterbodies or watercourses.
C. Procedure. All proposed development within the scenic corridor shall
be subject to the requirements set forth in Article XXII (Subdivision of
Land), Article XXIII (Site Plan Review), of this chapter. Additionally, any
application for a variance made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d within a scenic corridor shall be subject to the
standards contained in this section. Exemptions from the standards
contained in this section are found in Subsection D.
D. Exemptions. The standards contained in this section shall not apply to
the following:
(1) Construction of detached one or two dwelling unit buildings.
(2) Building additions or accessory uses provided the structure does
not further encroach on the enhanced front yard setback area set
forth in Subsection F(2)(a).
(3) Buildings, structures, and driveways which are part of a farming
operation as defined in § 112-4, Definitions, which comply with all
§ 112-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-201
1:485
provisions of this chapter, and where the parcel of land on which
the structure is proposed is under farmland assessment.
(4) Properties located within the R-10-H, R-20-H or R-40-H Zone
Districts.
(5) Development that satisfies the Township's affordable housing fair
share obligation by the construction of affordable units shall be
subject to the provisions of the Scenic Corridor District Overlay,
except for the enhanced front yard setback area set forth in
Subsection F(2)(a).
(6) Commercial uses containing frontage along Route 27 existing at
the time of adoption of this chapter.
(7) Administrative minor site plans where the proposed disturbance or
structure is less than 1,000 square feet and where the Township.
(8) Engineer determines that no adverse impacts will occur from such
proposed development.
E. Location: Scenic corridors shall extend 1,000 linear feet in both
directions from the center line of scenic roadways identified in the
Township Master Plan, for a total corridor width of 2,000 feet, and as
depicted on the Township Zoning Map.
F. Regulations.
(1) Use standards set forth in Schedule 1 of this chapter shall govern.88
(2) Setbacks.
(a) The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or
structure in a scenic corridor shall have a front setback
distance equal to the lesser of:
[1] At least twice the required front yard setback for the zone
district in which the property is located; or
[2] At least 1/2 the lot's depth, as measured from its frontage
along the scenic roadway; or
[3] A distance approved by the Board if it can be
demonstrated that the proposed construction will not be
visible from the road.
(b) If compliance with the preceding heightened setback
standards is impractical due to the presence of identified
wetlands, substantial wooded areas, an active agricultural
operation, or other substantial environmental feature, a
structure may be located in accordance with the prevailing
88.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-201 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-201
1:486
zone standards, provided that a naturalized landscaped screen
is established to preserve the scenic corridor viewshed.
Additionally, the preceding heightened setback standards may
be relaxed by the Board for development on substantial
hillsides, in which case development should be located at the
foreground or midground of the hill with appropriate
naturalized landscape screening to not create a barrier visible
from the scenic corridor.
(3) Height standards set forth in Schedule 389 of this chapter shall
govern all structures, with the exception of farm buildings and
related structures which shall be governed by the provisions of
Article XXI, Right to Farm.
(4) Signs:
(a) Sign standards set forth in Schedule 4 of this chapter shall
govern.90
(b) In addition to Subsection F(4)(a) above, to ensure a sign's
aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding visual
environment, natural, earthtone colors should be utilized.
(c) Signs may be indirectly illuminated via spotlights, provided
adjacent properties and approaching vehicles are adequately
shielded.
(d) Internally illuminated signs shall be prohibited.
(5) Fences and walls:
(a) Fences located in a scenic corridor shall be no more than 50%
opaque, i.e. picket, or post-and-rail. Chain link fences or fences
with vinyl or aluminum slats shall be prohibited from scenic
corridors except for security purposes for utility installations.
Fences shall not incorporate barbed wire unless in conjunction
with an active agricultural operation.
(b) Decorative walls in a scenic corridor shall not exceed four feet
in height, and shall consist of natural stone or other indigenous
material that is consistent with the scenic character of the
overlay district.
G. Design standards: All site layouts, landscape planting, signage, erosion
control plans, proposed building plans and designs for principal and
accessory structures shall take into consideration the following:
(1) Site layout.
89.Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
90.Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-201
1:487
(a) Preservation. All development shall promote the preservation
and protection of the aesthetic character of natural features
such as rock outcrops, individual trees or stands of trees,
hedgerows, streams, ponds, meadows, open fields, mountain
profiles or ridgelines, plateaus, water bodies and watercourses
and similar elements that individually or collectively constitute
an important part of the visual landscape of the scenic road or
scenic corridor. Additionally, site designs shall promote the
preservation and protection of significant man-made features
such as stone walls, wooden fences, historically or
architecturally important structures such as barns,
agricultural outbuildings, places of worship or residences that
individually or collectively constitute an important part of the
visual landscape of the scenic road or scenic corridor.
(b) Building location. The establishment of building envelopes and
building sites in open fields shall be avoided. Building
envelopes and sites shall be adaptively located on and along
the edges of established fields to the greatest practicable
extent. Existing tree lines, woodlands and hedgerows that
frame open fields shall be preserved and used to effectively
screen new buildings from view, or used to blend new
development into the scenic landscape. Building setbacks
should be varied in order to avoid a monotonous site design.
(c) Farmsteads. The visual appearance of the farmsteads and
farmlands shall be preserved to the greatest practicable extent
by adaptive use or reuse of farm buildings and features,
together with the preservation of contiguous open space
adjacent to such buildings.
(2) Roadways and driveways.
(a) Traffic circulation. Traffic circulation in scenic corridors shall
be via either established scenic roadways identified by the
circulation element of the Master Plan. New residential streets
shall be constructed in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS). The establishment of rural
streets and lanes is encouraged, provided paved road widths
are adequate to accommodate response and placement of
emergency vehicles. Lot-to-street access shall be designed so
vehicles do not back out of lots onto a roadway. On-street
parking shall be prohibited.
(b) Roadway orientation. Established scenic roadway orientations
shall be maintained, unless otherwise specified by the
circulation element of the Master Plan. New rural lanes shall
follow existing grade contours to minimize the extent of cuts
and fill. Rural lanes shall follow existing linear features of the
tract or site, including existing farm or other lanes, trails,
§ 112-201 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-201
1:488
stone rows, tree lines or hedgerows, and shall not be located in
nor traverse open fields.
(c) Driveways. It is recommended that access points be limited
along scenic corridors to promote the flow of traffic while also
maintaining the scenic qualities of the roadside views.
Driveways shall follow existing linear features of the tract or
site, including existing farm or other lanes, trails, stone rows,
tree lines or hedgerows. Common driveways and rural lanes
are encouraged in order to reduce improvements and
additional impervious coverage. Maximum driveway width
shall be 12 feet, except at street intersections as necessary to
provide for turning movements.
(d) Reverse frontage lots may be incorporated into site designs in
order to minimize driveway cuts to scenic roadways and rural
lanes, provided existing natural features are preserved.
(3) Stormwater management. Stormwater management shall be
designed to make minimal changes to natural drainage patterns
and systems. Utilization of existing and new swales is encouraged,
except where not practical due to topography, and provided a
balance is achieved between the aesthetic value of the scenic
corridor, stormwater management and enhanced water quality.
Where stormwater management facilities are required, they shall
be designed to occupy as small an area and involve as little
disturbance as possible within the scenic corridor. Retention basins
may be utilized where a basin is needed or appropriate, and such
basin may be designed to resemble and function as a natural pond
with a view toward the creation of wildlife habitat. Landscaping
standards for stormwater detention facilities are contained in
Subsection G(5)(d).
(4) Curbs, sidewalks and bikeways.
(a) Curbing shall be installed along scenic roadways only if, where,
and to the extent necessary to provide for adequate
stormwater management or road stabilization. When so
required, sloped granite block type curbing shall be installed.
(b) Shoulders may be used instead of curbs when soil and/or
topography make their use preferable, or to preserve the rural
character of the scenic corridor. Shoulders shall be
constructed of materials such as stabilized earth, gravel,
crushed stone or bituminous treatment.
(c) Concrete sidewalks shall not be located parallel to scenic
roadways, and may only be located along internal rural lanes
or driveways where deemed appropriate. Where it is deemed
necessary to provide a safe pedestrian environment along a
scenic roadway, bituminous treatment may be utilized.
§ 112-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-201
1:489
(d) Bikeways shall be provided along scenic roadways and within
developments as set forth in the bikeway element of the Master
Plan. If bikeways are called for, no sidewalks shall be required.
Bikeways should consist of bituminous treatment and be
separated from the scenic corridor cartways.
(5) Landscaping, clearing and planting.
(a) The preservation of existing hedgerows both along scenic
roadways and in other areas is essential to the continuing
aesthetic quality of the scenic corridor. Accordingly, the
preservation of such hedgerows shall be considered crucial
when balanced with other site improvements associated with
new development such as road widening, utilities, curbs,
sidewalks or stormwater management facilities.
(b) Landscaping in a scenic corridor shall utilize native grasses,
wildflower patterns, evergreen and deciduous trees, ground
cover that, to the greatest degree possible, replicates and
complements the natural environment. Extensive residential
lawns shall be avoided in favor of naturalized planting and
screening. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
greatest degree practical via the establishment of conservation
easements.
(c) The age, condition and species of vegetation to be planted or
cleared in conjunction with development shall be considered in
context with the visual landscape of the scenic road and scenic
corridor. To the greatest extent possible, existing vegetation
shall be preserved. Existing vegetation should be used to
screen or break up visually incompatible project elements, or
to enhance the relationship of the proposed development to its
surrounding visual environment. The long-term viability of
existing vegetation should be ensured.
(d) Stormwater detention facility landscaping.
[1] All basin structures shall be designed to blend into the
landscape in terms of construction materials, color,
grading and planting. The screening of outfall structures
and emergency spillways from public view is of particular
importance in the landscape design. This may involve
integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features
or naturalized wetland areas.
[2] All plants shall be tolerant of typical floodplain and
wetland conditions.
[3] Basins designed as naturalized wetland areas should be
planted with a quantity of trees equal to the number
necessary to cover the entire area of the interior of the
basin to the emergency spillway elevation. Of this number,
§ 112-201 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-201
1:490
10% shall be two inches to 2.5 inches caliper, 20% shall
be 1.5 inches to two feet caliper, and 70% shall be six feet
to eight feet height whips. The trees shall be planted in
groves and spaced five feet to 15 feet on center.
[4] Basins designed to function as dry basins shall be planted
with trees in areas of the interior of the basin in a
naturalized pattern where there will not be interference
with the maintenance of the basin and low-flow channel, as
determined by the Township Engineer. The ground should
be seeded with a wildflower or wet meadow grass mix, but
in unique circumstances may require sod or hydroseeding
to stabilize the basin slopes. Planting other than
wildflowers and grasses shall not be located within 10 feet
of low-flow channels to facilitate drainage.
[5] The planting of the perimeter of the water's edge of a
stormwater retention facility shall accentuate views of the
water and other vistas. Plantings shall include native,
informally massed deciduous and evergreen trees and
wildflowers.
(6) Utilities.
(a) New utility distribution lines and services to new locations
shall be installed underground, except for those lines or
services serving active agricultural operations.
(b) To the maximum extent practical, electric transmission lines
not installed underground shall be located on existing poles or
towers.
(c) No new streetlighting shall be installed except where required
for public safety as required by the Franklin Township Police
Department.
(7) Erosion control measures.
(a) In order to maintain the existing visual quality of the area and
its soil supporting natural vegetative cover, subsurface soil
conditions shall be maintained in a fashion that is as close as
possible to natural conditions.
(b) The visual impacts of certain erosion control measures which
may be implemented in conjunction with development shall be
considered in order to require the use of visually unobtrusive
or natural materials, such as vegetative cover, fiber mesh
matrices and natural stone to replace more visually obtrusive
measures, such as rock riprap or concrete structures,
wherever possible.
§ 112-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-201
1:491
(8) Proposed building plans. Proposed structures within the scenic
corridor shall be designed in harmony with the corridor's
topography, viewsheds, architectural styles, colors, character and
appearance.
§ 112-201 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-201
1:492
ARTICLE XXVI
Township Design Standards
§ 112-202. Adoption of Design Standards.
Township Design Standards as prepared by the Department of Community
Development under the direction of the Township Engineer are hereby
incorporated into this chapter by reference. These standards shall be held
to be minimum criteria for site improvements in the Township of Franklin
and shall include all specifications, procedures, requirements, plans and
any other documentation as may be contained therein.
§ 112-203. Architectural design guidelines in HBD.
A. Applicability. These guidelines and standards shall apply to all
applications for development within the HBD. The following design
standards shall be used to prepare and review the architectural design
of all buildings and structures in a development plan application or
building renovation that is funded through the Township's facade
program. Where a development plan involves an existing building or a
site upon which an existing building is located, the existing building
shall be repaired, renovated and restored to comply with these
guidelines.
B. Horizontal courses. All visibly exposed sides of a building shall have an
articulated base course and cornice. The base course shall be
traditionally proportionate to the overall horizontal and vertical
dimensions of a facade and shall align with either the kick-plate or sill
level of the first story. The cornice shall terminate the top of a building
wall, may project out horizontally from the vertical building wall plane
and shall be ornamented with moldings, brackets and other details that
shall be appropriate to the architectural style of a building. The middle
section of a building may be horizontally divided at floor, lintel or sill
levels with belt courses. Building courses shall be considered an
integral part of the design of a building and shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building.
C. Continuity of treatment. The architectural treatment of a facade or roof
shall be completely continued around all visibly exposed sides of a
building. All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed so as to
be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details. In the
instance of multistory buildings, the architectural treatment and
building materials of the first floor shall be compatible with upper
stories.
D. Roof. The type, shape, pitch, texture and color of a roof shall be
considered as an integral part of the design of a building and shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of such building. Roofs and rooflines shall conform to the following
standards:
§ 112-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-203
1:493
(1) No flat roof shall be permitted on a building with a building height
less than 18 feet. A flat roof may only be permitted on a single story
building, provided that all visibly exposed walls shall have an
articulated cornice, parapet wall or some other type of
architectural detailing that projects out horizontally from the
vertical building wall plane or projects vertically from the
horizontal roof plane.
(2) A mansard roof may be permitted, but only if such is located on the
third story of a building, completely and integrally enclosing such
story.
(3) Architectural embellishments that add visual interest to roofs, such
as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys, cupolas, clock towers
and such similar elements shall be permitted, provided that such
are architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of the building.
(4) For all roofs other than flat roofs, the minimum permitted roof pitch
shall be eight on 12, and all gables on a building shall be of the
same pitch.
(5) Roofline offsets shall be provided along any roof measuring longer
than 75 feet in length in order to provide architectural interest and
variety to the massing of a building and relieve the negative visual
effect of a single, long roofline. The minimum height of a required
roofline offset shall be 10 inches.
E. Windows. Windows shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of a building. Windows shall be vertically
proportioned, wherever possible. The location of windows on the upper
stories of a building shall be vertically aligned with the location of
windows and doors on the ground level of such building. Permitted
retail and personal service business uses located in business districts
should have large pane display windows on the ground level. All other
windows shall be double-hung or casement types. A building designed
of an architectural style that normally has windows with muntins or
divided lights shall utilize them. Such muntin or divided light grids may
be the snap-on type, if fitted on the exterior of the window or between
the glazing of the window units.
F. Doors and entrances. All entrances to a building shall be defined and
articulated by utilizing such elements as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades and other
such elements, where appropriate. Any such element utilized shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of such building. Recessed doorways are encouraged; as they provide
cover for pedestrians and patrons in bad weather and help identify the
location of store entrances. A recessed doorway may be required when
it is deemed necessary to provide a clear and safe area for out-swinging
doors, thus reducing potential safety risks to pedestrians walking by an
§ 112-203 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-203
1:494
entrance. All recessed doorway areas shall have lighting installed and
maintained that is sufficient to illuminate the entire recessed area. This
lighting shall be lit from sunset to sunrise.
G. Physical plant. All air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes
or stacks and elevator housing shall be shielded from view for a
minimum distance of 500 feet from the site. Such shielding shall be
accomplished by utilizing the walls or roof of the building or a
penthouse-type screening device that shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of such building.
H. Materials, colors and details. All materials, colors and details used on
the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the
style of such building, as well as with each other. A building designed of
an architectural style that normally includes certain integral materials,
colors and/or details shall have such incorporated into the design of
such building. The number of different materials on exterior facades
should be limited to three types.
I. Shutters. A building designed of an architectural style that normally
includes shutters shall provide such on all windows on the front facade.
If such building is located on a corner lot, shutters shall be provided on
all windows of all facades fronting on a street.
J. Lighting. Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be
designed to be architecturally compatible with the style, materials,
colors and details of such building and other lighting fixtures used on
the site. Consideration shall also be given to the type of light source
utilized and the light quality such produces. The type of light source
used on buildings, signs, parking areas, pedestrian walkways and other
areas of a site shall be the same or compatible. The use of low-pressure
sodium or mercury vapor lighting either attached to buildings or to
light the exterior of buildings shall be prohibited.
K. Signage. All signs, affixed to the exterior of a building or freestanding,
shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of the buildings on the site and other signs used on the same site
and/or building. All signage shall conform to the requirements
contained in Article XII, § 112-106 et seq., of this chapter.
L. Multiple uses. A building with multiple storefronts or other multiple
uses, no matter whether such uses are the same type of use or located
on the same floor level, shall be unified through the use of
architecturally compatible styles, materials, colors, details, awnings,
signage, lighting fixtures and other design elements for all such
storefronts or uses.
M. Corner buildings. A building on a corner lot shall be considered a more
significant structure from an urban design standpoint since such
building has at least two front facades visibly exposed to the street.
Such building may be designed to have additional height and
§ 112-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-203
1:495
architectural embellishments relating to its location on a corner lot, if
deemed appropriate by the Board.
N. Multiple buildings. A development plan that contains more than one
building or structure shall be unified through the use of architecturally
compatible styles, materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, lighting
fixtures and other design elements for all such buildings or structures.
O. Professional office design standards. The following additional
architectural design standards for professional offices shall apply:
(1) Dormers should be used to visually break up large roof masses.
(2) Windows should be double-hung sash-types with the glass area
divided by horizontal and vertical muntins.
(3) Exterior materials should be brick, stone, horizontal siding or wood
shingle, or a combination of such materials.
(4) In the event that a professional office use is located in an office
space having an existing storefront window (typically associated
with a retail use), such business shall maintain the size of the
original storefront window. Proprietors may provide attractive
window displays or install blinds in lieu of altering or removing an
existing storefront window.
P. Retail sales and service design standards. The following additional
architectural design standards for retail sales and services (including
banks) shall apply:
(1) Retail stores oriented towards a street or parking lot shall have a
minimum of 50% of the first floor building facade that faces a street
or parking lot consist of glass display windows.
(2) Primary building entrances should be oriented towards the street.
(3) Common concrete block shall not be used on any elevation visible
from a public or private street. Where permitted, common concrete
block shall be painted or otherwise finished.
(4) In no instance shall a building elevation have a homogeneous
facade without a variation in materials, textures or other design
features.
Q. Maintenance, repair, and renovation of storefronts and facades.
(1) Most downtown commercial buildings have large ground-level
openings (storefronts), framed by vertical piers and a horizontal
supporting beam. The storefront area generally includes an
articulated entrance (usually recessed), display windows, a paneled
bulkhead under the display windows, sometimes a transom over
the storefront, and a cornice that covers the horizontal beam. The
first floor should also have a separate entrance to the upper floors.
§ 112-203 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-203
1:496
The upper floor facade of buildings in a downtown commercial
district is generally characterized by evenly spaced windows that
repeat on each floor. Finally, there is often a cornice along the
top of the facade, which may be constructed of metal, masonry, or
wood. All of these elements must be considered when a commercial
storefront is proposed for restoration or alteration or a new
storefront is proposed for construction. (See Figure 6 at the end of
this chapter.)
(2) Usually, the storefront and front facade has changed more than any
other part of a commercial building as an array of business owners
have sought to remain competitive. The availability of steel beams,
for instance, resulted in storefronts becoming more open as larger
display windows were installed to attract customers. Unfortunately,
some changes may not be compatible with the design of the
building or were accomplished with inexpensive materials that
have not endured. On the other hand, some changes might be
extremely good design in their own right and have enhanced the
original building. All maintenance and repair shall meet the
following guidelines:
(a) Retain and repair all elements, materials, and features that are
original to the storefront and facade or are sensitive
remodelings. If feasible, return a storefront and/or front facade
to its original configuration by restoring as many original
elements as possible, including windows, cornice, and
decorative details. This work should be based on pictorial
research and exploratory demolition that has determined the
original building design and condition. If reconstruction is not
possible, any new storefront design should respect the
character, materials, and design of the building. In instances
where alterations have acquired their own significance and
contribute a positive visual quality to the building and the
surrounding neighborhood, they should be recognized and
preserved.
(b) Consider restoring any original window opening that has been
covered, filled in, or altered.
(c) Remove any materials, elements, and sign panels that cover
display windows, transoms, or bulkheads and that obscure
original architectural elements such as windows, cornices, or
decorative features.
(d) Avoid adding incompatible elements or materials such as coach
lanterns, overhanging roofs, small paned windows, wood
shakes, vertical siding, or shutters on windows where they
never previously existed.
(e) Avoid creating a false historic appearance by remodeling a
building with elements from an earlier period of construction.
§ 112-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-203
1:497
§ 112-204. Design guidelines for security grilles/roll-up doors in the
HBD.
(f) Individuality within a standardized or unified appearance is
encouraged for single buildings containing multiple
storefronts.
(g) Colors of exterior materials, signs, window frames, cornices,
storefronts and other building elements should be coordinated.
(h) High-quality durable materials should be used in order to
convey substance and integrity.
A. Applicability. These guidelines and standards shall apply to all
applications for development within the HBD.
B. Purpose. Security grilles and doors found to be necessary in certain
situations are an important building facade element that should be
given thoughtful consideration. Security grilles and doors must be
installed in a manner that preserves full visual access to a building's
unique design elements. Security grilles and doors designed may be
installed by nonresidential uses only in accordance with the standards
set forth herein.
C. Design standards. Security grilles and roll-up doors shall be designed
according to the following standards:
(1) Solid rolling service doors fabricated of interlocking slats or panels
with no openings are extremely detrimental to an attractive
streetscape and should be avoided. No solid rolling service doors
shall be installed so as to be visible from a public right-of-way.
(2) If a security grille is absolutely necessary, it should be a least 60%
nonsolid. The standard curtain pattern is a straight lattice design
with horizontal rods at two inches on center and vertical links at
nine inches on center. For added visual interest, a staggered brick
pattern with 4 1/2 inch horizontal spacing may be preferable. (See
Figure 7 at the end of this chapter.)
(3) The security grille coil, whether side- or overhead-mounted, should
never be attached to the exterior of the building. When the security
grille is in the closed position, it should be located on the interior
side of the windows so as not to degrade the architectural design
features along the streetscape.
(4) Where headroom is limited, a folding or accordion grille may be
installed in lieu of the typical roll-up type. Any sliding type security
grille must also be nonsolid and situated on the interior side of the
windows.
(5) An emergency egress feature should always be incorporated into
the design and installation of any security grille.
§ 112-203 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-204
1:498
§ 112-205. Design guidelines for awnings and canopies in the HBD.
(6) All recipients of grant money under the Township's facade
improvement program shall be required to remove any security
grille or door that is not in compliance with these standards.
A. Applicability. These guidelines and standards shall apply to all
applications for development within the HBD.
B. Definitions. The following terms shall be defined and used in these
design guidelines as follows:
AWNING — A structure made of cloth, canvas or vinyl, with a frame
attached to a building or other structure, which is so erected as to
permit it to be raised to a position against the building or structure
when not in use.
AWNING, WINDOW — A structure, made of cloth, plastic, metal or
other architectural material and provides a permanent roof-like shelter
over an upper-story window, either installed to be retractable or in a
fixed position.
CANOPY — A structure, in a fixed position, made of cloth, plastic,
metal or other architectural material and provides a permanent rooflike
shelter over a public or quasi- public right-of-way. In the case of a
gasoline service station, a canopy is a roof-like cover that is supported
by one or more columns or stanchions, does not have any side walls and
is used primarily to shield the pumps from the elements.
C. Design standards. Awnings and canopies provide a secondary location
for signage, add color and interest to building storefronts and facades,
and can be used to emphasize display windows and entrances. The also
serve to protect pedestrians and display windows from the sun and rain.
The ground level of a building in a business district may have awnings
or canopies, where appropriate, to complement the architectural style
of a building. Awnings and canopies may also be used on the upper
levels of a building, where appropriate. The following standards for
ground-level awnings and canopies should be adhered to:
(1) The design of awnings and canopies shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of such
buildings and should not conceal significant architectural features,
such as cornices, columns, pilasters or other trim details.
(2) The maximum height from ground-level to uppermost portion of an
awning or canopy shall not exceed the height of the sill or bottom of
any second story window or 15 feet, whichever is less. In the case
of single-story buildings, the maximum height shall not exceed 12
feet or the top of the wall, whichever is less.
(3) The minimum height from ground level to lowermost portion of
awning or canopy shall be 7 1/2 feet.
§ 112-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-205
1:499
§ 112-206. Design standards for signs in the HBD.
(4) The maximum horizontal projection dimension of an awning from
the building wall, including any appurtenances, shall not exceed six
feet from the building face. Awnings may project over a public
sidewalk but shall not be closer than two feet of the vertical plane
of the curb edge or the edge of any other public right-of-way. No
awning shall project over a public sidewalk when the business it
relates to is not open for business.
(5) No canopy with a projection greater than nine inches from the
building wall face shall project over a public right-of-way, unless
approved by the Township Council.
(6) The maximum total vertical dimension of an awning shall not
exceed the total horizontal projection dimension. (See Figure 1,
Awning Proportion, at the end of this chapter.)
(7) An awning's surfacing material shall be constructed of canvas,
cloth or vinyl.
(8) No awning shall contain more than two colors plus white. The color
of any sign messages or other graphic features shall be included in
the number of colors. The colors must be compatible with the
architectural color scheme of the entire building.
(9) Internally illuminated or backlit awnings and canopies are not
permitted.
(10) Awning and canopy frame styles (shapes) shall relate to the
facade's architectural elements. The use of standard-shaped
awnings and canopies is encouraged, when appropriate. Dome,
convex, concave, or other unusually shaped awnings and canopies
should be designed with considerable care, complementing a
specific architectural element of the building. (See Figure 1 sketch
of frame styles at the end of this chapter.)
(11)On buildings with multiple storefronts, compatible awning and
canopy frame styles shall be used as a means of unifying the
structure but need not be identical.
(12) All signage on awnings shall conform to Article XII, Signs,
§ 112-106 et seq., of this chapter.
(13) All signage mounted, affixed or displayed directly on a canopy shall
be regulated as wall-mounted attached signs in accordance with
Article XII, Signs. No canopy used as an internally illuminated wallmounted
sign shall project more than nine inches from the building
face to which the canopy is attached.
A. Applicability. These guidelines and standards shall apply to all
applications for development within the HBD.
§ 112-205 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206
1:500
B. General design standards. All signs shall be subject to the following
design standards:
(1) Every sign shall be in good scale and proportion in design and
visual relationship to structures, buildings and other surroundings.
(2) Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the structure, building and site to which it principally relates. As an
architectural element, a sign shall be in harmony with the
structure, building or site's character and use.
(3) The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious
with the structure, building and site to which it principally relates.
(4) The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be limited to a
minimum needed to convey the sign's main message, and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
(5) The content or advertising which may be displayed on signs shall
be limited to the identification and location of the premises,
identification of its owners or occupants and information
concerning the activities conducted on the premises or the goods
and services offered in connection therewith.
(6) All sign graphics shall be made by a qualified professional.
(7) The base of a freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped with a
combination of shrubs, ground cover, flowers or other plant
material.
(8) Freestanding signs shall be skirted to enclose the supporting pole
or pylon of the sign. The skirting shall extend the full dimensions of
the sign at its lower edge from ground to sign. The skirting shall
not be included in the sign size calculation unless it displays a sign
message.
(9) No signs, illustrations or symbols shall be placed so as to interfere
with the opening of an existing door of any building, or to obstruct
any window opening, except for window signs as regulated herein.
No sign shall be placed to interfere with the use of any fire escape
or to create a hazard to pedestrians.
(10)No wall sign may project more than nine inches from the outer face
of a wall and shall not extend over any public right-of-way, unless
otherwise provided for in this article. Any desired wall sign which
projects more than nine inches from the outer wall face shall be
considered a projecting sign and must conform to all applicable
provisions for projecting signs set forth in this article. No canopy
used as an internally illuminated wall-mounted sign shall project
more than nine inches from the building face to which the canopy is
attached. An awning sign shall not be construed in any way to be a
wall sign.
§ 112-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206
1:501
C. Sign illumination standards. Illuminated signs may be floodlighted,
spotlighted or internally illuminated with a diffused light source, unless
such illumination is specifically prohibited elsewhere in this chapter.
For example, awning signs and canopy signs may not be backlit. All
illumination shall be subject to the following:
(1) All lighting sources shall be completely shielded from the view of
vehicular traffic.
(2) Such illumination shall not project light above the highest elevation
of the front wall of the building for wall-mounted signs or more
than five feet above ground level for freestanding signs.
(3) Backlit/internally illuminated signs shall not have a white or lightcolored
background or signboard.
(4) Where a sign is located on a lot with residential uses or on a lot
adjacent to a lot used primarily for residential purposes, such shall
not be illuminated in a manner that permits any light to shine or
cause a nuisance to the adjacent residential use.
(5) No illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street
from any single-family residential district and visible from such
residential district shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the use to which the sign pertains is
open for business during those hours.
(6) No sign shall contain blinking, flashing, flickering, tracer or
sequential lighting. All signs shall remain stationary and constant
in intensity and color at all times.
(7) All wiring for permanent illuminated signs shall be installed and
maintained so that it is not within public view. The running of
wiring or conduit along the exterior wall of a building to access a
sign is specifically prohibited unless in the judgment of the
Construction Official there is no practical way to run the conduit so
that it is not within public view.
(8) No illuminated sign shall be of such a color or located in such a
manner as to be confused with, or to diminish or detract in any way
from, the effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar official safety
or warning device.
(9) Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk
illumination, driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of
signs and ornamental lighting, shall be shown on a lighting plan in
sufficient detail to allow a determination of the effects upon
adjacent properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The
objective of these items is to minimize undesirable off-premises
effects.
§ 112-206 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206
1:502
D. Street address required. All buildings shall display street address
numbers and/or text in a manner that is clearly legible from the public
street. Signs displaying a street address shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Individual characters identifying a street address for
nonresidential properties must be at least six inches high, larger if
deemed necessary due to visibility circumstances.
(2) Street address numbers may be placed on any permitted sign or
directly on the building face. The sign area devoted to street
address numbers shall not be considered in calculating sign area.
E. For nonresidential uses and mixed-use buildings, no street address
number sign shall exceed an area of six square feet. Residential name
plates shall not exceed two square feet.
§ 112-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206
1:503

ARTICLE XXVIA
Commercial Design Standards
[Added 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 3597]
§ 112-206.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to encourage and advance long-term economic
vitality through commercial design standards to achieve a premium
aesthetic appeal while discouraging less attractive layouts. Designs should
contribute to an attractive commercial center, creating a sound commercial
community identity and inviting pedestrian interest and activity. The
following guidelines should be used in conjunction with other applicable
ordinances in order to guide and facilitate the development of new and
rehabilitated buildings.
A. General objectives and goals:
(1) New commercial developments should minimize generic and
corporate images, but instead express the architectural elements
and forms that best express the values and heritage of the
community.
(2) Minimize the dominance of parking surfaces and structures.
(3) Use green space to soften parking lots.
(4) Invite pedestrian access.
(5) Encourage selection of appropriate vegetation and landscaping
materials.
(6) Promote safe ingress and egress.
(7) Promote shared access.
B. Key design elements of commercial project design:
(1) Landscaped and screened parking.
(2) Significant landscape and hardscape elements.
(3) Building locations which provide pedestrian courtyards and
common gathering area with coordinated site furniture and
lighting.
(4) Visual compatibility with development on adjacent sites.
(5) Visual connections between entrances and associated pedestrian
areas of individual buildings.
(6) Building forms and massing with significant wall articulation.
(7) Preservation of natural site features.
C. Elements that should be avoided:
§ 112-206.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.1
1:505
§ 112-206.2. Applicability. [Amended 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3737]
The commercial design standards contained herein shall apply to all
commercial development, including: retail goods and services stores; eating
and drinking establishments; professional, medical and general offices;
restaurants; child-care centers; banks; hotels; and other such commercial
uses, whether permitted as-of-right or via use variance. The commercial
design standards shall not apply to warehouses; laboratories;
manufacturing uses; and other such light industrial uses. The commercial
design standards shall also not apply to development within the
Renaissance Redevelopment Area or the Hamilton Street Business District,
which areas have their own design standards.
§ 112-206.3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms are defined:
FOCAL POINT — An architectural feature, which may be visible from the
intersecting thoroughfare streets. Examples include a distinctively designed
building, clock tower, spire, public art or sculpture, fountains or other water
feature, landscape feature, public plazas or landscaped open space.
MULTITENANT BUILDING — When there is only one building in a proposed
commercial development that will be occupied by multiple tenants.
PAD SITES — Smaller independent buildings within a larger development.
SINGLE-TENANT BUILDING — Only one building in a proposed
commercial development that will be occupied by a single tenant, such
building must be oriented toward the primary abutting street.
§ 112-206.4. Building orientation.
(1) Poorly defined accesspoints.
(2) Disjointed parking areas, or confusing or unsafe circulation
pattern.
(3) Square, box-like structures with large, blank, unarticulated wall
surfaces.
(4) Highly reflective surfaces or heavily-tinted glass storefronts.
(5) Metal siding on primary facades.
(6) Mix of unrelated styles.
(7) Strong theme-based architectural styles associated with some
chain commercial developments.
(8) Visible outdoor storage, loading and equipment areas.
(9) Signage which is redundant or out of scale with building
architecture.
§ 112-206.1 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.4
1:506
§ 112-206.5. Architectural design.
Building composition refers to the overall design of a building, its
relationship to neighboring buildings and to the context of the overall
development. Architectural design should promote a human scale, create
rhythms among neighboring buildings, and encourage individual expression
A. Site layout and building orientation:
(1) Buildings or portions of buildings should be oriented on a site to
create a strong relationship to adjacent structures, providing visual
continuity and compatibility within the overall development.
(2) Linear development is discouraged. However, if it is unavoidable
the development should incorporate design elements that
significantly mitigate the linear effect.
(3) Varying building setbacks to enhance visual interest along the
streetscape is strongly recommended. Parking setbacks from all
streets should allow for adequate visual buffering or screening.
(4) Surrounding buildings or wrapping the project perimeter with
parking lots, especially along the street front, is strongly
discouraged.
(5) Deep setbacks behind large parking lots or vacant land should be
avoided; orienting some buildings closer to the street to screen
parking in the interior of the site and provide stronger pedestrian
connections to buildings is a more favorable alternative.
(6) Multiple buildings in a single development project should be varied
in size and mass. A transition from low buildings at the site
perimeter to larger and taller structures on interior of site is
suggested.
B. Pad sites:
(1) The location and design of smaller freestanding buildings, or
"pads," can create a more inviting appearance in a larger
development by visibly reducing the project's scale and by
expanding the range of activities and businesses found within a
single development.
(2) Pad sites should be clustered together to define street edges and
entry points or to enclose and create intriguing places between
buildings
C. Alternatives. An applicant may submit an alternative development
pattern, provided such pattern achieves the intent of the above
standards and this section.
D. Focal point required. One or more focal points should be provided
within larger scale developments.
§ 112-206.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.5
1:507
within the context of pedestrian-friendly architecture. Important design
considerations include building opening proportions, height to width ratios,
and rooflines. The design of new infill projects or the renovation or
redevelopment of existing buildings should conform to the following
guidelines and standards.
A. Building relationships and compatibility:
(1) Create commercial developments with a contrast in massing,
ensure compatibility with surrounding developments to emphasize
important corners and designate points of entry.
(2) Avoid the box-like, bulky appearance of commercial buildings. Use
varied materials, textures and/or colors, or provide visual breaks.
Standard franchise design elements or corporate architectural
design plans for buildings and signs should be modified where
necessary to conform to these guidelines to ensure that such
elements are unobtrusive and secondary to the overall
architectural design.
(3) Building elevations must consider the character of the surrounding
architecture and neighborhood, and incorporate design elements
to further enhance community character.
(4) Linear strip development, where unavoidable, must incorporate
variation in building height, building mass, roof forms and changes
in wall planes in the architectural design to mitigate the linear
effect. In some instances, a physical separation of one building into
two or more buildings may be required. Particular attention should
be made to building design when the building is adjacent to
residential property or within direct public view of residential
property.
(5) Multiple buildings within a development must maintain a
consistent style/architectural theme.
(6) Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing by incorporating projected or
recessed entryways, higher rooflines and changes in building
material or color.
B. Storefront and facade design. Excellent storefront design enhances the
pedestrian experience by creating a visually interesting streetscape,
showcasing merchandise, and identifying the mix of goods and services.
Such storefront design promotes individual businesses in ways that
signs alone do not.
C. Consistency of materials. Use materials that complement existing
buildings when freestanding walls are used to provide security,
screening and privacy. Color schemes must tie building elements
together, relate separate buildings within the same development to
§ 112-206.5 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.5
1:508
§ 112-206.6. Site access and circulation.
A pedestrian network that offers clear circulation paths from the parking
areas to building entries creates a friendlier, more inviting image. By
creating a safe, continuous network of pedestrian/bicycle pathways within
and between developments, pedestrians will feel more inclined to safely
walk (rather than drive) between stores.
each other, and must be used to enhance the architectural form of a
building.
D. Energy-conserving design. Applicants are encouraged to consider
energy-conserving design concepts, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Proper orientation and clustering of buildings to take advantage of
the prevailing summer winds and to buffer against adverse winter
wind conditions.
(2) Types of material and their insulation characteristics.
(3) The arrangement and design of windows and doors.
(4) Direct solar or photovoltaic energy.
(5) Day-lighting concepts.
(6) Earth sheltering with creative land forming.
(7) Natural ventilation of outdoor, indoor and attic spaces.
A. Internal vehicle circulation:
(1) Internal vehicle circulation patterns must provide a clear and
direct path to the principal customer entrance of the primary
building, to outlying pad sites, and to each parking area.
(2) In large commercial centers, a clear system of main circulation
drives containing few or no parking spaces that directly access the
main drives must be established to carry the highest volumes of
traffic within the site.
(3) In small commercial centers where traffic volumes are lower and
pedestrian-vehicular and vehicular-vehicular conflicts are less
likely, more flexibility is available in the location and design of
internal drives.
B. Vehicle connections with adjacent properties:
(1) Accesspoints should provide continuous connections between
adjacent nonresidential development parcels.
(2) Common or shared service and delivery access should be provided
between adjacent parcels and/or buildings.
§ 112-206.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.6
1:509
§ 112-206.7. Parking.
Placing large amounts of parking between the front door of buildings and
the adjacent street contributes to an unenthusiastic arrival experience for
patrons and creates a detached relationship between the primary building
and the street. The scale of parking areas should be reduced by locating a
portion of the parking lot out of view, providing clear pedestrian circulation
paths and amenity areas within parking areas, and using increased
landscaping within parking lots to screen spaces and reduce the overall
visual impact of large parking areas. Minimizing the visual and physical
dominance of the automobile is paramount for these design standards.
C. On-site truck traffic/loading and circulation. Loading and delivery
facilities separate from customer parking and pedestrian areas.
D. Pedestrian/bicycle access and circulation:
(1) Bicycle parking is required.
(2) Bikeways and pedestrian walkways should be separated and
buffered from external and internal automobile circulation within
parking lots. Pedestrians should feel comfortable that they are in a
clearly defined pathway to the building.
(3) To enhance pedestrian safety and attractiveness of the walkway,
internal pedestrian walkways within a parking lot or drive area
must be distinguished from the driving surface by use of pavers,
bricks, integrally colored, scored concrete, or other acceptable
methods as determined by the Township.
(4) Bicycle and pedestrian circulation must be provided from the
perimeter of the site to all buildings and all sidewalk areas
designated to accommodate pedestrian activity.
(5) Where applicable, planned bus stops must be shown on the plans.
Bus stops must be linked with pedestrian circulation system of
development.
A. Surface parking lots:
(1) To reduce the scale of parking areas, the total amount of parking
provided should be broken up into parking blocks, separated from
each other by landscaping, access drives, public streets, pedestrian
walkways, or buildings.
(2) Dead-end aisles are discouraged.
(3) Separate parking areas from buildings by either a raised concrete
walkway, pedestrian plaza or landscaped strip.
(4) Avoid head-in parking off of major drive aisles, which causes
hazardous backing movements. Handicap parking is exempt.
§ 112-206.6 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.7
1:510
§ 112-206.8. Site amenities.
Site amenities and pedestrian-scale features, such as outdoor plazas, street
furniture, playgrounds, statuary and sidewalk cafes in commercial
developments, offer attractive spaces for customer and visitor interaction
and create an inviting image for both customers and employees. Such
amenities can vary widely in size, in type, and in degree. Buildings, trees,
walls, topography, and other site features within a commercial development
should be oriented and arranged to surround the gathering places and lend
a human scale. The use of site amenities can also provide pedestrian spaces
at the entry to buildings, which can break up the expanses of parking,
improve the overall development quality, and contribute to the character of
an area. Site amenities may also qualify as a green/open space transition
area.
(5) Avoid aligning all travel lanes in parking lots in long straight
configurations
B. Parking structures and parking beneath buildings. The appearance of
parking structures, whether freestanding or attached, should relate to
the buildings they serve, and contribute to the character of the
development. The incorporation of parking structures in a commercial
development is encouraged in order to minimize site coverage.
(1) Provide convenient pedestrian connections between parking
structures and main buildings.
(2) Separate vehicular access to parking structures from access to
general surface parking lots and clearly identify the access with
signs.
A. Minimum area devoted to site amenities.
(1) New commercial developments with a parking ratio of less than
five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor areas must provide
a minimum of 10 square feet of site amenities, open areas, and
public gathering places for each 10 parking spaces.
(2) New commercial developments with a parking ratio of five per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area or greater must provide a
minimum of 15 square feet of site amenities, open areas, and public
gathering places for each 10 parking spaces.
(3) Site amenities should be located close to and provide convenient
access to the building on site in order to encourage frequent use.
B. Allowed site amenities.
(1) Site amenities may consist of any of the following:
(a) Patio or plaza with seating area;
(b) Mini-parks, squares, or greens;
§ 112-206.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.8
1:511
§ 112-206.9. Landscape design.
Landscaping for commercial areas will enhance the aesthetics and create
a pedestrian-friendly environment. Landscaping also performs the task of
breaking up the mass of commercial buildings, softening architectural
materials and providing screening of service structures and loading areas.
Besides defining building and parking area entrances, sound landscape
design serves functional purposes as well by providing shade, screening
and climate control. Landscaping the corridors along perimeter streets and
internal driveways should provide a visually cohesive design.
(c) Well-designed bus stops, if applicable;
(d) Customer walkways or pass-through containing window
displays;
(e) Water feature;
(f) Clock tower;
(g) Public art; and/or
(h) Any other similar, deliberately shaped area and/or focal feature
that, in the municipality's judgment, adequately enhances such
development and serves as a gathering place.
(2) Furnish spaces with pedestrian amenities such as benches,
landscaping, and/or recreational areas. These outdoor spaces must
be functional and must not appear as left-over spaces
(a) Provide seating that is useable year-round. Position seating
such that it is buffered from exposed areas and takes
advantage of sunny locations.
(b) All common amenities within industrial developments must be
owned and maintained by the developer or by an organization
established for such purposes.
(c) Where feasible, create a sense of enclosure for outdoor seating
areas.
C. Aggregation allowed.
(1) In commercial developments containing more than one building,
the required area may be aggregated into one larger space,
provided such space is within easy walking distance of the major
tenant(s) in the development and any transit stops.
(2) Any such amenity/area must have direct access to the public
sidewalk network.
(3) The amenity/area must be constructed of materials that are similar
in quality to the principal materials of the primary buildings and
landscape.
§ 112-206.8 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.9
1:512
A. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) Interior parking lot landscaping:
(a) Use parking lot landscaping to minimize the expansive
appearance of parking lots, provide shaded parking areas, and
mitigate any negative acoustic impacts of motor vehicles.
(b) Provide trees and other landscape screening to shield large
parking areas from adjacent lots.
(c) Large parking lots are encouraged to provide landscaped
islands and walkways, which help to break up the visual
expanse of blacktop and encourage safe pedestrian travel
areas. The interior of all uncovered parking block spaces must
be landscaped.
(2) Perimeter parking area landscaping:
(a) Provide an attractive, shaded environment along street edges
that gives visual relief from continuous hard street edges,
provides a visual cohesion along streets, helps buffer
automobile traffic, focuses views for both pedestrians and
motorists, and increases the sense of neighborhood scale and
character;
(b) A low continuous landscaped hedge;
(c) A low decorative masonry wall in combination with
landscaping.
(3) Entryway landscaping announces and highlights entries into the
development for the visiting public.
(a) Building setback areas along thoroughfare, collector, or
residential streets, or along private drives, must be
landscaped;
(b) Articulate building facades with landscaped seating areas to
provide visual interest and pedestrian-friendly places;
(c) Landscaping at street intersections and driveway corners must
"pull back" to open view lines into the site and to create corner
features and should not interfere with required sight triangles.
(4) Special attention should be paid to preserving use of natural
features and vegetation which are significant because of unique
character, history, size, variety and/or growth habits.
(5) Site furnishings include benches, waste receptacles, planters,
railings and bollards. Visual consistency of these elements is
desired throughout each development. All components of outdoor
site furniture should be low maintenance, highly durable and
resistant to vandalism, graffiti and theft.
§ 112-206.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.9
1:513
(a) Use outdoor seating that is comfortable, attractive, durable
and easy to maintain
(b) Locate benches at major building entryways, drop-off areas,
transit stops, pedestrian courtyards and plazas;
(c) Locate benches in areas that receive direct sunlight in the
winter, are sheltered from winds and shaded in the summer;
(d) Where seating is fixed, provide a variety of arrangements (both
linear and grouped) which accommodate two to six persons.
B. Crime prevention. Integrate site-planning principles, such as easy
surveillance of common areas and walkways, into the design of new
commercial developments to lessen the likelihood of crime within the
development. Commercial development site planning should integrate
the principles of "Crime Prevention through Environmental Design,"
(CPTED). These principles include:
(1) Territoriality. Space within the development and along the edges
should be well defined and delineated to create a sense of
ownership, such that intruders stand out. This may be
accomplished through the use of pavement treatments,
landscaping, art, signage, screening, fencing, and similar
techniques.
(2) Natural surveillance. Create an environment where it is possible
for people engaged in their normal behavior to observe the spaces
around them. Maximize a space's visibility through thoughtful
design of building orientation, window placement, entrances and
exits, landscaping of trees and shrubs, and other physical
obstructions. Utilize nighttime illumination of parking lots,
walkways, entrances, stairwells, and related areas that promote an
environment in which natural surveillance is possible.
(3) Access control. Access control may include, but is not limited to,
use of fences, walls, landscaping, and lighting to prevent or
discourage public access to or from dark or unmonitored areas. In
addition, sidewalks, pavement, lighting, and landscaping areas
should be used to guide the public to and from primary
development entrances and exits.
(4) Activity support. Create activity support by placing new or existing
activities in an area so that individuals engaged in a particular
activity become part of the natural surveillance of other areas.
C. Service, delivery and storage areas.
(1) Locate loading docks, outside storage, and service areas in areas of
low visibility such as at the side, rear (non-street side of buildings).
§ 112-206.9 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.9
1:514
§ 112-206.10. Lighting.
Prominent lighting fixtures and layout patterns contribute to unified
exterior lighting design of commercial developments in addition to
promoting safe vehicular and pedestrian access to and within a
development.
(2) No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction,
loading, or other such uses must be located within 20 feet of any
public street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian walkway.
(3) Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, trash collection,
trash compaction, and other service functions must be
incorporated into the overall design of the building and
landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these
functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent
properties and public streets. Screening materials must be the
same as, or of equal quality to, the materials used for the primary
building and landscaping.
D. Mechanical equipment screening. All mechanical equipment, whether
on the roof, sides of the building, or mounted on the ground, should be
screened from public view. Screening should be architecturally
integrated with the building through materials, color, texture, shape,
size, and with design features, such as facade parapets. Mechanical/
utility screening must be an integral part of the building structure and
architecture and not give the appearance of being "tacked on" to the
exterior surfaces. The building parapet must be the primary means of
screening roof top equipment.
A. Pedestrian walkway lighting.
(1) Pedestrian-level, bollard lighting, ground-mounted lighting, or
other low, glare-controlled fixtures mounted on building or
landscape walls must be used to light pedestrian walkways.
(2) Accent lighting on buildings is encouraged as a security feature.
(3) Every attempt should be made to consider the impacts the
additional lighting will have on the surrounding environment. Offsite
glare onto adjacent properties or right-of-way is not permitted
and over-lighting areas and high contrast between properties
should be avoided. Concealment of the light source should be a
design consideration.
B. Storefront lighting. Building facades should be highlighted through
"up" lights or accent lights placed on the facade, or through gooseneck
lights mounted on the building facade to highlight facade features and
signs. Accent lighting of buildings and landscape to highlight features
and elements is encouraged, such as the use of indirect lighting, cove
lighting, "wall washing," rim or eaves lighting, and overhead down
lighting.
§ 112-206.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-206.10
1:515
§ 112-206.11. Sign design.
Signage in retail commercial centers is generally intended to identify to the
user the location of a specific business or retail center. If signs are visible
from a public street, they must not compromise public safety by attracting
undue attention. Signage must be subservient to the overall design and
impression of the architecture. Signs should be consistent with overall
project design but should be subordinate to architectural and landscape
elements. All signage must conform to § 112-9G of this Development
Ordinance.
(1) Direct storefront lighting onto the facade or the sidewalk
immediately in front of the store.
(2) Lighting should be shielded to prevent glare on adjacent
properties.
(3) Display windows should be accented by using lights placed inside
the building.
(4) All lighting fixtures should be compatible with the architectural
design of the building.
C. Exterior site lighting. Exterior light fixtures should be compatible and
relate to the architectural character of the buildings on a site. Site
lighting should be provided at the minimum level to accommodate safe
pedestrian and vehicle movements, without causing any off-site glare.
(1) Poles and fixtures should be designed to be architecturally
compatible with structures and lighting on adjacent properties.
(2) Illuminate all intersections with perimeter public roads with similar
poles and fixtures used internal to the development.
(3) Parking lot lighting should be unobtrusive and provide safe light for
orderly functions.
(4) Landscape lighting should enhance and complement, not
overpower, the landscape materials.
A. Tenant signage may be prohibited on the back/rear elevation of
buildings that are visible from other non-retail commercial properties
or public streets, with the exception of signage necessary for delivery
or door identification that will not exceed two square feet and be
nonilluminated.
B. Monument signs must not be placed within the sight triangle of any
intersection or access drive with a public street. Monument signs must
incorporate design and materials that match the architecture of the
development.
§ 112-206.10 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-206.11
1:516
ARTICLE XXVII
Reservation of Public Areas
§ 112-207. Depiction on plat required; private use of areas.
§ 112-208. Applicability.
§ 112-209. Just compensation for loss of use.
The applicant shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss found
to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of use. In
such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been mutually agreed
upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair market value of
an option to purchase the land reserved for the period of reservation;
provided that determination of such fair market value shall include, but not
be limited to, consideration of the real property taxes apportioned to the
land reserved and prorated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall
be compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering, or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining site plan
approval caused by the reservation.
A. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins, or public
areas within the proposed development, before approving a site plan,
the Planning Board may require that such streets, ways, basins or areas
be shown on the site plan in locations and sizes suitable to their
intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve the location and extent
of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of
one year after the approval of the final plat or within such further time
as may be agreed to by the applicant.
B. Unless during such period or extension thereof the Township shall have
entered into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land
comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas, the applicant shall not
be bound by such reservation shown on the plat and may proceed to use
such land for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the subdivision
or land development and required for final approval.
§ 112-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-209
1:517

ARTICLE XXVIII
Escrow Deposits
§ 112-210. Deposit required; use.
The Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall require
escrow deposits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such
escrow shall be utilized to pay the cost of any professional fees incurred
for review of and/or testimony concerning an application for development
submitted by an applicant.
§ 112-211. Payment to professionals.
The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall make all of the
payments to professionals for services rendered to the municipality or
approving authority for review of applications for development, review and
preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The initial fees or charges
shall be as hereinafter set forth. The application review and inspection
charges shall be limited only to professional charges for review of
applications, review and preparation of documents and inspections of
developments under construction and for review by outside consultants
when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the municipality. The only costs that shall
be added to any such charges shall be actual out of pocket expenses of
any such professional or consultants including normal and typical expenses
incurred in processing applications and inspecting improvements. No
applicant shall be charged for any municipal clerical or administrative
functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges, or any of the
municipal costs and expenses except as provided for specifically herein, nor
shall a municipal professional add any such charge to his bill.
§ 112-212. Charges for professional services.
The applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the municipality with
regard to specific professional services in accordance with the following:
A. Charges for any professional for required attendance at any special
meeting during which hearings are held on the application in question;
provided, however, that where hearings are held on other applications
at the same hearing, the cost of attendance of the municipality's
professionals shall be reimbursed on a pro rata basis;
B. The municipality shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the review of
applications including but not limited to:
(1) All expenses of in-house Township technical and professional staff
and outside consulting and professional personnel for services
necessary to review and process an application for development
before a Township agency; such as:
§ 112-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-212
1:519
§ 112-213. Escrow and professional fees. [Amended 8-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3767; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 3845; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4010-13]
At the time of the filing of an application for development, appeal or other
matter pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the administrative
officer an initial deposit for services in accordance with the following
schedule. Deposits shall be made by check, bank money order or cash. In
the case of proposals requiring a combination of approvals, such as site plan
(a) The cost of reviews by in-house Township technical and
professional staff and outside consulting and professional
personnel of applications and accompanying documents both
as to completeness and content.
(b) Issuance of reports by in house Township technical and
professional personnel, outside technical and professional
services as deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, and
other outside technical and professional personnel and
consultants to the Township agency setting forth
recommendations resulting from the review of any documents
submitted by applicant.
(c) Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested or
initiated by an applicant, applicant's attorney or any of the
applicant's experts.
(d) Review of additional documents submitted by applicant and
issuance of reports relating thereto.
(e) Review or preparation of easements, developer's agreements,
deeds or the like, and necessary correspondence with
applicant or applicant's professionals.
(f) Review or preparation of resolutions of approval and
memorializing resolutions.
(g) The cost of independent expert advice or testimony obtained
by the Township agency.
(2) The term "technical and professional personnel" or "technical and
professional services" as used herein shall include the services of a
duly licensed engineer, surveyor, planner, Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, municipal or other attorney, realtor, appraiser,
environmentalist or other experts and their employees or staff who
would provide technical and professional services to insure an
application meets performance standards set forth in the ordinance
and generally accepted standards for the particular professional
field. Professional personnel or professional services shall also
mean experts whose testimony is in an area in which the applicant
has presented expert testimony.
§ 112-212 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-213
1:520
and/or variance(s), the applicant shall deposit an amount equal to the sum
of the deposits required for each application.
A. Escrow fees. [Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4261-19]
Type of Development Escrow to be Posted
Residential development:
2-3 units (site plan/minor
subdivision)
$3,000
2-10 units (site plan/major
subdivision)
$4,000
11-20 units $6,000
21-100 units $8,000
101-500 units $10,000
501-1,000 units $12,500
1,001 units and greater $15,000
Commercial/industrial development application not involving
structures:
0-3 lots $5,000
4 lots and greater $7,500
Commercial/industrial development application involving structure:
Total Floor Plan
5,000-10,000 square feet $7,500
10,001-20,000 square feet $10,000
20,001 square feet and greater $12,500
Variance application involving an
"isolated lot"
$1,500
All other applications when no
residential or commercial/
industrial development is proposed
$3,000
B. Professional fees. Applicants for the following single-lot applications
are required to pay the Township a nonrefundable fee for professional
review and inspection services in accordance with the following fee
schedule:
Proposed Improvement Review and Inspection Fee
New dwelling with variances $1,000
New dwelling without variances $500
Addition with variances $300
Addition without variances $150
Ground-mount solar $250
§ 112-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-213
1:521
§ 112-214. Deposit of escrow funds; refunds.
Deposits received from applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the
Chief Financial Officer in special interest-bearing deposit account, and upon
receipt of bills from professionals and approving said bills as hereinafter
provided for, the Chief Financial Officer may use such funds to pay the bills
submitted by such professionals or experts. The municipality shall not be
Proposed Improvement Review and Inspection Fee
New accessory structure or pool
with variance
$300
New accessory structure or pool
without variance
$150
Decks or aboveground pools No fees required
Site plan waiver $500
Sign variances $500
Home occupations $500
TRC reviews $1,000 (This fee may be waived
or reduced by TRC.)
Wireless communication facilities
requiring review and approval by
the Township Council or the TRC:
New wireless
telecommunication antennas
and/or equipment
$5,000
Replacement of existing
wireless telecommunication
antennas and/or equipment that
involves change(s) in the
number, size and/or location of
antennas and/or equipment
$1,000
In-kind replacement of existing
wireless telecommunication
antennas and/or equipment that
involves no change(s) in the
number, size or location of
antennas and/or equipment
$500
First 3 reviews are included in
the above fees. Afterwards the
fee is $150 per additional
review. This provision does not
apply to wireless
communication tower or
antenna reviews by the
Township Council or TRC.
§ 112-213 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-214
1:522
required to refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not
exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, the entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the
municipality annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied for the
purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be, except that the
municipality may retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent of no
more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount, which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses.
§ 112-215. Payment pursuant to voucher; statement of account.
§ 112-216. Payments required prior to issuance of permits.
No zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other
types of permits may be issued with respect to any approved application
for development until all bills for reimbursable services have been received
by the municipality from professional personnel rendering services in
connection with such application and payment has been made.
A. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be
pursuant to a voucher from the professional which voucher shall
identify the personnel performing the service, and each date the
services were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professionals
shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
on a monthly basis in accordance with the schedules and procedures
established by the Chief Financial Officer. The professional shall send
an informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the
applicant and the municipal agency for whom said services were
performed.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative balance
of the escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly
basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if
monthly charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow account or deposit
contains insufficient funds to enable the municipality or approving
authority to perform required application reviews or improvement
inspections, the Chief Financial Officer shall provide the applicant with
a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work
to continue on the development or the application, the applicant shall
within a reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an
amount to be agreed upon by the municipality or approving authority
and the applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the replenishment
of funds.
§ 112-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-217
1:523
§ 112-217. Closeout procedures.
§ 112-218. Scope of charges.
All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements shall
be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the
application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection
with an application for development presently pending before the approving
authority or upon review of compliance with the conditions of approval, or
review of requests for modification or amendment made by the applicant.
A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by any
state governing agency and not under the jurisdiction of the municipality.
§ 112-219. Limitation of inspection fees.
Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a subdivision
or site plan or required by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting
improvements under construction shall charge only for inspections that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the work and
such inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development
plans and documents.
§ 112-220. Substitution of professionals.
If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the place
of a professional originally responsible for development application review,
or inspection of improvements, the municipality or approving authority
shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to
become familiar with the application or the project, and the municipality or
A. The following closeout procedures shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. and shall commence after the approving authority has granted
final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements
have been approved in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 in the case
of improvement inspection escrows and deposits.
B. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality and the approving authority and to
the relevant municipal professional, that the application or the
improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of such
notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the
municipality shall render written final accounting to the applicant on
the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the
final bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account
including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53-1 shall be
refunded to the developer along with the final accounting.
§ 112-217 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-220
1:524
approving authority shall not bill the applicant or charge to the deposit or
the escrow account for such services.
§ 112-221. Estimate of cost of improvements.
The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be estimated by the Municipal Engineer based on
documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the
general area of the municipality. The developer may appeal the Municipal
Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
§ 112-222. Appeals.
A. An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with copies to
the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the professional
whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a professional for
a service rendered to the municipality in reviewing applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvements, or other charges made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
The governing body or its designee shall within a reasonable time
attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved
to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the
County Construction Board of Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127, any charge to an escrow account or deposit by any
municipal professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation of
improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the
appeal in writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The
applicant or his authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of
the appeal to the municipality, approving authority, and any
professional whose charges are the subject of the appeal. An applicant
shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational
copy of the professional's voucher required by subsection N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2(c), except that if the professional has not supplied the
applicant with an informational copy of the voucher, then the applicant
shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the municipal
statement of activity against the deposit or escrow account required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c). An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing
series of charges by a professional during a period not exceeding six
months to demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need not
appeal each charge individually.
B. The County Construction Board of Appeal shall hear the appeal, render
a decision thereon and file its decision with a statement of the reasons
therefor with the municipality or approving authority not later than 10
business days following the submission of the appeal unless such period
of time has been extended with the consent of the applicant. The
decision may approve, disapprove or modify the professional charges
§ 112-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-222
1:525
§ 112-223. Review criteria.
Within 45 days after the filing of an application for development the
Planning Board and/or the Board of Adjustment as the case may be, shall, in
conjunction with appropriate representatives of the staff of the Township of
Franklin, review said application for development to determine whether the
escrow amount set forth above is adequate.
appealed from. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded by certified
or registered mail to the party making the appeal, the municipality, the
approving authority and the professional involved in the appeal. Failure
by the Board to hear an appeal and render and file a decision thereon
within the time limits prescribed in this subsection shall be deemed a
denial of the appeal for purposes of a complaint, application, or appeal
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the rules and procedures
established by the County Construction Board of Appeals.
D. During the pendency of any appeal, the municipality or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application for
development and to inspect the development in the normal course and
shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections, signing of
subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release of
performance or maintenance guaranties, the issuance of construction
permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this subsection.
The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality may pay charges out of
the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal has been
filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the
amount of any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the
applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or
consultant who is not an employee of a municipality, the professional or
consultant shall reimburse the municipality in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
A. In conducting such review said Board shall consider the following
criteria:
(1) The presence or absence of public water and/or sewer servicing the
site.
(2) Environmental considerations, including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(3) Traffic impact of the proposed development.
(4) Impact of the proposed development on existing aquifer and/or
water quality.
§ 112-222 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-223
1:526
§ 112-224. Posting of escrow.
No application for development shall be deemed complete until such time
as the applicant shall have posted with the Township of Franklin in cash,
certified check or money order the amount of escrow deposit determined
by the Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment to be required in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 112-225. Escrow considered additional to other fees.
The escrow deposit funds pursuant to this Article XXVIII are in addition to
the application fees pursuant to Article XL.
B. Upon completion of said review and within said forty-five-day period,
the Board shall adopt a resolution specifying whether the escrow
amount specified above is sufficient, excessive or insufficient. In the
event the Board shall determine that said amount is excessive, it shall in
the resolution specify the amount that shall be deemed sufficient,
including a specification, if appropriate, that no escrow be posted. In
the event the Board shall determine the amount specified above is
insufficient, it shall so specify and shall further set forth the amount
required to be posted in light of the criteria specified herein.
§ 112-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-225
1:527

ARTICLE XXIX
Stream Corridor Preservation
[Amended 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4157-16]
§ 112-226. Objective.
§ 112-227. Stream corridor components.
Stream corridors include four components: stream channels, floodplains,
contiguous slopes of 12% or greater, and associated preservation areas.
These components are regulated by this article. These components are
defined as follows:
A. This article addresses the public interest of stream corridor protection
by prohibiting disturbance to undisturbed natural lands located along
stream corridors since the preservation of undisturbed lands are
particularly critical to protect property from flooding, to reduce land
development impacts on stream water quality and flows, and to provide
recreation and wildlife migration corridors. This article regulates
development by protecting stream corridors from the type and intensity
of development which would be destructive to their special
environmental importance, harmful to the health and welfare of the
general public, and harmful to properties downstream.
B. All new applications for development, including applications for major
and minor subdivisions and/or applications for site plan approval, shall
be designed so as to minimize, to the maximum degree practicable,
disturbance within stream corridor preservation areas and to avoid
disturbance within undisturbed areas of stream corridor preservation
areas to the maximum degree practicable.
C. So as not to unduly burden landowners of developed properties located
in proximity to stream corridors, this article expressly exempts from the
requirements of this article activities on portions of land that have been
previously disturbed, while such activities would continue to be subject
to other land development regulations (e.g., applicable, zoning and
stormwater management regulations). Conversely, it is the express
intent of this article to prohibit disturbance to undisturbed natural
lands located along stream corridors. Such additional disturbance is
prohibited under this article. While this article allows the granting of a
waiver if the applicant proves particular hardship, such waiver should
be the minimum necessary to address the hardship and otherwise meet
the requirements of this article.
A. Stream channels: Stream channels consist of the bed and banks of a
stream within which is conveyed the normal flow of the stream, as
identified on any one or more of the following:
(1) Streams identified as such in the NJ-GeoWeb mapping application
provided by the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) Bureau of GIS.
§ 112-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-227
1:529
(2) The most current Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, for the National Flood Insurance Program.
(3) Soil maps from the Soil Survey of Somerset County, New Jersey, at
a scale of one inch equals 1,230 feet, prepared by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service in
cooperation with the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station,
January 1972 or most current.
(4) Category 1 (C-1) waters are designated in the Surface Water
Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.15.
(5) Additional state "open waters," delineated via letter of
interpretation from New Jersey Department of Environment
Protection (NJDEP), not delineated per § 112-227A(1) through (4).
(6) For purposes of delineation, the center line of the stream shall
constitute the stream channel for all watercourses other than the
Raritan River, Millstone River, and Delaware and Raritan Canal.
For the three specified watercourses, the outer edge of the actual
stream bed and banks shall be the stream channel from which
setbacks shall be measured.
B. Floodplains: The special flood hazard area (i.e., one-percent annual
chance flood/one-hundred-year flood) as delineated in Subsection A(2)
above.
C. Critical slopes: Land whose slope exhibits a change in elevation greater
than 12% for a horizontal distance of 10 feet or greater and where the
toe of the slope lies within 50 feet of the stream channel bank or
floodplain shall be deemed critical slopes. The protection area for
critical slopes shall be the lesser of:
(1) A slope distance of 100 feet from the toe of slopes having a
consistently average slope of 12% or greater.
(2) A slope distance of 50 feet beyond the first point at which the slope
is less than 12%.
D. Preservation areas: The stream corridor preservation area is required
to be delineated as the most restrictive limit of any of the three
distances established in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 112-227 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-227
1:530
§ 112-228. Regulated activities.
Stream
Category
Minimum
Distance from
Stream
Channel
(§ 112-227A)
Minimum
Distance from
Outer Limit
of Special
Flood Hazard
Area
(§ 112-227B)
Critical Slopes
as
Defined in
§ 112-227C
Millstone River,
Raritan River,
D&R Canal, C-1
streams as
designated by
NJDEP and
upstream
tributaries
within the same
HUC-14
watershed
300 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
Other delineated
streams as
defined in
§ 112-227A(1)
through (4)
150 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
Additional state
"open waters"
per
§ 112-227A(5)
50 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
(1) For C-1 streams, the stream corridor area shall be measured as
defined at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(b), or as defined by this article,
whichever is wider.
(2) When an activity is also reviewed by the Delaware and Raritan
Canal Commission under N.J.A.C. 7:45-7, Stream Corridor Impact
Regulations for the Review Zone of the Delaware and Raritan Canal
State Park (adopted February, 1994), or successive regulations and
amendments, the result that is more restrictive, and less
permissive, to a landowner or applicant, shall apply.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DISTURBANCE — Construction or other human activity that disturbs
the surface of the land, or the soil below the land surface, which
modifies the natural state of the land and/or vegetation, including, but
not limited to: removal of trees or other natural vegetation; clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; installation of landscaping and
§ 112-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-228
1:531
lawns; embankments; land development; construction of buildings or
structure; altering of watercourses or waterbodies; storage of
materials; modifications to or construction of septic disposal systems;
modifications to or construction of wells; mineral extraction; and, the
moving, removal, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or
earth materials.
UNDISTURBED LAND OR UNDISTURBED AREA — Land existing in
a natural state and that has not been the subject of "disturbance" as
defined herein as of the effective date of this article (July 18, 2016).
B. This article shall apply to the disturbance of undisturbed land within a
stream corridor component as delineated under § 112-227. Activities
occurring in an area of land that had been the subject of disturbance
prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article.
C. Any disturbance to undisturbed land within a stream corridor
component as delineated under § 112-227 shall be prohibited.
D. Hardship waiver.
(1) Waiver from the requirements of this article may be granted by the
Board/Committee having jurisdiction provided the applicant
demonstrates the following:
(a) Proof that application of this article will result in a particular
hardship, including demonstration that the disturbance cannot
be located outside the undisturbed area without resulting in an
undue hardship;
(b) That the application has been designed to minimize the extent
of disturbance within the undisturbed area including
employment of methods to minimize the amount of tree
removal, grading, fill or deposition and disturbance to steep
slopes within the stream corridor; and, to minimize impact to
the stream including employment of necessary sedimentation
and erosion control measures and nutrient control by
vegetation filters or other mechanisms incorporated to protect
the stream;
(c) That disturbance to the undisturbed area is eliminated where
possible and minimized where not possible by relocating the
project or reducing the size of the project;
(d) That any temporarily cleared area of vegetation will be
replanted with indigenous, noninvasive vegetation;
(e) A condition of any waiver shall be submission of proof that the
proposed activity has received all necessary approvals
including those of the NJDEP and Delaware and Raritan Canal
Commission, as applicable.
§ 112-228 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-228
1:532
§ 112-229. Stream corridor plan requirements.
(2) Requests for waiver of any provision of this article shall be made as
follows:
(a) Any waiver sought in association with activity requiring
approval by the Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, including but not limited to applications for site
plan, subdivision and/or variance approval, shall be reviewed
in association with the application presented to the Board
having jurisdiction.
(b) Any waiver sought in association with activity not requiring
review and approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall require administrative site plan approval
from the Township Technical Review Committee.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, no waiver may be granted for the
following uses and activities within a stream corridor component as
delineated under § 112-227:
(a) Disturbance within the floodway unless such activity consists
of a roadway, driveway and/or bridge crossing necessary to
provide access to a site and permitted via general permit
issued by the NJDEP.
(b) Any solid or liquid waste or refuse disposal including but not
limited to sanitary landfills, dumps, transfer stations, and
wastewater lagoons.
(c) Junkyards, commercial and industrial storage facilities and the
open storage of vehicles and materials.
(d) Facilities for the storage of hazardous or toxic materials.
(e) Altering of watercourses (realigning, straightening, damming,
widening, or grading of the streambed), excluding the
restoration of watercourses in cases where restoration to their
former natural channels after diversion by floods is
demonstrated to be necessary to protect individual property or
is in the public interest.
A. In addition to information required by §§ 112-179 et seq. and 112-184 et
seq., all applications for development shall identify the location of
stream corridor components as defined and delineated in § 112-227.
B. Any request for a hardship waiver from the requirements of this article
shall, in addition to the application requirements otherwise required,
also provide the following:
(1) Detailed hydrologic engineering studies which indicate the effects
on drainage and streams on all adjacent properties as well as the
property in question, including the necessary data to determine
§ 112-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-229
1:533
§ 112-230. Stream corridor conservation easements.
An approved application for development or use on a lot which contains a
stream corridor or portion of a stream corridor shall provide a conservation
easement delineated by metes and bounds for the continued protection of
the stream corridor. Conservation easements shall be established by deed if
no subdivision map is being filed, or by plat filed with the county, recording
officer in compliance with the Map Filing Law.
§ 112-231. Monuments.
Appropriate monuments shall be set by the licensed land surveyor. Such
markers shall be set at each conservation easement corner not previously
marked by a monument. All boundary markers shall be described on the
survey provided to show their relation to the property or corner or, if
appropriate, to the boundary lines.
§ 112-232. through § 112-234. (Reserved)
whether the boundaries of the stream corridor would be affected if
the application were granted.
(2) A grading plan showing existing and proposed topography by
dashed and solid contour lines with such contours being shown at
one-foot intervals where practical but not to exceed two-foot
intervals.
(3) The evaluation of how suitable techniques, including erosion and
soil stabilization measures, sediment traps and nutrient control by
vegetation filters or other mechanisms will be incorporated to
protect the stream.
(4) Provide such additional plan(s), information or analyses necessary
to justify grant of a hardship waiver § 112-228D.
§ 112-229 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-232
1:534
ARTICLE XXX
Natural Resources Preservation Cluster Option
§ 112-235. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSERVATION PLAN — A two-part detailed analysis of the land area
proposed to be preserved as detailed in § 112-242 of this chapter. All
conservation plans shall consist of a written narrative which provides all
information required by § 112-242 of this chapter; and a conservation plan
which shall also consist of a map or maps showing the existing natural
features and contours and any changes if proposed by an applicant.
PRESERVATION AREA — In addition to any other definition provided in
this chapter, the area of property as detailed in the conservation plan
which shall be preserved without any modifications to the existing grades,
vegetation or any other natural or historic resources on the site, except
in accordance with a conservation plan approved by the Planning Board
pursuant to this chapter which plan may specifically provide for the
retention or creation of agricultural or horticultural uses and/or structures
pursuant to Article XXI, § 112-172, herein.
§ 112-236. Statement of purpose.
Cluster development under this provision is optional and intended to:
A. Promote imaginative, well-designed subdivisions.
B. Encourage a coordinated plan of development of major land parcels
under one ownership, where significant portions of such land parcels
contain, or are in proximity to, natural resource features which should
be preserved from development.
C. Retain the rural character of the area in which said land parcels are
situated.
D. Establish procedures to assure adequate maintenance and restricted
use of open space areas for the benefit of the inhabitants of the
subdivision, or for dedication to public use.
E. Establish procedures to assure adequate protection of existing and
potential developments adjoining the proposed cluster subdivision.
F. Protect historic villages, historic districts, and historic structures or
sites.
G. Protect aesthetically significant ridgelines and viewsheds from the
Delaware & Raritan Canal State Park and Canal Road.
H. Protect frontage along any existing or proposed reservoir, as well as
along all reservoir-owned property.
§ 112-235 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-236
1:535
§ 112-237. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in the NRPC option shall be those uses and accessory
uses permitted in the district in which the cluster development is located
and also preservation areas.
§ 112-238. Criteria for cluster development.
The NRPC Option may be permitted in the R-40 District alone, the A District
alone or the A and RR3 and RR5 combination districts, provided that the
requirements set forth below are met:
I. Protect forests, significant stands of trees and individual trees of
significant size.
J. Protect stream corridors, headwaters of streams, wetlands, floodplains,
flood hazard areas, ponds or lakes.
K. Protect farmland and recently cultivated farm fields including typical
farm features such as hedgerows and individual tree stands.
L. Protect rock outcroppings, including the bluffs and cliffs along Canal
Road and the Delaware & Raritan Canal State Park.
M. Maintain the gross density of the tract in compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
N. Permit a reduction in lot size within the developed portion of the R-40
Zone and A Zone, and in the RR3 Zone and RR5 Zone when combined
with lands within the A Zone, for the preservation of open space.
O. Provide for dedication of land as identified in the Master Plan.
P. Protect land and natural resources from damage both prior to and after
construction with a direct ban on the mining or extraction of any
natural resources from the portion of real property to be preserved as
part of the preservation area except in accordance with a conservation
plan approved by the Planning Board pursuant to this chapter.
Q. Provide for a financial endowment by the applicant under a formula
determined by the Township for the property to be deeded to the
Township to be used for the costs of upkeep and maintenance by the
Township of that specific on tract open space.
A. The tract shall be under one ownership or controlled by the applicant
for purposes of obtaining all required development approvals and
committing the tract to the regulations of the NRPC District.
B. All contiguous or noncontiguous tracts shall have an aggregate area of
not less than 40 acres, which acreage may be reduced to 10 acres if the
resulting preservation area will adjoin another preservation area or
land of similar nature that has been protected in a similar manner.
§ 112-236 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-238
1:536
C. At least 40% of the tract shall be a preservation area.
(1) The preservation area shall contain two or more of the following
natural resource features:
(a) Heavily wooded and forested areas, hedgerows, significant
stands of trees or individual trees of significant size;
(b) Natural wildlife habitats;
(c) Streams, stream corridors, headwaters of streams, wetlands,
flood hazard areas, ponds or lakes;
(d) Rock outcroppings, including the bluffs or cliffs along the
Delaware & Raritan Canal;
(e) Frontage along the Delaware & Raritan State Park and Canal
Road;
(f) Historic structures, sites, villages or districts;
(g) Frontage along any existing or proposed reservoir and all
reservoir owned acreage;
(h) Farmland and recently cultivated farm fields, including typical
farm field features such as hedgerows and tree stands.
(2) It may also include a dedication of land as identified in the Master
Plan for public use.
D. Dwelling units within the cluster development may be serviced by
individual wells and septic systems, provided the minimum lot size is
equal to or greater than two acres.
E. Dwelling units within the cluster development may also be serviced by
public sewer and public water utilities.
F. The applicant shall submit with its application a yield map
demonstrating that under the lot size requirements particular to the
zone, the applicant at issue, would otherwise be entitled to approval for
the number of units sought for the cluster development without resort
to variances or other waivers or design modifications such as wetland
buffer averaging. In applications for development of noncontiguous
tracts, individual tracts may include more housing units than allowed
by zone density, within allowable overall density for the total
development, solely at the discretion of the Planning Board for the
purpose of preservation and a coordinated plan of development.
G. The applicant shall submit a commitment in the form of a letter of intent
to create a financial endowment to the Township for the preservation
area under a formula determined by the Township for the costs of
upkeep and maintenance by the Township of that specific on-tract open
space.
§ 112-238 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-239
1:537
§ 112-239. Development standards.
An application submitted under this option, in addition to compliance with
the provisions of § 112-237 hereof shall also comply with the following:
§ 112-240. Preservation area.
A. The development areas may only be developed for detached singlefamily
residential dwellings.
B. Preservation areas shall be located in appropriate locations and
arranged in such a manner so as to further and foster the purposes of
the NRPC option.
C. All preservation areas shall be dedicated for nondevelopment and open
space uses in such manner as delineated in this chapter, or for
municipal purposes as identified in the Master Plan. Preservation areas
shall not be altered, disturbed or damaged by the applicant before or
during construction. Activities including, but not limited to, the mining,
extraction, or balancing of soil, subsoil or other natural resources, the
stockpiling of soil or subsoil or any construction materials or activities
are not allowed in preservation areas except in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the Planning Board pursuant to this
chapter. The removal of trees or other existing vegetation is not allowed
on preservation areas except in accordance with a conservation plan
approved by the Planning Board pursuant to this chapter which plan
may specifically provide for the retention or creation of agricultural or
horticultural uses and/or structures pursuant to § 112-172 herein.
D. Lots shall be developed according to the following lot and yard
requirements:
(1) Fifteen thousand square feet to 0.99 acres: in accordance with the
R-15 standards.
(2) One to 1.99 acres: in accordance with R-40 standards.
(3) Two to 5.99 acres: in accordance with RR-3 standards.
(4) Six acres and larger: in accordance with A standards.
A. No less than 40% of the entire tract shall be designated as preservation
area.
B. The preservation area shall have a minimum contiguous lot area of not
less than 15 acres, and no portion thereof shall be less than 500 feet in
width except, however, the Planning Board may allow the creation of a
preservation area less than 15 acres or less than 500 feet in width as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
ordinance if the literal enforcement of the provisions of this subsection
is impractical or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 112-239 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-240
1:538
C. Preservation areas shall first be made available for the benefit of all
residents of the Township, and accordingly shall be offered for
dedication to the Township or its designee. The applicant shall deed all
preservation areas to the Township upon final approval and prior to the
commencement of any construction or the issuance of any building
permits by the Township for work on the site. Prior to the dedication to
the Township or its designee, the lands shall be improved by the
developer in accordance with Township requirements. Improvements to
the property may include but are not limited to development of the site
for its natural and scenic qualities, including the removal of all debris
by the applicant, the establishment of trails or other means to view the
site, or to connect the site to other preservation areas or similar areas,
landscaping or other measures to improve the environmental
characteristics of the property. The Environmental Commission shall
provide a list of all recommended improvements, all or any of which
may be incorporated into any preliminary and final approvals at the
discretion of the Planning Board. Improvements to the site may also
include recreational facilities, provided that they are approved by the
Township Council upon a recommendation from the Planning Board
and/or as recommended in the Township Master Plan.
D. If all or a portion of the property designated a preservation area is not
accepted to public use, or if the approving agency shall determine only
a portion thereof be accepted to public use, said areas not so accepted
to public use shall be protected by legal arrangements, satisfactory to
the Planning Board, sufficient to assure its maintenance and
preservation for its intended purpose. Covenants and other legal
arrangements shall specify ownership of the area; method of
maintenance; responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance;
compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions;
guaranties that any association formed to own and maintain said area
will not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Board; and any
other specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
E. Preservation areas shall not be approved to include facilities necessary
for approval of construction of the developed portion of the property
including but not limited to drainage basins.
F. All tracts of land deeded to the Township designated as a preservation
area shall be deed restricted and contain specific notation reflecting
that the property was acquired for preservation and is subject to all
conditions and restrictions of such designation. No building, real
property or interest therein acquired as part of the NRPC Ordinance
shall be sold, conveyed, leased or otherwise alienated from Township
ownership, unless it has been approved by the Township Council after
review by and comment from the Planning Board, Agricultural Advisory
Committee, Environmental Commission and Open Space Advisory
Committee.
§ 112-240 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-241
1:539
§ 112-241. Findings.
The Planning Board shall determine, at a minimum, the following findings
with respect to the proposed NRPC application:
§ 112-242. Application.
A. The development provides for a total environment better than that
which could be achieved under conventional subdivision.
B. The application conforms to the Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
C. The application is designed to produce an environment of stable and
desirable character, consistent with the intent and purpose of the
cluster development regulations to promote public health, safety and
general welfare, and not out of harmony with its surrounding
neighborhood.
D. The property would be used for purposes and in a manner permitted in
the existing district except for lot size, and site of dwellings in the zone.
E. The conservation plan has been submitted to the Agricultural Advisory
Committee, Environmental Commission, the Shade Tree Commission
and the Open Space Advisory Committee for review and comment and
is in accordance with the standards set forth in the ordinance.
A. An applicant proposing to develop lands in accordance with the above
conditions shall first submit a sketch subdivision plat to the Planning
Board in accordance with standards enumerated in § 112-181 et seq. of
this chapter. After approval of the plat by the Planning Board, the
applicant may then submit a plan in accordance with the standards and
conditions of Article XXII, § 112-179 et seq.
B. An NPRC application accompanied by a sketch plat in conformity with
§ 112-181 shall further contain the following:
(1) A designation of those portions of the combined tract intended for
residential cluster development and the development densities
proposed (the "development areas").
(2) Projects in excess of 500 acres shall not be required to designate
lot layouts on the sketch plat.
C. In addition, the applicant shall also submit a conservation plan in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) A conservation plan for all preservation areas within the total
project shall be provided. Such a conservation plan shall include
the location, size, nature and topography of all preservation areas.
(2) The conservation plan shall describe in a written report any
irreplaceable natural resource features located on the tract, such
as but not limited to stream corridors, headwaters of streams,
§ 112-241 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-242
1:540
wetlands, ponds or lakes; wildlife habitats; forests, significant
stands of trees, hedgerows and individual trees of significant size;
farmland; significant viewsheds and ridgelines; rock outcroppings,
including the bluffs or cliffs along Canal road and the Delaware
& Raritan Canal State Park. These irreplaceable natural features
shall be included within preservation areas to the maximum extent
practicable. All trees or forests with trees greater than 18 inches in
diameter shall be separately identified on the conservation plan.
D. If any preservation areas within the conservation plan are slated for
preservation because of scenic value and purposes, their suitability
shall be determined by visibility from a roadway and/or visibility to a
significant number of people.
E. The conservation plan shall describe existing structures or sites having
significant historic or social value to the Township. Such historic
structures and sites shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practicable.
F. The conservation plan shall describe how preservation areas are
protective of the environment and wildlife and shall demonstrate how
preservation areas support the goals and intent of the Comprehensive
Plan of the Township and of this chapter.
G. All preservation areas within the conservation plan shall be designed to
be compatible with the submitted cluster development proposal, as well
as with existing development in the immediate area.
H. The applicant shall meet with the Environmental Commission and
provide a copy of the conservation plan prior to any preliminary
approvals by the Planning Board. The Environmental Commission shall
review the conservation plan and make any proposed changes to it
which will enhance the public's ability to enjoy the property. The
Planning Board shall review the comments of the Environmental
Commission and may incorporate these changes into the approved
conservation plan if it determines the proposed changes are in the best
interests of the public.
I. The Planning Board with the assistance of the Environmental
Commission and the Open Space Advisory Committee shall rank the
land proposed for preservation to determine if the best land available to
the Township has been offered. A criteria-ranking system for
preservation areas shall be established by the Environmental
Commission.
§ 112-242 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-242
1:541

ARTICLE XXXI
Agricultural Cluster Option
§ 112-243. Statement of purpose.
Development under this provision is optional and is intended to:
§ 112-244. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in the AC option shall be those uses and accessory uses
permitted in the district in which the cluster is located and cluster open
space.
§ 112-245. Criteria for development.
The AC option may be permitted in the A and RR3/RR5, R-40 or C-R
Districts, provided that the requirements set forth below are met:
A. Maintain the gross density of the tract in compliance with the Master
Plan.
B. Permit a reduction in lot size within the developed portion of the
agricultural cluster to compensate for the 50% open space set-aside.
C. Provide a density bonus to encourage the continued practice of
agriculture and horticulture.
D. Encourage development outside the A Zone in zones which have been
planned for medium to high density development and accordingly
planned for utility extensions.
E. Recognize the requirement for a minimum size tract of 200 acres to
provide a minimum 50% set aside for a one-hundred-acre farm.
A. The tract of land must contain lots which are all contiguous as defined
in the Farmland Assessment Act.
B. The tract must contain lands in both the A Zone and either the RR3/
RR5, R-40 or C-R Zone.
C. A minimum of 33% of the tract must be within the RR3/RR5, R-40 or C-R
Zone.
D. The minimum tract size shall be 200 acres, except that agricultural
cluster developments that are found by the Planning Board to be a
logical extension of an existing or approved agricultural cluster
development may contain fewer acres to be approved by the Planning
Board.
E. The total number of dwelling units permitted in the cluster subdivision
shall be determined by dividing the total land area in the A Zone by 2.3
and adding that to the number of units permitted on lands in the RR3/
§ 112-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-245
1:543
§ 112-246. Development standards.
§ 112-247. Cluster open space.
RR5, R-40, or C-R Zone to be determined by dividing the total land area
by the minimum lot size.
F. The subdivision shall be served by public sewer and water.
A. The minimum lot standards set forth in Schedule 2, Lot and Yard
Requirements, may be reduced to not less than the standards specified
hereafter:
(1) Lot size:
(a) Interior lot: 25,000 square feet.
(b) Corner lot: 27,500 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage:
(a) Interior lot: 125 feet.
(b) Corner lot: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
(5) Minimum total of two side yards: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
(8) Maximum impervious coverage: 25%.
B. The required frontage shall be met on each frontage of a corner or
through lot.
C. No building lot shall front on an arterial street.
D. Yards abutting the boundaries of the entire development shall not be
less than the minimum requirements for the RR3/RR5, R-40 or C-R Zone
in which the tract is located under conventional zoning, provided that
this requirement shall not apply if there is proposed common open
space of a minimum one-hundred-foot depth at the edge of the cluster
development.
E. Every lot created for one-family residential use shall be capable of
containing an "effective square" as indicated in § 112-33.4 with respect
to the AC Zone. [Added 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4008-13]
A. Not less than 50% of the entire parcel shall be designated as cluster
open space. A minimum of 33% of the cluster open space shall be in
§ 112-245 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-247
1:544
§ 112-248. Approval.
An applicant proposing to develop lands in accordance with the above
conditions shall first submit a sketch subdivision plan to the Planning Board
in accordance with standards enumerated in § 112-181 of this chapter. After
approval of the plat by the Planning Board, the applicant may then submit a
plan in accordance with the standards and conditions of § 112-179 et seq.
§ 112-249. Findings.
The Planning Board shall determine, at a minimum, the following findings
with respect to the proposed cluster development:
active agricultural or horticultural use at the time of filing the
application for development.
B. A plan shall be presented to the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection
D herein designed to insure continued active devotion to an agricultural
or horticultural use for a period of not less than 20 years.
C. No credit for cluster open space shall be given for land within the onehundred-
year floodplain; except, however, where the tract exceeds 500
acres in area, land in the one-hundred-year floodplain shall receive
credit for cluster open space, provided that in no event shall such
floodplain lands comprise more than 20% of the cluster open space.
D. Cluster open space shall first be made available to the Township. Prior
to dedication to the Township, the lands shall be improved by the
developer in accordance with Township requirements.
E. If cluster open space is not accepted to public use, it shall be protected
by legal arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Board, sufficient to
assure its maintenance and preservation in perpetuity for its intended
purpose. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify
ownership of the cluster open space; method of maintenance;
responsibility for maintenance; maintenance taxes and insurance;
compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions;
guaranties that any association formed to own and maintain cluster
open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning
Board; and any other specifications deemed necessary by the Planning
Board.
F. Lands designated as cluster open space may be incorporated into
private lots which conform to this chapter upon approval by the
Planning Board that such land will be permanently protected from
development, and that the proposal conforms to the intent of the cluster
open space requirement.
A. The development provides for a total environment better than that
which could be achieved under conventional subdivision.
B. The application conforms to the Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
§ 112-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-249
1:545
C. The application is designed to produce an environment of stable and
desirable character, consistent with the intent and purpose of the
cluster development regulations to promote public health, safety and
general welfare, and not out of harmony with its surrounding
neighborhood.
D. The property would be used for purposes and in a manner permitted in
the existing district except for lot size and siting of dwellings.
E. The location, size, nature and topography of the cluster open space
areas make them suitable for agricultural and horticultural uses or use
as common areas for park, recreational purposes and buffer areas
between groups of dwellings.
F. Cluster open space shall include irreplaceable natural features located
in the tract, such as but not limited to stream beds, significant stands of
trees, individual trees of significant size and rock outcroppings; and
shall also attempt to preserve existing structures of features having
historic or social value to the Township.
G. If open space is intended to be improved and utilized for active
recreational or active public use, it shall be easily accessible to
pedestrians and designed to meet the needs of the handicapped and
elderly.
H. If open space is intended for scenic value and purposes, the suitability
shall be determined by its visibility from a significant number of units or
length of streets.
I. Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design
shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between
development and the land.
J. Property in the vicinity of the area included in the plan shall not be
adversely affected by the cluster subdivision proposal.
K. If the cluster open space is intended to be devoted to an agricultural or
horticultural use, it shall be designed to be compatible with the overall
development including that of the immediate area, and sufficient
arrangements made in accordance with Section G5 herein to insure the
maintenance and continuance of the use.
§ 112-249 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-249
1:546
ARTICLE XXXII
Conceptual and Zone Plans
§ 112-250. Informal review.
§ 112-251. Submission procedures.
A. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development. The amount of any fees for such informal review shall be
a credit toward fees for review of the application for development. The
developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any review.
B. Public notice and notice to owners of all real property within 200 feet
shall be given in accordance with § 112-231.
C. Applications by corporations and partnerships shall comply with the
disclosure requirement of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 through 40:55D-48.4.
A. The developer shall submit a written request for the concept review, 20
copies of the proposed conceptual plan and supporting documents to
the Secretary of the Planning Board.
B. Plans shall be prepared in conformance with § 112-300P(2) through (6)
for submission requirements for use variance applications.
C. If applicable, plans are to show existing approvals on the property as
compared to the proposal.
§ 112-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-251
1:547

ARTICLE XXXIII
Affordable Housing Development Fees
[Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3537; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3554;
12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 3583; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3708;
11-8-2018 by Ord. No. 4247-18]
§ 112-252. Purpose.
§ 112-253. Basic requirements.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. The New Jersey Supreme Court issued its decision in re adoption of
N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97,91 221 N.J. 1 (2015) on March 10, 2015, stripping
COAH of its administrative duties. In response to that decision, Franklin
Township filed a declaratory judgment action with the Superior Court,
which action sought judicial determination of compliance with the
Township's third round affordable housing obligation. The Superior
Court of New Jersey Law Division Somerset County (the Court) issued a
Conditional Order of Compliance, dated January 16, 2018, which
requires that the Township submit for Court approval all resolutions
and ordinances necessary to implement the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan and Affordable Housing Trust Fund Spending Plan prepared
in response to the Conditional Order of Compliance. Any and all
references to COAH shall mean the Court.
D. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 to 38. Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.92
91.Editor's Note: Both chapters are reserved, having expired on June 2, 2015.
92.Editor's Note: Chapter 97 is reserved, its provisions having expired on June 2, 2015.
§ 112-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-253
1:549
§ 112-254. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and includes, but is not limited
to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a
100-percent affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act which previously had primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with
sound regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner (owners) of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.93
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A.
c.54:1-35c).
TOWNSHIP — Franklin Township in Somerset County.
§ 112-255. Residential development fees.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The Township shall not spend development fees until the Court has
approved a plan for spending.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of
the equalized assessed value for residential development, provided
that no increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
93.Editor's Note: Chapter 97 is reserved, its provisions having expired on June 2, 2015.
§ 112-253 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-255
1:550
§ 112-256. Nonresidential development fees.
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units shall
be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval.
Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to effective date of this article shall pay a fee of 1%
of the equalized assessed value as such was the applicable fee prior
to the adoption of this article. Where a site plan approval does not
apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be synonymous with
preliminary or final site plan approval for this purpose. The fee
percentage shall be vested on the date that the building permit is
issued.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as
a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
(4) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use (e.g., a singlefamily
dwelling converted into a two-family dwelling), is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not
otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of
the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements, for all
new nonresidential construction.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
§ 112-255 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-256
1:551
§ 112-257. Collection procedures.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
§ 112-256 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-257
1:552
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6b).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
§ 112-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-257
1:553
§ 112-258. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 112-259. Use of funds.
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township. Appeals from a determination of the Director may
be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount: payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in
a townhouse or other multistory attached development accessible;
rental income from municipally operated units; repayments from
affordable housing program loans; recapture funds; proceeds from the
sale of affordable units; and any other funds collected in connection
with the Township's affordable housing program.
C. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Department.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used
for any activity approved by the Court to address the Township's fair
share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls; rehabilitation; new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs; accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs; conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units; green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards; purchase of land for affordable
housing; improvement of land to be used for affordable housing;
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
§ 112-257 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-259
1:554
housing sites; financial assistance designed to increase affordability;
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan; or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.994 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.95
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with the applicable monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
94.Editor's Note: Chapter 97 is reserved, its provisions having expired on June 2, 2015.
95.Editor's Note: Chapter 96 is reserved, its provisions having expired on June 2, 2015.
§ 112-259 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-259
1:555
§ 112-260. Monitoring.
The Township shall monitor the collection of development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from
affordable housing program loans, and any other funds collected in
connection with the Township's housing program, as well as the expenditure
of revenues and implementation of the plan approved by the Court. Such
collections and expenditures shall be reported in the manner required by
law, rule or Court.
§ 112-261. Ongoing collection fees.
The ability for the Township to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its judgment of compliance unless the Township has
filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the Court,
has petitioned for substantive certification, and has received the Court's
approval of its development fee ordinance. The Township shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its judgment of compliance,
nor shall the Township retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The Township shall not expend development fees after the
expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 112-262. through § 112-263. (Reserved)
sites or objecting to COAH's regulations and/or action are not eligible
uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 112-259 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-262
1:556
ARTICLE XXXIV
Parkland Dedication
§ 112-264. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS — Except for construction permits for
individual lots and subdivisions of four lots or fewer, any subdivision and site
development plan designed for single-family condominiums, townhouses,
manufactured housing, including mobile home parks, attached and
semiattached units and garden apartments in any mixed-use development
and in projects designed entirely for residential purposes. Any residential
development as defined herein shall be subject to the requirements of this
article.
§ 112-265. Dedication or cash contribution required.
The developer of a residential development, as defined herein, shall be
required to dedicate and improve parkland or to make a cash contribution
toward acquisition and development of recreation facilities located off site.
Any lands proposed to be dedicated shall be subject to acceptance by the
Township Council as to location, size and improvements. However, at a
minimum, 75% of the acreage to be dedicated shall be developed for active
recreation purposes. If the required dedication acreage is calculated to be
less than 10 acres in size, the Township shall have the option of requiring a
cash contribution in lieu of all or part of the required dedication. This option
shall be exercised solely at the discretion of the Township Council when the
acreage is less than 10 acres.
§ 112-266. Dedications of more than 10 acres.
If the required dedication acreage is calculated to be 10 acres or more,
50% of the calculated acreage must be improved and dedicated to the
Township. The Township Council shall have the option of substituting a cash
contribution in lieu of up to 50% of the calculated acreage. The acreage
required to be improved and dedicated shall be in parcels which are a
minimum of five acres in size.
§ 112-267. Population multipliers.
The following population multipliers shall be applied to the formula by
residential unit type, as follows:
A. Single-family and duplex units: 3.2 persons per household.
B. All other residential units: 2.2 persons per household.
§ 112-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-268
1:557
§ 112-268. Acreage requirements.
The acreage dedication and the improvement contribution equivalent shall
be calculated by utilizing the National Recreation and Park Association
standard of eight acres of developed parkland per 1,000 population. This
standard results in a requirement of 0.008 acres per person. The acreage
to be dedicated shall be determined by multiplying the number of units in
the development by the per person household multipliers contained herein
and by multiplying the resulting project population by the 0.008 per-person
acreage standard.
§ 112-269. Options in lieu of dedication.
If a developer proposes to make a cash contribution, in whole or in part, in
lieu of dedicating improved parklands and said proposal is accepted by the
Township Council, the contribution shall be calculated by multiplying the
acreage for which a contribution is to be substituted times a cost of $40,000
per acre.
§ 112-270. Contribution and dedication requirement.
All residential developments which do not indicate a parkland dedication
on the final site plan or final subdivision map shall be required to make
the required cash contribution prior to receiving construction permits for
in excess of 50% of the total residential units within the development. If a
developer is required to dedicate and improve parkland, the Township shall
only accept said parkland upon satisfactory completion of all improvements
after inspection and approval thereof.
§ 112-271. Applicability.
All residential developments which have not received site plan or final
subdivision approval prior to the effective date of this article shall be
subject to the requirements of this article.
§ 112-268 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-271
1:558
ARTICLE XXXV
Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan
§ 112-272. Introduction.
A. The Redevelopment Area that is the subject of this redevelopment plan
is part of the Greater Renaissance 2000 Planning Area that
encompasses seven U.S. census block groups along the Route 27
corridor in both Franklin Township and the City of New Brunswick. (See
Exhibit 1, Location Map, at the end of this chapter.) In 1993, a public/
private partnership between Franklin Township, the First Baptist
Community Development Corporation, the City of New Brunswick and
New Brunswick Tomorrow was announced to perform joint planning
and redevelopment of the Renaissance 2000 area in order to most
effectively use resources in an area that was characterized by
community disinvestment.
B. Later in 1993, a consultant was hired to prepare a concept plan for the
physical and social redevelopment of the Renaissance 2000 area, and in
1994, more than 300 residents, business owners and other stakeholders
participated in a community review of that concept plan. In 1995 the
concept plan was finalized and approved by the Renaissance 2000
Executive Committee, a body consisting of the Mayors of both Franklin
Township and the City of New Brunswick, the Franklin Township
Manager, the New Brunswick Director of Planning and Economic
Development, the Chairman of the Board of First Baptist Community
Development Corporation, and the Director of New Brunswick
Tomorrow. In 1997, a majority of the Renaissance 2000 area in Franklin
Township was designated "an area in need of redevelopment" pursuant
to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law (the LRHL, N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.). In 1998, the development proposals contained in
the 1995 plan were reviewed by the Executive Committee and
revalidated.
C. The basic revitalization strategy is to reinforce existing residential,
educational, recreational, cultural, employment, transportation and
human services systems by adding needed new facilities, jobs and
services to create a balanced new community which will provide:
(1) A job opportunity or the opportunity to prepare for a job for every
household.
(2) A continuum of housing choices through financing mechanisms
designed to allow individuals and families to move from starter
units to full ownership to a retirement life-care community.
(3) A continuum of learning opportunities for the preschool, schoolage,
job-oriented, leisure-time and retirement learners through a
range of public and private facilities and programs.
§ 112-272 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-272
1:559
§ 112-273. Statutory requirements.
According to state statute, the redevelopment plan shall include an outline
for the planning, development, redevelopment or rehabilitation of the
project area sufficient to indicate:
(4) Community recreation facilities focused on a new public park with
program relationships with the public school, churches, other
human services agencies and with local residential organizations.
(5) A business- and industry-friendly environment in which existing
businesses can expand and to which new businesses are attracted.
(6) Design and use regulations and standards that protect and
conserve the physical environment, with full and active citizen
participation in setting such standards and a review process in
which citizens participate.
(7) Transportation to provide access to employment, recreational,
social and housing opportunities. (Renaissance 2000 Community
Revitalization Plan, June 1998).
D. Despite the approval of a concept plan for the Area, the plan for the
Renaissance 2000 area was never formulated pursuant to requirements
of the LRHL. This redevelopment plan acts to incorporate the still-valid
recommendations of the 1995 Renaissance 2000 Plan and to plan the
remainder of the Area in Franklin Township pursuant to the LRHL.
A. Its relationship to definitive local objectives as to appropriate land uses,
density of population and improved traffic and public transportation,
public utilities, recreational and community facilities and other public
improvements.
B. Proposed land uses and building requirements in the project area.
C. Adequate provision for the temporary and permanent relocation as
necessary of residents in the project area including an estimate of the
extent to which decent, safe and sanitary dwelling units affordable to
displaced residents will be available to them in the existing local
housing market.
D. An identification of any property within the Redevelopment Area which
is proposed to be acquired in accordance with the redevelopment plan.
E. Any significant relationship of the redevelopment plan to:
(1) The Master Plans of contiguous municipalities;
(2) The Master Plan of the county in which the municipality is located;
and
§ 112-272 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-273
1:560
§ 112-274. Current planning.
(3) The State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant
to the State Planning Act, P.L. 1985, c. 398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et
seq.).
A. Physical and social revitalization planning targeted within the
Renaissance 2000 has been on-going for almost a decade. This planning
was begun at the grass roots level by several community-based
organizations that joined together in the early 1990s with the host
municipalities to pool resources and to promote efficient, consensusbased
revitalization of the Area. The three principal nongovernmental
organizations which operate within the Renaissance 2000 area are:
(1) The First Baptist Community Development Corporation (FBCDC).
(a) FBCDC is an off-shoot of the First Baptist Church of Lincoln
Gardens created in 1993 to serve the community through
social, educational and economic development programs.
FBCDC is the management entity for Renaissance 2000 and
essentially coordinates planning and human services activities
in the Renaissance 2000 area. FBCDC's primary
responsibilities in the Renaissance 2000 area include:
[1] Administration of and application for federal and state
grants for projects in the Area including UCC-related
assistance.
[2] Management of loan funds and programs including human
services programs.
[3] Intermediary in arranging project financing.
[4] Review of project plans within the Area.
[5] Selection of projects for funding assistance.
[6] Manage process of developer and design team selection
and developer negotiation.
[7] Coordination and consensus building of revitalization
efforts between Franklin Township, New Brunswick and
the residents of the Area.
(b) FBCDC has created several subsidiary companies. CDC
Properties, Inc. manages the acquisition, development,
redevelopment and sale of housing in the Renaissance 2000
area. This includes the Renaissance 2000 Affordable Housing
Program, the Hampton Club Condominium Complex
Redevelopment in the City of New Brunswick, management of
affordable rental housing within the Renaissance area, and a
Special Needs Housing Program focused on families affected
by HIV/AIDS. The Renaissance Community Development
§ 112-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-274
1:561
Credit Union (RCDCU) works with area residents to develop
their credit and increase their self-sufficiency. The Renaissance
Economic Development Holding Corporation focuses its efforts
on economic development within the Renaissance area
through industrial and commercial ventures. Most recently, the
Renaissance Employment & Training Academy, (RETA), was
created. This entity provides basic skills, computer literacy,
and industry-specific customized training to area residents and
employees.
(c) The Renaissance Neighborhood Association is managed by the
FBCDC and plans to incorporate as a stand-alone entity within
the next year. This organization is comprised of residents,
business owners and employees and service providers from
within the Renaissance area.
(2) The Antioch Community Development Corporation. The Antioch
CDC is an off-shoot of the Antioch Christian Church whose focus is
residential development of the Area surrounding Antioch Christian
Church in New Brunswick.
(3) New Brunswick Tomorrow. This organization focuses mainly on
human capital development in the Area.
B. Urban Coordinating Council Neighborhood. In March 1996, the
Renaissance 2000 area was designated an Urban Coordinating Council
(UCC) Neighborhood, which provides the Area with special technical
assistance from the state and priority for competitive funding
opportunities. Numerous other state agencies and departments have
provided funding and technical assistance for the redevelopment and
provision of human services in the Area.
C. Community enhancement programs. Efforts in the Area to improve
social conditions and to revitalize the built environment of the
Renaissance 2000 area has yielded many community enhancement
programs. The following list is representative of the programs currently
under operation in the Redevelopment Area. Funding and incentive
programs for the Area are contained in the project funding and
incentives section of the plan.
(1) Renaissance Community Development Credit Union provides
access to credit for area residents and provides all general banking
services.
(2) Franklin Township Neighborhood Preservation Program
encourages property maintenance within the community.
(3) Community Clean Up Program is a UCC-assisted program which
provides institutionalized workers from the Department of
Corrections to clean public areas within the Area.
§ 112-274 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-274
1:562
§ 112-275. Plan principles.
(4) Franklin Township Neighborhood Police Team provides two
permanent police officers at the Parkside community and
established a satellite police station at the Franklin Township
Housing Authority on Parkside Street. The police team works
closely with the Parkside Crime Watch and Citizen Patrol.
(5) Employment and training programs: Renaissance 2000 Distance
Learning Center, Renaissance 2000 Employment Initiative and
Green Thumb.
(6) Health and Human Service Programs: Family Support Services
Center, Harvest of Hope, Renaissance Youth Partnership Program,
Brothers Working Together, Men of Tomorrow, Sisters Circle,
Young Mothers Program, Renaissance 2000 Basketball League and
other sports leagues, School Base Program, Youth Services
Program, Franklin Child Care Program, and Parent Infant Care
Center.
A. Design.
(1) It is the paramount design goal of the Redevelopment Area to
improve the visual environment and to promote neighborhood
pride and public safety. Design strategies for visual improvement
include employing standards such as setback, building, signage,
landscaping and prohibiting parking in front yard setbacks. Certain
uses which typically require outdoor storage of products are not
recommended to front on Route 27 to limit their visual intrusion.
Uses along Franklin Boulevard are recommended to have a similar
design theme to make this entrance into Franklin more of a
gateway. Senior housing is recommended to be located adjacent to
the existing Williams Park so that the park resource, as well as the
Suburban Bus Lines station can be easily accessed by the senior
residents.
(2) Pedestrian safety and convenience is enhanced by bringing uses
closer to the street and by requiring sidewalks of every
development. Streetscape requirements also strive to enhance
pedestrian areas.
(3) Because the Renaissance 2000 area spans two municipalities along
a highway corridor, it is recommended that design standards
established herein be mirrored on the New Brunswick side of the
Area, particularly in the gateway area of Route 27 and Franklin
Boulevard where design is an important component of
redevelopment.
B. Partnerships. The partnerships forged during the initial planning of the
Renaissance 2000 area are strongly supported by this plan as are the
creation of new partnerships. Not only is the partnership between
§ 112-274 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-275
1:563
§ 112-276. Planning context.
FBCDC, Franklin Township, the City of New Brunswick, New Brunswick
Tomorrow and Antioch CDC crucial, the continued support of the
Neighborhood Council, the residents, business and property owners of
the Area as well as public and private entities is equally critical.
A. Location.
(1) The Renaissance 2000 area is located along the Somerset County/
Middlesex County border in the adjoining municipalities of
Franklin Township and the City of New Brunswick along State
Route 27. (See Exhibit 1, Location Map, at the end of this chapter.)
The area is accessible from several roadways of regional
importance including US Route 1, Route 27, Route 206 and
Interstate Route 287.
(2) The Redevelopment Area in Franklin Township that is the subject of
this plan is approximately 156 acres in area and is located along
Route 27, which connects the Area to Edison, Woodbridge and
points north, and Princeton to the south. The City of New
Brunswick is directly adjacent to the Area, to the south of Route 27.
The Redevelopment Area spans the length of Route 27 in Franklin
from the Amtrak rail line south of Churchill Avenue to the Franklin/
New Brunswick border north of Home Street. The northern
boundary of the Area is varied, but is generally south of Hamilton
Street.
B. Area description.
(1) The Redevelopment Area contains a mix of uses including singleand
multifamily residential, large- and small-scale commercial,
industrial and public and institutional uses. The industrial uses are
generally concentrated at the western end of the Area while the
commercial uses are concentrated along Route 27. Residential uses
are generally located along side streets that radiate from Route 27.
The First Baptist Church is within the Area on Route 27 between
Millstone Road and Stone Place and Naaman Williams community
park is located between Parkside Street and Matilda Avenue, south
of Mark Street. A portion of the Parkside community (Department
of Housing and Urban Development funded) is also located within
the Redevelopment Area.
(2) The following properties in the Hamilton Street sub area are
deleted from the redevelopment plan:
Block 103, Lot 9
Address: 1000 Hamilton St.
Block 103, Lot 10
Address: 990 Hamilton St.
Block 103, Lot 11
Address: 984 Hamilton St.
Block 103, Lot 12.03
Address: 55 School Ave.
§ 112-275 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-276
1:564
Block 104, Lot 9
Address: 970 Hamilton St.
Block 104, Lot 10
Address: 974 Hamilton St.
Block 104, Lot 11
Address: 980 Hamilton St.
Block 291, Lots 1-3; 25-32
Address: 935 Hamilton St.
Block 291, Lots 4-6
Address: 943 Hamilton St.
Block 291, Lots 7-8
Address: 949 Hamilton St.
Block 291, Lots 9-12
Address: 431 Berry St.
Block 291, Lots 13-14
Address: 427 Berry St.
Block 291, Lots 15-16
Address: 425 Berry St.
(3) The following parcels are not subject to eminent domain:
(a) Block 167, Lots 16-19.
(b) Block 121, Lots 1-13.
(c) Block 114, Lots 1-27.
(d) Block 177, Lots 27.01, 12-26.
(e) Block 180, Lots 67-73, 81-97.
(f) Block 181, Lots 25-28, 36-38.
(g) Block 185, Lots 1-4.
(h) Block 172, Lots 10-23.
(i) Block 103, Lots 12.05 and 12.06.
C. Population profile.
(1) In 1998, FBCDC prepared a reexamination of the Renaissance
2000 community demographic information. The following
population profile summary is descriptive of the entire Renaissance
2000 Area, including the Redevelopment Area that is the subject of
this plan.
(2) There are approximately 6,850 people living in the Renaissance
2000 Area, which is projected to decrease by 1% to 6,770 by 2007.
Although the population is projected to decrease, the number of
households in Renaissance 2000 is projected to increase from
1,922 in 1990 to 2,342 in 2007, which is an increase of 22%.
Alternatively, the populations in Franklin Township and New
Brunswick are projected to increase over the seventeen-year
period between 1990 and 2007 by 53% and 13%, respectively,
while the number of households in Franklin Township and New
§ 112-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-276
1:565
Brunswick as a whole is projected to increase by 59% and 9%,
respectively. The seeming disparity between decrease in population
and increase in number of households can perhaps be explained
by the decrease in household size. The number of persons per
household is anticipated to decrease in the Redevelopment Area,
which follows a national trend.
(3) The current racial composition of Renaissance 2000 is
approximately 48% Black (according to US census standards), 41%
White, 3% Asian and 8% otherwise classified. Fourteen percent of
the residents report Hispanic origin. The population of the Area is
anticipated to be comprised predominantly of working-age adults
in 2007 (65%), while 21% of the population will be under 18 years
of age and 14% over 65 years of age.
(4) Educational attainment levels in the Area are below state and local
levels, although over half (64%) have attained a high school degree,
18% of which have received a college degree. Average median
household income in the Area is projected to be approximately
$58,500 in 2007, an increase of 24% over the 1990 figure.
D. Environmental considerations.
(1) Wetlands and floodplains.
(a) Although the Area is relatively level in topography, in general it
is not significantly constrained by the presence of wetlands or
floodplain. There is only one water body in the Area, Mile Run
Brook, which is located at the northern end of the
Redevelopment Area, north of Home Street. Limited floodplain
parallels this water body.
(b) NJDEP Freshwater Wetlands Maps for the Area indicate the
potential presence of several wetland areas. Only an areaspecific
wetland delineation will determine the exact extent
and location of wetlands and their resource classifications, if
any. The preliminary wetlands line is depicted on the Wetlands
Map.96
(2) Site contamination.
(a) Due to the current and/or former industrial and commercial
uses in the Area, the NJDEP Site Remediation Program List of
Known Contaminated Sites in Somerset County was reviewed
and contains the following sites within the Redevelopment
Area:
96.Editor's Note: See Exhibit 2, Wetlands Map, at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-276 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-276
1:566
Sites With On-Site Sources of Contamination
Site Name Address
NJDEP
Contact
Case
Identification
Bureau
Number
Buist Inc. 28 Voorhees
Avenue
BFO-N NJP000894683951101152529
Franklin
Township
Dept.
Public
Works
12 Berry
Street
BUST NJD9865868320063687
Quality
Cosmetics
61 Berry
Street
BUST NJL600220792001
BFO-N NJL000065540931124
Sicora
Motors,
Inc.
541
Somerset
Street
BUST NJD0117349510145857
Getty, Inc. 669
Somerset
Street
BUST 98-01-19-102947
BFO-N: Bureau of Field Operations-Northern
BUST: Bureau of Underground Storage Tanks
(b) The foregoing sites could be in various stages of property
remediation. Examination of the case files is necessary.
Environmental assessments of other existing and former
commercial and industrial properties are necessary to
determine the potential for contamination on such properties.
E. Area development projects. Several of the development projects
recommended in the 1995 plan for the Renaissance 2000 Area are
currently being implemented, either through design or construction.
The projects are as follows:
(1) Naaman Williams Park improvements. It has been an on-going
recommendation of Renaissance 2000 to upgrade and expand
Williams Park to meet changing community needs. The Township is
currently pursuing the recommendations and has retained a
consultant to prepare a concept plan for the redesign of the park. A
preferred concept plan has been selected, and will be modified to
contain an expanded pavilion and tennis courts. (See Exhibit 3,
Concept 1, at the end of this chapter.) The concept plan includes
the following:
(a) The provision of off-street parking for the adjacent Parkside
community.
§ 112-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-276
1:567
(b) Upgrade of the community pool.
(c) Multi-use and softball fields.
(d) Basketball and tennis courts.
(e) A fitness circuit path and tot-lot.
(2) First Baptist Church expansion. Another recommendation of
Renaissance 2000 was the expansion of the First Baptist Church
and parking area. The expansion is currently underway and will
increase the capacity of the church and the parking area.
(3) Parkside Street realignment.
(a) A recommendation of Renaissance 2000 to examine the
realignment of Parkside Street to meet Van Dyke Avenue,
across Route 27 in New Brunswick, at a four-way controlled
intersection, was preliminarily investigated by a consultant
retained by the Township. However, due to public opposition
expressed at neighborhood Council meetings and planning
concerns brought forth in the NJDOT-sponsored Route 27/
Renaissance 2000 Corridor Study for the area, the
appropriateness of this realignment was questioned and a
stop-work order on the realignment was issued by the
Township Council. (See Appendix A.97)
(b) A Somerset County Economic Improvement Program grant
application was received to study alternative alignments.
(4) Other projects. The plan is sensitive to current revitalization efforts
in the Area and supports any current efforts that are consistent
with the goals and standards of this plan. One development
application has been identified as having either Board approval or
is under construction in or adjacent to the Area:
(a) Jumab Pharmacy. A proposed pharmacy on Block 130, Lots
5-11, received final site plan approval from the Franklin
Township Planning Board in April 1997 and is currently under
construction. The principal structure will have 3,560 square
feet of gross floor area, will be one story in height, and will
access Fuller Street. The property owner will dedicate eight
feet of its Franklin Boulevard frontage to Somerset County for
right-of-way purposes.
(b) Utilities infrastructure.
[1] The Redevelopment Area is highly suitable for
development due to its location along Route 27 and its
existing roadway and utilities infrastructure. Utilities
available in the Redevelopment Area include public water
97.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 112-276 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-276
1:568
and stormwater infrastructure, public sewerage,
subsurface gas, and aboveground electricity, telephone,
and television cable service. The water and sewerage lines
are owned and maintained by Franklin Township. Gas and
electric service is provided by PSE&G, telephone service
by Bell Atlantic-NJ and television cable by TKR Cable.
These utilities are located in the roadway right-of-way.
[2] According to Township officials, the water, stormwater and
sewerage lines are adequate to meet the needs of future
commercial operations. Eight-inch diameter water mains
are located along Route 27 and Franklin Boulevard in the
Area. Six-inch water distribution lines service the adjacent
streets. Domestic water is provided by the Elizabethtown
Water Co., and sanitary wastes are collected by the
Middlesex County Utilities Authority.
(c) Roadway infrastructure. Route 27/Renaissance 2000 Corridor
Study.
[1] Route 27 is an undivided four-lane state highway with no
shoulders that has sidewalks on either side for the
majority of its length in the Area. Route 27 is characterized
by heavy traffic volumes, particularly in the southern
portion of the roadway in Franklin and New Brunswick and
is the host of above-average accident, specifically
pedestrian, levels. In the Renaissance 2000 area, Route 27
is heavily traveled and is perceived to be pedestrianunfriendly
at best.
[2] Traffic volumes during the evening peak hour have been
recorded at 2,250 vehicles at the intersection of Route 27
and Franklin Boulevard, which increases as one moves
southward to 2,864 vehicles at the intersection of Route 27
and Veronica Avenue and decreases as one moves
northward to 1,595 vehicles at the intersection of Route 27
and French Street in New Brunswick.
[3] NJDOT recently sponsored a study of the Route 27 corridor
in and around the Renaissance 2000 area which
recommends functional, safety and aesthetic
improvements throughout the Area. Conceptual
recommendations were presented and discussed with
stakeholders in the Renaissance 2000 area, including
representatives of Franklin Township. The stakeholders
support the recommendations as presented. (See
resolution from Township Council in Appendix A.98) The
goal of the study recommendations is:
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 112-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-276
1:569
[4] To improve the ability of Renaissance 2000 area residents
to safely travel within the Area and access destinations
outside the Area; to improve access to commercial and
work destinations within the Route 27 corridor; and to
maintain regional mobility for thorough traffic, while
preventing such traffic from impairing the quality of life
for Renaissance 2000 residents (Route 27/Renaissance
2000 Corridor Study, May 1999).
[5] The study recommends both aesthetic and circulation
improvements, including the promotion of pedestrian and
bicyclist safety and increased linkages with the existing
bus lines and bus station on Route 27. The following
improvements are recommended:
[a] Roadway improvements:
[i] From French Street to Franklin Boulevard, two
travel lanes with a center turning lane (instead of
four travel lanes) is proposed. The right-of-way
will accommodate a four-foot wide sidewalk and a
five-foot wide panel for grass and/or shade tree
plantings. A shoulder/bike lane 4.5 feet wide will
be provided on both sides of the street. There is
also the opportunity for special paving at left-turn
locations and along pedestrian crosswalks.
[ii] From Franklin Boulevard to How Lane, four travel
lanes with a center shared left turn lane are
proposed. Driving lanes will be gradually
increased between Irving Street and Franklin
Boulevard so that four lanes are achieved west of
Franklin Boulevard. The right-of-way will
accommodate a four-foot wide sidewalk and a
three-foot wide panel for grass planting. A threefoot
wide shade tree easement will be obtained on
the outside of the sidewalk area for shade tree
plantings. A five-foot wide shoulder/bike lane will
be provided on both sides of the street.
[b] Public transportation improvements. Locations for bus
pull-out areas (areas recessed into the roadway rightof-
way) have been identified in Franklin at the
Franklin Boulevard and Route 27 intersection and at
the Douglas Avenue and Route 27 intersection in the
Redevelopment Area.
[c] Pedestrian improvements.
[i] Sidewalk construction is proposed for the
following roadways in the Redevelopment Area:
§ 112-276 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-276
1:570
[A] Both sides of Franklin Boulevard from Route
27 to Frank Street.
[B] Both sides of the new Matilda Avenue From
Route 27 to Hamilton Street.
[C] The west side of Douglas Avenue from Route
27 to Kathryn Street.
[ii] The concept plan proposes installing a pedestrian
light at the intersection of new Matilda Avenue
and Route 27 to connect the senior housing site in
Franklin with the Suburban Bus Lines bus station
in New Brunswick.
[iii] The City of New Brunswick has indicated that it
will receive grant money to install sidewalks along
Route 27 in the vicinity of St. Peter's Cemetery.
[iv] The study recommends that the intersection of
French Street and Route 27 be studied in greater
detail to determine potential safety improvements
in that area.
[d] County roadways.
[i] Franklin Boulevard (CR 617) is a four-lane
roadway with a fifty-foot right-of-way in the
Redevelopment Area, which connects Route 27
with Easton Avenue in the Township. Pavement
width is currently 44 feet in the Redevelopment
Area. No sidewalk is currently provided along this
roadway in the Redevelopment Area. The
installation of sidewalks along this roadway from
Route 27 to Frank Street is recommended in the
Route 27/Renaissance 2000 Corridor Study
prepared for NJDOT. Somerset County currently
has no plans to alter/improve this road in the
Redevelopment Area.
[ii] Hamilton Street (CR 514) is a four-lane roadway
with a right-of-way of 66 feet in the
Redevelopment Area. Sidewalks are in place on
the northern side of Hamilton Street in the Area.
[e] Local roadways.
[i] The local roadways in the Redevelopment Area
have fifty-foot-wide rights-of-way with 27 plus feet
of pavement width. These local roadways are
generally not striped or curbed and do not contain
sidewalks in most locations. The 1995
§ 112-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-276
1:571
§ 112-277. Plan goals.
In general, the plan attempts to improve the Redevelopment Area by
providing locations and design standards for uses that are currently in
demand that will increase job and housing opportunities and community
pride in the Area. The specific goals of the plan, in a nonprioritized order,
are as follows:
Renaissance 2000 Plan proposed several local
street closures to decrease turning movements
onto Route 27 and to discourage residential
through traffic. In most cases, the effect of the
closures can be achieved through more efficient
measures, as will be detailed in the circulation
plan section of the plan.
[ii] Additionally, there are several paper streets
within the Redevelopment Area that are indicated
on the Township Tax Maps but are currently
unimproved. They are:
[A] Myrtle Avenue.
[B] Marshal Street.
[C] Gurley Street.
[D] A portion of Baker Street.
[E] A portion of Camner Avenue.
[F] A portion of Kevin Apuzzio Avenue.
[Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 3611]
A. To promote the effective use of all the Redevelopment Area property
and to improve property values within the Area to increase local
revenues.
B. To direct redevelopment to promote neighborhood pride and activism
through job opportunities and aesthetic improvements.
C. To improve utilization of land in the Redevelopment Area, which, by
virtue of its proximity to transportation and major employment and
population centers, could be more effectively employed for the
community benefit.
D. To foster existing partnerships and to establish new ones, where
appropriate.
E. To acknowledge the significance of State Route 27 to the Area, and to
capitalize on its presence while not exceeding the capacity of local
roads within or beyond the Redevelopment Area.
§ 112-276 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-277
1:572
§ 112-278. Development opportunities.
F. To improve circulation on Route 27 and local or County roadways while
providing for enhanced, safe pedestrian and bicycle circulation.
G. To improve the appearance of the Route 27 corridor to provide a
positive community identity.
H. To coordinate design standards with the City of New Brunswick portion
of the Renaissance 2000 Area to create a consistent aesthetic
appearance throughout the Renaissance 2000 Area.
I. To create a circulation pattern that will serve the planned uses in the
Area and that will protect cohesive residential areas from through
traffic.
J. To improve the public elements of the streetscape through landscaping,
street furniture, paving, lighting and pedestrian linkages.
K. To provide a variety of housing types for all age groups that will be
affordable to those living in the Area.
L. To preserve and upgrade existing, stable residential areas.
M. To improve Naaman Williams Park to serve a broader range of age
groups with a variety of facilities and programs sponsored by public
schools, churches, other human services agencies and local residential
organizations.
N. To incorporate the goals and plans of the property owners to the
greatest extent possible in a manner consistent with the plan.
O. To create special improvement districts or business improvement
districts in appropriate locations.
P. To promote the creation of high-quality jobs in the Township that will
provide opportunities for both existing residents and as well as for
others in the region.
Q. To improve local entrepreneurial opportunities through promotion of
new and diverse economic activities.
R. To maximize the leveraging of public and private funds to accomplish
comprehensive redevelopment of the Area.
S. To redevelop land occupied by obsolete structures or uses.
T. To maintain existing viable residential and business uses during the
redevelopment process to prevent continued decline of property values
within the redevelopment area.
A. The Redevelopment Area in Franklin Township presents many
development opportunities due to its location, the resident population
base, the high volumes of through traffic and most importantly due to
§ 112-277 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-278
1:573
§ 112-279. Circulation plan.
In order to meet the goals of the plan and to accommodate planned
development, improvements to the existing roadway network in the
Redevelopment Area are required. (See Exhibit 4, Circulation
Improvements Plan, at the end of this chapter.)
the united efforts of residents, property owners, business owners,
community-based groups and governmental entities.
B. The plan calls for the following elements:
(1) Opportunity for independent, affordable senior housing, an
affordable assisted-living facility, a day-care center and generation
of associated job opportunities.
(2) Improvement of Naaman Williams Park to contain more parking
and recreation features in a safer environment.
(3) Increased local retail and office entrepreneurial opportunities
through the construction of new retail and office space.
(4) Infill of existing, stable residential areas with new residential uses.
(5) Infill of existing commercial and light industrial areas with new
uses and implementation of new design standards.
(6) Improvement of the physical appearance of the Area through new
design standards, the implementation of new uses and streetscape
requirements.
(7) Public street improvements to upgrade the road network's safety
and circulation for pedestrians and bicyclists as well as
automobiles.
(8) Provisions for the maintenance and expansion of existing
residences and businesses during the redevelopment process.
A. Route 27. The recommendations of the Route 27/Renaissance 2000
Corridor Study have been endorsed by the Renaissance Neighborhood
Association and the 1999 Franklin Township Council, and are endorsed
by this plan. At this time, they include:
(1) Lane reconfiguration changes north and south of Franklin
Boulevard.99
(2) Pavement markings or other measures including crosswalks to
promote safety and aesthetics along Route 27.
(3) Installation of a stop light with pedestrian timing at the intersection
of newly aligned Matilda Street (Pine Street) and Route 27.
99.Editor's Note: See Exhibit 5, Renaissance 2000 Proposed Lane Use (Route 27
Intersections), at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-278 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-279
1:574
(4) Installation of bus pull-outs and bus shelters along Route 27.
(5) Addition of shoulders as shared bicycle lanes.
(6) Provision of right-of-way or easement for street tree plantings.
(7) Further study of the French Street/Route 27 intersection in terms
of pedestrian safety.
B. Realignment of Irving Street. As an alternative to the realignment of
Parkside Street to Van Dyke Avenue in New Brunswick, it was
recommended by FBCDC that the realignment of Irving Street to Van
Dyke Avenue may be a more beneficial alignment in terms of lesser
neighborhood impacts and in terms of engineering. This alternative is
recommended for further study, and is part of the grant moneys sought
from Somerset County to explore alternatives to the Parkside Street
realignment.
C. Roadway vacations.
(1) Roadway vacations of improved streets are recommended to
accommodate the planned uses within the Redevelopment Area.
Vacated roadway portions would be deeded to the adjacent
property owners. The following vacations in connection with
property redevelopment are recommended:
(a) Booker Street between Route 27 and Fuller Street.
(b) Oak Place.
(c) Chester Avenue, High Street, Matilda Avenue West.
(d) Stothoff Street west of Pine Street.
(e) Kevin Appuzio Avenue south of Myrtle Street. [Amended
5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 3611]
(2) The following unimproved streets should be vacated to adjacent
property owners to provide more developable property:
(a) Unimproved Gurley Street.
(b) The portion of Camner Avenue that is currently unimproved.
(c) Myrtle Street.
D. Access control.
(1) Rather than completely eliminate access to Route 27 at points in
the eastern portion of the Redevelopment Area as once
recommended, it is now recommended that South Dover Avenue
become a one-way street at its Route 27 access point. This will
require the implementation of one-way street signage at this
location. As the Area redevelops, similar one-way treatment at
Route 27 may become necessary.
§ 112-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-279
1:575
(2) Alternately, Kossuth Street is no longer recommended for one-way
treatment due to the limited opportunities for local residents to
conveniently access Route 27 via other alternatives. Additionally,
Home Street is recommended to remain a one-way street at its
Somerset Street terminus.
E. Sidewalk installation.
(1) The Route 27/Renaissance 2000 Corridor Study also recommended
the installation of sidewalks in locations where high volumes of
pedestrians were observed walking on either dirt paths alongside
roadways or in the roadways themselves. Locations for sidewalks
include:
(a) The south side of Douglas Avenue.
(b) Both sides of Pine Street.
(c) Both sides of Franklin Boulevard to Frank Street.
(d) The north side of Route 27 from Churchill Street to Veronica
Avenue.
(e) Sidewalks will be required along all public streets in the
Redevelopment Area as the redevelopment process occurs.
F. Plan impact on county roadways and drainage facilities.
(1) Franklin Boulevard. Sidewalk construction is proposed along
Franklin Boulevard. Additionally, it is anticipated that, due to the
large lot requirement along this roadway, that the existing number
of access points will be decreased, which should lead to better
safety and circulation on this roadway. The existing stormwater
system along Franklin Boulevard is not anticipated to be adversely
impacted by redevelopment in the Area.
(2) Hamilton Street. The southern side of Hamilton Street is planned
for office use. If office uses are constructed in this area, it is
anticipated that traffic movements and volumes into and out of the
parcels will increase. Sidewalks will be required in this area. On
the northern side of Hamilton Street in the Redevelopment Area,
the entrance to the high school may be repositioned from Francis
Street to the vacant area between Francis Street and Berry Street,
should the Board of Education decide to move forward with its
entrance modification and athletic fields plans. The existing
stormwater system along Hamilton Street is not anticipated to be
adversely impacted by redevelopment in the Area.
§ 112-279 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:576
§ 112-280. Land use plan.100
Based upon analyses of prior Renaissance 2000 plans for the Area,
continued support for those plans and Area opportunities and constraints in
their entirety, a land use plan was created to take advantage of existing and
potential physical and economic opportunities in the Area and to achieve
the goals and objectives of the plan. The proposed land uses in the Area are
varied to take advantage of the different opportunities that are present in
the Area, and are flexible enough to respond to market conditions at the
time of site planning and development. The land uses are proposed for each
development district, and standards for each district have been created.
The permitted uses and design standards within the various districts and
the design standards that apply to the entire Area are detailed in the
following district standards and general design standards sections.
A. Relationship of plan to the Township Land Development Regulations.
(1) The Area shall be redeveloped in accordance with the standards
detailed in this Redevelopment Plan. In order to implement the
Redevelopment Plan consistent with the goals and objectives
herein, the plan supersedes the use, bulk and design standards
provisions of this chapter. Other Township regulations affecting
development that are in conflict are superseded by this plan,
however, existing standards and procedures pertaining to general
development procedures and practices including site plan and
subdivision standards and procedures, performance guaranties and
fees, shall be complied with. In particular, standards for accessory
uses associated with existing or infill one- and two-family
residential uses, such as fences, walls, pools and home occupations
should be taken from this Chapter 112, Land Development.
(2) Any deviation from standards of this plan that result in a "d"
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall be addressed as an
amendment to the plan by the Township Council rather than via
variance relief through the Township Zoning Board of Adjustment.
"C" variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c may be
addressed by the Planning Board through the development
application process. All development must be approved by the
Township Planning Board and shall be submitted through the
normal site plan and subdivision procedures as identified by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(3) In order to allow existing property owners to utilize their property
while the redevelopment plan is being implemented, an Underlying
Zone Plan as set forth on the attached map entitled "Renaissance
2000 Redevelopment Zone Underlying Zoning Plan," prepared
April 2002 and revised August 2002 is adopted.101 The permitted
100. Editor's Note: See Exhibit 6, Renaissance 2000 Land Use Plan, at the end of this chapter.
101. Editor's Note Exhibit 7, Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Zone Underlying Zoning Plan, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:577
uses, bulk standards, and design standards applicable to this
underlying zone can be used until if and when a redevelopment
project is proposed and implemented. The standards of this
underlying zone are added as § 112-280J and shall remain in effect
following the expiration of the redevelopment plan.
B. District standards. The following district standards contain information
pertaining to the development objective of the parcel, the permitted
and accessory uses therein, and the parcel-specific design standards.
The general Area-wide design standards contained in the general
design standards section below apply to all districts. In addition to the
more specific standards provided in this section, also included is the
vision statement of the district. This statement serves to guide the
prospective developer to achieve what the Township envisions for the
specific area in terms of types of uses and design. Developers are
encouraged to align their development proposal(s) for their property
with the overall vision of the parcel and the Area as a whole. The
standards for the development districts are as follows:
C. Senior housing.102
D. Infill residential. Redevelopment objective: This district currently
contains stable residential neighborhoods and has been designated for
infill of single-family and two-family residential uses on vacant lots and
maintenance of existing, intact housing. New development in this area
is encouraged to coordinate with the existing pattern and appearance
of development.
(1) Principal permitted uses:
(a) Single- and two-family residential.
(b) Public use.
(c) Place of worship. [Added 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 4303-19]
(2) Accessory uses: customary, incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(3) Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area for single-family structures: 5,000 square
feet.
(b) Minimum lot area for two-family structures and public use:
7,500 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage for single-family structures: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage for two-family structures and public use:
75 feet.
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Senior housing, was repealed 3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
3661A.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:578
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(f) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard (each): 8 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage for one- and two-family residential use:
30%.
(i) Maximum lot coverage for public use: 55%.
(j) Accessory structures and uses shall be governed as per this
Chapter 112, Land Development.
(k) Every lot created for one- or two-family residential use shall be
capable of containing an "effective square" as indicated in
§ 112-33.4 with respect to the R-F Zone. [Added 3-27-2013
by Ord. No. 4008-13]
(l) Places of worship in the R-F Zone shall comply with the
following bulk, parking and design requirements: [Added
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 4303-19]
[1] Minimum lot area: one acre.
[2] Building setbacks: The walls of the main building or of any
accessory structure greater than 200 square feet shall be
set back no less than 50 feet from the abutting street rightof-
way line(s) (front yard setback) or less than 25 feet from
side and/or rear property lines. Accessory structures 200
square feet or less shall be set back no less than 50 feet
from the abutting street right-of-way line(s) (front yard
setback) or less than five feet from side and/or rear
property lines.
[3] Building height. The building height shall not exceed 35
feet unless in accordance with §112-28.
[4] Lot (building) coverage: 30%.
[5] Impervious coverage: 60%. Impervious cover may be
increased an additional 10% upon approval by the
Planning Board where the parking, drive or pedestrian
surface is constructed of pervious pavement material,
subject to the same conditions contained in Subsection
D(3)(l)[6][b] below.
[6] Parking requirements:
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:579
[a] One parking space per every three seats. One seat
shall be considered 22 inches in calculating the
capacity of pews or benches. In the event there is no
seating provided, parking shall be provided at one
parking space for every three persons at the largest
anticipated gathering or a minimum of one parking
space for every 15 square feet of worship area.
[b] Depending on the number of special occasions, the
Planning Board may require overflow parking to be
constructed of pervious pavement materials. Parking
may be banked upon approval of the Planning Board in
anticipation of future growth, but it shall be
delineated on the plan and included in all coverage
calculations and drainage calculations.
[7] Design standards.
[a] Parking location. The majority of the parking shall be
located to the rear of the main structure, with no more
than 10% of the total parking located at the front
entrance for handicapped accessibility, weddings and
funeral services.
[b] Parking setbacks and standards. No parking shall be
provided within 15 feet of the front property line(s),
and no parking or access driveways shall be permitted
within any required buffer area required in Subsection
D(3)(l)[7][c] below.
[c] The following perimeter buffering shall be provided:
15 feet of heavily landscaped buffer containing, at a
minimum, a double, staggered row of evergreen trees
planted at a maximum of 10 feet on center with a
minimum planting height of six feet to eight feet, or
approved equivalent; a mix of evergreen and
deciduous shrubs; and a six-foot-high, solid, board-onboard
fence; or 25 feet of heavily landscaped buffer
containing, at a minimum, a triple, staggered row of
evergreen trees planted at a maximum of 10 feet on
center with a minimum planting height of six feet to
eight feet, or approved equivalent; and a mix of
evergreen and deciduous shrubs.
[d] Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare and spillover
onto adjacent property or into the sky. This shall
be accomplished through the use of cutoff fixtures
and/or reflectors so that light is directed, as much as
possible, to the area intended to be illuminated. The
light source shall be fully concealed. Lighting fixtures
shall be limited to 15 feet in height and 250 watts in
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:580
power and shall not exceed 0.0 footcandles beyond the
property line zoned or used for residential purposes;
[e] No place of worship shall be located on a flag lot as
such term is defined in § 112-71.
E. Gateway commercial.103
F. Renaissance commercial.
(1) Redevelopment objective:
(a) The objective of this district is to revitalize the commercial
properties and activity in the Area by providing opportunities
for existing property owners to continue and upgrade their
properties as well as for redevelopment of the properties by
redevelopers. Meeting this objective requires design flexibility,
which has been provided by tiering the standards for
properties in this district by lot size. Larger-scale uses
generally require more screening, more landscaping, wider
setbacks and less lot coverage. Smaller-scale uses, on the
other hand, are generally less obtrusive and so require less in
terms of buffering and setbacks.
(b) Larger-scale uses are desired on several target blocks within
the Area. They are Blocks 171.02, 166, 164, 163, and 152. In
addition, the existing office condominiums on Block 171.02,
Lot 237.03, at the corner of Henry Street and Route 27 and the
properties consisting of Block 171.02, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 236.01,
237.02 and 238.02, have been targeted for adaptive reuse as
potential residential uses.
(2) Principal permitted uses:
(a) Retail including restaurant.
(b) Office.
(c) Financial institution.
(d) Public use.104
(e) Convenience store with filling station. Such use shall be
defined as any building, land area or other premises used for a
convenience store, which is a store under 6,000 square feet
that stocks a range of everyday items such as groceries, snack
foods, candy, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products, and
newspapers, with an associated automotive fueling station
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Gateway commercial, was repealed 3-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 3661A.
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(e), which allowed as a principal permitted use
adaptive reuse of existing office condominium structures, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:581
which involves the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels
but does not include the installation of lubricant, tires,
batteries and similar vehicular accessories nor the renting,
painting, cleaning, servicing or repair of vehicles. [Added
4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 4103-15]
(f) Self-storage facility. Such use shall be defined as a fully
enclosed building or group of fully enclosed buildings
containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of
varying sizes available for lease or rent for varying periods of
time. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 4299-19]
(3) Accessory uses: Customary, incidental and accessory to the
principal use, including outdoor dining.
(4) Standards. [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 4299-19105]
(a) Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
(b) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(d) Setbacks, coverages and height:
[1] Front yard: minimum 15 feet; maximum 25 feet (along
Route 27) and maximum 40 feet (along side streets).
[2] Side yard (each): minimum 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: minimum 40 feet.
[4] Maximum impervious coverage: 85%.
[5] Maximum height: 35 feet.
[6] Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Standards for permitted adaptive reuse:
(a) Minimum lot size: 1.5 acres.
(b) Maximum density: 19 units per acre.
(c) Minimum setbacks: perimeter setback of 20 feet.
(d) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 60%. [Amended
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection F(5), Standards for lots
greater than 20,000 square feet in area, and former Subsection F(6), Standards for blocks
along Franklin Boulevard.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:582
(e) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(8) Accessory structure standards:
(a) Accessory buildings shall not be located in the front yard and
shall have ten-foot minimum yards.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
(9) Townhouse developments existing within the Renaissance
Commercial (RC) Zone as of the effective date of this ordinance106
shall be considered permitted uses, subject to the requirements of
§ 112-280F(7). [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 4021-13]
(10) Standards for convenience store with filling station: [Added
4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 4103-15]
(a) Minimum lot size: 1.5 acres.
(b) Required access: direct access to Route 27 or access to a
secondary street that intersects Route 27 at a signalized
intersection.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
(d) Parking: one space per 125 square feet of gross floor area.
(e) Minimum front, side and rear yard for principal and accessory
buildings (including canopy): 40 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
(h) Maximum height: 35 feet; one story.
(i) Buffer where adjacent to residential zone: A buffer area at least
20 feet in width shall be provided in all side and rear yard
areas that abut a residential zone, except that no buffer area
shall be required when an arterial street as shown on the
adopted Master Plan of the Township of Franklin is located
between the site and the residential zone. Screening within the
buffer shall consist of such fencing and/or evergreen plantings
so as to create a solid visual buffer as determined by the
approving board, at least six feet in height.
(j) Compliance with the applicable general design standards in
§ 112-281.
(11) Standards for self-storage facilities: [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 4299-19]
(a) Minimum lot size: 1.5 acres.
106. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 4021-13, adopted 7-16-2013.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:583
(b) Required frontage/access: direct access to Route 27 required.
Minimum required frontage on Route 27 is 50 feet.
(c) Parking: no less than 10 spaces and such additional spaces as
deemed necessary by the Board to serve parking needs for
employees and customers of the facility.
(d) Minimum yards:
[1] Front: 35 feet.
[2] Side: five feet [55 feet along side property line(s) directly
abutting a residential lot].
[3] Rear: 40 feet [55 feet along rear property line(s) directly
abutting a residential lot].
(e) Maximum lot (building) coverage: 50%.
(f) Maximum impervious coverage: 90%.
(g) Maximum height: four stories/45 feet.
(h) Buffer where adjacent to residential lots. A buffer area at least
20 feet in width shall be provided in all side and rear yard
areas where the subject property directly abuts a residential
lot. Screening within the buffer shall consist of such walls,
fencing and/or evergreen plantings so as to create a solid
visual buffer as determined by the approving board, at least six
feet in height.
(i) Design concept. A holistic approach shall be employed on the
overall design of the site and building. The design shall balance
the contrast of nearby residential areas and the adjoining
heavily trafficked highway with the storage facility successfully
transitioning these two neighboring contexts. Appropriate
security shall be employed, including appropriate fencing and
gate access, as well as internal loading for tenants for safety,
protection from the elements, and separation of activity from
the neighboring area.
The architecture of the storage facility shall be designed to
blend within its environment and shall be a well-designed
project that will become an asset to the community. The
applicant shall employ creative use of materials that help to
blend as well as visually break down the mass of the building
as well as take design cues from some of the local materials
(e.g., taking on a "modern brownstone" facade, including the
use of honed CMU block, glazing, black painted metal, EIFS,
and thin brick veneer accents along the entirety of the
building). Exterior lighting and signage shall conform with
all local codes and requirements. The storage facility shall
be parked appropriately, landscaped thoughtfully, and operate
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:584
efficiently. The facility shall be attractively designed to set the
standard for such developments within the Township and for
development generally within the Renaissance Redevelopment
Area.
(j) Compliance with the applicable general design standards in
§ 112-281.
G. Commercial/industrial.107
H. Office/professional.
(1) Redevelopment objective: to provide a location for appropriate
uses along the Hamilton Street corridor in the Area. This district is
envisioned to contain office/professional buildings of up to three
stories in height that will provide a transition from the more office
and residentially oriented portion of Hamilton Street to the
commercial node at Franklin Boulevard/Hamilton Street
intersection.
(2) Principal permitted uses:
(a) Office.
(b) Financial institution.
(c) Existing residential use.
(d) Public use.
(3) Accessory uses: customary, incidental and accessory to the
principal use, including parking and loading and signs.
(4) Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(d) Maximum height: 40 feet for office use; 35 feet for residential
use.
(e) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard: 35 feet.
[2] Side yard (each): 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Commercial/industrial, was repealed 3-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 3661A.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:585
[4] Maximum lot coverage: 55% for office use; 30% for
residential use.
[5] Office uses shall be permitted access only onto Hamilton
Street.
[6] Accessory structures and uses shall be governed as per
this Chapter 112, Land Development.
I. Institutional/public. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 3740]
(1) Redevelopment objective: to retain existing public and institutional
uses in the Area. These existing uses are permitted to remain and
expand within the parameters of the standards set forth herein.
The Board of Education property on Hamilton Street was
programmed in the Renaissance 2000 plans to contain a new
entrance to the High School and to potentially contain athletic
fields.
(2) Principal permitted uses:
(a) Public or institutional use.
(b) Houses of worship.
(c) Parks and open space.
(d) Low- and moderate-income housing consisting of two-family
dwellings and age-restricted apartments.
(e) Public housing.
(f) Existing residential use.
(3) Accessory uses: customary, incidental and accessory to the
principal use, including office, parking and loading and signs.
(4) Standards for existing residential uses:
(a) Minimum lot area for single-family residence: 7,500 square
feet.
(b) Minimum lot area for two-family residence: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage for single-family structures: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage for two-family structures: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(f) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:586
[2] Side yard (each): 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(5) Standards for public housing:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre (can be divided across a public
right-of-way).
(b) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks: perimeter setback of 20 feet.
(6) Standards for low- and/or moderate-income two-family dwellings:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(d) Maximum height: two habitable stories/35 feet.
(e) Minimum building separation (side to side): 15 feet.
(f) Minimum building separation (rear to side): 25 feet.
(g) Minimum building separation (rear to rear): 25 feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(i) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(j) The design standards of § 112-280K(6) and (7) shall apply, as
applicable.
(7) Standards for low- and/or moderate-income age-restricted
apartments:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 18 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 18 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 18 feet.
(d) Maximum height: 54 feet.
(e) Minimum lot size: 70,000 square feet.
(f) Maximum density shall be 50 dwelling units per acre.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(h) Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:587
(i) The design standards of § 112-280K(6) and (7) shall apply, as
applicable.
(8) Standards for houses of worship:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3 acres.
(b) Minimum setbacks: perimeter setback of 25 feet.
(c) Maximum number of stories: 35 feet.
(d) Maximum height: 50 feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(9) Standards for accessory structures: Accessory structures and uses
shall be governed as per this Chapter 112, Land Development.
J. The permitted uses, accessory uses and conditional uses, bulk
standards and design standards applicable to the R-10 and M-2 Zones
within the Underlying Zone Plan are as set forth elsewhere in this
chapter for the R-10 and M-2 Zones respectively.
(1) The permitted uses, bulk standards and design standards
applicable to the BR Underlying Zone are as follows: [Amended
3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4008-13; 7-16-2013 by Ord. No.
4021-13]
Zoning Standards for Underlying Redevelopment
Area Zone Plan for NBR Zone
Permitted
Uses
Neighborhood
Business Zone
Uses
Single-family
Uses
Two-Family
Uses
Lot area 20,000 square
feet
7,500 square
feet
10,000 square
feet
Lot frontage 100 feet 75 feet 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Side yard
(each)
10 feet/25 feet 8 feet/20 feet 8 feet/20 feet
Rear yard 30 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Lot coverage 40% Building
80%
Impervious
20% Building
30%
Impervious
20% Building
30%
Impervious
Height 30 feet (2
stories)
35 feet (2 1/2
stories)
35 feet (2 1/2
stories)
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:588
NOTE: NBR Zone Development shall also comply with the
General Design Standards contained in § 112-281,
including streetscape requirements; open space design
and landscaping; building design; signage; off-street
parking and circulation; storage, service, and loading
areas; refuse and recycling collection areas; screening of
exterior mechanical equipment; and outdoor dining. Every
lot created for one- or two-family residential use shall be
capable of containing an "effective square" as indicated in
§ 112-33.4 with respect to the NBR Zone.
K. Churchill-Millstone Redevelopment Area. [Added 3-13-2007 by Ord
No. 3661A]
(1) Introduction.
(a) The Renaissance Redevelopment Area is located between
Churchill and Brookline Avenues along Route 27 and up to
several blocks in depth west of Route 27. The redevelopment
plan for this area, the Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan,
was adopted by Franklin Township in 1999 and subsequently
amended in 2000 to clarify which parcels would not be
considered for acquisition by the redevelopment agency. Today,
aspects of feasibility and highest and best use are reconsidered
in light of current market activity, trends and viability. This
amendment is proposed as an acknowledgement of those
changes in the market and as a corrective strategy for a
specific portion of the overall redevelopment area. The
following core planning principles incorporated in the
Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan, however, will be
maintained:
[1] The development of a design strategy for the visual
improvement of the area; employment of consistent
standards for building setbacks and design, signage,
landscaping, and parking,
[2] The establishment of necessary public involvement and
public/private partnerships,
[3] Introduction of the Gateway concept; i.e., infill residential
and commercial development and redevelopment of the
high traffic area along Franklin Boulevard and State
Highway Route 27.
(b) The Redevelopment Plan Amendment (hereafter referred to as
the "plan") will regulate development within the Churchill-
Millstone area of the Renaissance Redevelopment Area. This
area is located at an important crossroads of Franklin
Township and, when properly redeveloped, will serve as an
important component of Franklin's desire to create pedestrian-
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:589
friendly commercial and/or mixed-residential/commercial
districts, anchored by residential districts that are respectful
of the established character of the surrounding residential
neighborhoods. The redevelopment area is bounded by
Franklin Boulevard and Churchill Avenue and New Jersey State
Highway 27 to Berry and Ellen Streets. It is approximately 45
acres in size. The block/lot description of the redevelopment
area is provided below in Table 1.
Table 1: List of Blocks and Lots Within the
Redevelopment Area
Municipal Tax Block Tax Lots
108- All
109- All
111- All
112- All
113- All
115- All
116- All
117- All
118- All
119- All
120- All
122- All
128- All
129- All
130- All
131- All
132- All
(2) Redevelopment objectives and policy standards.
(a) The statements that follow define the intent and purpose
within which this plan was created. These statements set forth
a series of policies and objectives by which the redevelopment
requirements of subsequent sections of this plan will be
guided. Similarly, these statements may be used to determine
the degree to which future applications for development within
the plan area meet plan policies and objectives.
(b) It is desired, in the creation and adoption of this plan
amendment, to:
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:590
[1] Create a cohesive sustainable community, introducing a
neighborhood that is compact, pedestrian friendly and of
mixed use.
[2] Create a plan that establishes a positive image and a sense
of place, a place to which people will come to enjoy, shop,
and live.
[3] Establish architectural requirements for the Mixed Use
District that complement and contribute to the community
and its identity, maintaining an architectural style
consistent with the surrounding area while allowing for a
blend of modern accents and carrying design threads into
the adjacent residential areas of the plan area.
[4] To create buildings that present themselves as part of a
traditional neighborhood center and not as part of a
standardized highway-oriented strip shopping center.
[5] Create mixed-commercial/residential buildings and shops
that all have frontages on and direct access to the street,
and provide for active and attractive storefronts that allow
maximum window-shopping potential.
[6] Provide a continuum of housing opportunities that include,
in part, affordable, age-restricted, and market-rate
housing.
[7] Reinforce the pedestrian interconnections between the
plan area and the uses within the surrounding environs.
[8] Accommodate automobiles in a manner that respects the
pedestrian spaces and does not compromise the physical
form of that pedestrian space.
[9] Produce architecture that is distinctive yet linked to its
immediate surroundings through building scale and
placement.
[10] Provide for a variety of public spaces, plazas and open
spaces to accommodate a variety of uses.
[11] Provide for a mixture of uses and an intensity of
development that will create an economically viable and
vibrant community.
[12] Maximize the use of shared parking on site in the Mixed
Use District and permitting on-street parking for visitors
in the Residential District.
(3) Proposed redevelopment actions.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:591
(a) The implementation of this plan will substantially improve and
upgrade the Churchill-Millstone Area. The actions outlined
herein will provide a uniform and consistent course of action
that will displace the adverse influences that led to the
deterioration and ultimate designation of the plan area. These
actions will include, but not be limited to, the following:
[1] Consolidation and resubdivision of land within the plan
area into suitable parcels for development for the new
residential and/or commercial land uses.
[2] Provision of a full range of infrastructure necessary to
service and support new development within the plan
area.
[3] Construction of new structures and complementary
facilities that are consistent with the goals and objectives
of this plan.
(4) Relationship to existing development standards.
(a) The areas shall be redeveloped in accordance with the
standards detailed in this plan. The plan supersedes the
current use, bulk and general design standard provisions of the
Township Land Development Regulations for these areas
unless specifically referenced. The Township's Zoning Map
shall be amended to identify the plan areas.
(b) Section 112-284 A and B, Administrative and procedural
requirements, of the Land Development Regulations of the
Township of Franklin shall apply to the plan.
(c) Section 112-280A(2), Deviations from standards of the plan, of
the Land Development Regulations of the Township of Franklin
shall apply to the plan.
(5) District regulations.
(a) Mixed use district (CMMU).
[1] This district is intended to be the focal point of the
redevelopment area. The standards proposed below are
intended to fundamentally improve the appearance and
character of the redevelopment area.
[2] Ground floor permitted principal retail and service uses:
Antique store
Art gallery/shop
Art studio
Bank (except drive-through)
Bed and bath accessories
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:592
Bookstore (except adult bookstores)
Boutique
Camera shop
Card/stationery shop
Clothing store
Cosmetics and makeup (except body art establishments)
Electronics store
Entertainment software; e.g., music stores and
videostores (except adult videostores)
Eyeglass and lens shop
Flower shop
Gift shop
Hardware store
Home furnishings and interior design and decorating
shops
Houseware shops
Jeweler
Liquor store
Office supplies
Pharmacy
Phone or wireless communications store
Photography studio
Restaurant (except drive-through)
Shoe sale/repair
Sporting goods
Toy store
Martial arts studio
Real estate agency
Tailor
Health club/spa
Financial industry offices
Child care
Other uses of similar nature and intensity
Basement areas may be developed for utilities, waste
storage facilities, and for storage of merchandise, goods
and supplies of tenants. They must not be occupied by
personnel for any purpose other than to load and retrieve
stored material and to service the utilities.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:593
[3] Second floor and above permitted uses: residential.
[4] Area, yard and bulk requirements:
[a] Minimum front yard: zero feet. (But shall be a
minimum of 15 feet from the curb face to the building
face. Along Franklin Boulevard and New Jersey State
Highway 27, there shall be a minimum of 20 feet from
the curb face to the building face.)
[b] Maximum building height: four stories/45 feet.
[c] Maximum density: 50 dwelling units per acre.
[d] Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
[e] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[f] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[g] Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
[h] Maximum impervious coverage: 100%.
[i] Maximum floor area ratio: 2.2.
[j] Minimum side yard: zero feet.
[k] Minimum rear yard: zero feet.
[l] Maximum square footage: 15,000 square feet per first
floor use to encourage main street type uses.
[5] Existing single-family residences shall be considered a
permitted use in the CMMU zone, may be expanded in
building footprint by up to 1,000 square feet, and shall be
subject to the applicable zoning requirements (e.g., bulk
and coverage requirements) of the R-7 Zoning District.
[Added 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4163-16]
(b) Residential district (CMR).
[1] The redevelopment objective is to provide quality infill
residential development that is coordinated with the
existing pattern and appearance of development and
serves as an anchor for the proposed mixed use district
(CCMMU).
[2] Principal permitted uses:
[a] Single-family detached dwellings.
[b] Single-family townhome.
[c] Two-family dwelling.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:594
[d] Residential apartments.
[e] Age-restricted apartments.
[3] Accessory uses:
[a] Off-street parking and garages.
[b] Home occupations as per § 112-41 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
[4] Area, yard and bulk requirements.
[a] Single-family detached dwellings:
[i] Maximum number of stories shall be 2.5 stories/
35 feet.
[ii] Minimum front yard setback shall be 18 feet.
[iii] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard setback shall be three feet for
one/eight feet for both.
[v] Minimum lot size shall be 3,000 square feet.
[vi] Minimum lot width shall be 30 feet.
[vii] Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
[viii] Maximum density shall be 14 DU/acre.
[ix] Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
[x] Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
[b] Two-family dwellings:
[i] Maximum number of stories shall be three stories/
35 feet.
[ii] Minimum front yard setback shall be 18 feet.
[iii] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard setback shall be three feet for
one/eight feet for both.
[v] Minimum lot size shall be 3,300 square feet.
[vi] Minimum lot width shall be 33 feet.
[vii] Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
[viii] Maximum density shall be 25 DU/acre.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:595
[ix] Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
[x] Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
[c] Single-family townhomes:
[i] Maximum number of stories shall be three stories/
35 feet.
[ii] Minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet.
[iii] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard setback shall be zero for one/
10 feet at ends.
[v] Minimum lot size shall be 2,000 square feet.
[vi] Minimum lot width shall be 20 feet.
[vii] Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
[viii] Maximum density shall be 20 DU/acre.
[ix] Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
[x] Maximum impervious coverage: 80%.
[d] Residential non-age-restricted apartments:
[i] Maximum number of stories shall be four stories/
45 feet.
[ii] Minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet.
[iii] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard setback shall be five feet.
[v] Minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet.
[vi] Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
[vii] Minimum lot depth shall be 150 feet.
[viii] Maximum density shall be 50 DU/acre.
[ix] Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
[x] Maximum impervious coverage: 100%.
[xi] Maximum floor area ratio: 1.25.
[e] Age-restricted apartments: The redevelopment
objective is to utilize existing underutilized land to
provide affordable, independent and assisted-living
housing opportunities to senior citizens.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:596
[i] Maximum number of stories shall be four stories/
45 feet.
[ii] Minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet.
[iii] Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard setback shall be five feet.
[v] Minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet.
[vi] Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
[vii] Minimum lot depth shall be 150 feet.
[viii] Maximum density shall be 50 DU/acre.
[ix] Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
[x] Maximum impervious coverage: 100%.
[xi] Maximum floor area ratio: 1.25.
(6) General design standards. The following standards and
requirements shall apply to all applications for development,
including but not limited to: developments, redevelopments,
rehabilitation, and or reuse applications within the plan area:
(a) All utility boxes associated with mixed-use functions and
townhouses and/or single-family dwellings shall be
underground or located inside the principal structure.
(b) All electronic communication and reception equipment shall be
hidden or screened to the maximum extent feasible while still
preserving good reception. Screening shall remove such
devices from view from the street and existing/planned
neighboring buildings. This may be achieved through
decorative screening, landscaping and/or disguising such
equipment within the basic architecture of the building. All
constructed screening shall be executed in a manner
consistent with the architecture of the building and shall utilize
the same or similar materials as used in the construction of the
building, such that the screening appears to be an integral part
of the building. All vegetative screening shall be evergreen.
The placement of said equipment shall minimize the need for
screening.
(c) Fencing general requirements.
[1] Chain link fencing and stockade fencing are prohibited
within the plan area, except during demolition and
construction.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:597
[2] Only wrought-iron-type or decorative wooden fences shall
be permitted, subject to placement requirements below.
[3] Fences shall be no less than 40% open. Translucent,
transparent, or clear materials shall be considered as solid
elements.
[4] Fences shall be free of sharp spikes or points, jagged-edge
or sharpened surfaces, or other components or materials
that may cause injury. If a fence has an unfinished side, the
finished side shall face away from the property that is
fenced.
(d) Fences for townhouses.
[1] Front yard fence. A front yard fence, constructed of solid,
wrought-iron-type mild steel, not less than 0.5 inches
thick, and not less then 30 inches nor more than 40 inches
in height shall be installed at the sidewalk line throughout
the townhouse development to enclose and define the
private front yard spaces of the townhouse units.
[2] Side yard fence. Where there is a side yard, no fencing
shall be allowed other than the front yard fence described
above.
(e) Fences for single-family and two-family dwellings:
[1] Front yard fence. No fencing shall be permitted within the
required front yard nor forward of the plane of the front
facade of the house. A fence, not higher than 48 inches and
running approximately parallel to the plane of the front
facade, may be installed at or behind the plane of the front
facade. For the purposes of this paragraph, the front plane
of the house shall not include any porch, stoop or steps.
[2] Side yard fence. A side yard fence runs approximately
parallel to the side walls of the house and is generally
placed on the property line. No side yard fences may be
placed forward of the plane of the front facade of the
house. The maximum height of any fence placed along the
side yard shall be 48 inches, except that behind the plane
of the rear facade of the house it may be the same height
as the rear yard fence.
[3] Rear yard fence. A rear yard fence runs approximately
parallel to the rear wall of the house, near or on the
property line. The maximum height of a rear yard fence
shall be 60 inches.
[4] No wall shall be constructed in lieu of a fence.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:598
(f) In the mixed use district, all trash storage such as dumpsters
and/or compactors shall be located within the principal
buildings. The redeveloper may, at the time of the site plan
application, propose alternatives to this and, if approved by the
Planning Board, such alternatives shall be permitted. All
outdoor merchandising shall be prohibited.
(g) In the residential district, all units shall utilize individual
screening corrals for waste container storage.
(h) All buildings within the plan area must display the street
address of the building in a location that is clearly visible from
the adjoining street right-of-way while remaining in scale with
the building.
(7) Design requirements.
(a) General building design requirements applicable to all
structures and zones.
[1] All structures within the plan area shall be situated with
proper consideration of their relationship to other
buildings, including those that are existing or proposed,
and inside or outside of the redevelopment area, in terms
of light, air, usable open space, access to public and
private rights-of-way, off-street parking, height, and bulk.
[2] Building shall be designed to be attractive from all vantage
points. No facade shall be any less detailed or less
important than another.
[3] If security gates are used on any part of a building or
window, they shall be interior and of open-grate style.
(b) Entrances.
[1] Buildings shall be oriented toward the street and any inner
courts so as to contribute to the overall liveliness of the
pedestrian environment. Specifically, direct open and
functional pedestrian ingress/egress from business uses
must be provided directly to the street, sidewalk,
courtyards and/or walkways to which such use is adjacent.
This pedestrian access shall be augmented by windows
meeting the seventy-five-percent glazing requirements
wherever ground floor retail or commercial use is
permitted by the mixed use district. These windows may
contain displays or shall provide fully unobstructed
visibility into the store shop.
[2] Prominent entries: Main-building entries shall be easily
identifiable as such from the sidewalk and may not occur
simply as voids between buildings.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:599
(c) Facade articulation.
[1] General: Buildings should have a clear base, middle and
top. Architectural devices, such as providing stringcourses
and/or horizontally differentiating surface treatments, can
be used to achieve the necessary transitions. Transitions
between building segments shall occur once between the
basement ceilings and the first floor ceiling if there is a
basement, and once again within the top story.
[2] Facade ratio: The percentage of void area (windows and
other openings) in a building facade shall be between 20%
and 50% except at street-level retail and commercial
frontages, where it shall not be lower than 75%.
[3] Facade composition: "Scattered-window" facades shall not
be allowed at frontages. Each facade shall present a
unified, rational composition.
[4] Facade materials: To avoid aesthetically unpleasant views,
facades shall consist of no more than three materials,
textures or colors (windows and framing not counted). Any
changes in primary wall material shall occur across a
horizontal line, with the lighter-appearing material above
the heavier (for example, wood over bricks, or bricks over
stone).
[5] Facade color: The color of building walls shall be within
the white-to-russet quadrant of the color wheel, including
cream, beige, tan, gray, yellow, ochre, red, and brown.
[6] Blank walls: Walls at frontages may not be blank at the
street level. First floor walls at frontages shall have at
least one window per structural bay, in a pattern that
suggests habitation. Exposed basement walls at frontages
shall have at least one small window per structural bay if
any part of the foundation wall is more than three feet
above finished grade.
[7] Balconies and terraces: Where balconies and terraces are
not facing onto courtyards, they shall be very shallow or
recessed to prevent their use as storage spaces. Balconies
and terraces are encouraged to face onto pedestrian areas
and in mixed use districts may accommodate outdoor
seating or dining areas.
[8] Accenting articulation: Accenting articulation of facades
shall be provided at the corners of the building, the area
around entries, and at designated vista terminations.
[9] Soffit emphasis: In most buildings, the underside of the
overhang is more visible than the roof. The soffit shall
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:600
therefore receive a greater amount of attention and
budget than it is typically afforded. Only high quality,
painted or stained, tongue-and-groove wooden or
cementations materials shall be used for soffits in the
mixed use district. All such soffits shall give the
appearance of tongue-and-groove wooden material.
(d) Windows.
[1] Style: All windows shall contain both lintels and sills.
Windowsills shall be emphasized more than the lintels or
window headers. All first floor front facade windows in
residential buildings shall be at least one-foot longer in
vertical dimension than the windows on other floors above.
[2] Residential windows: All residential windows shall be
taller than they are wide, in a ratio of height to width of
approximately five to three. They shall be all wood or
aluminum-clad wood. Single-family, two-family and
townhouse developments shall utilize true divided lights.
Lights for windows of residential components in the mixed
use district shall be determined at site plan approval. All
glass used in all windows shall be energy efficient,
nonreflective glass. Individual sash lights for windows may
vary according to the style of the housing they serve. In
the case of the townhouses, the architecture will tend
towards a Colonial or Federalist style, which calls for
smaller lights, arranged in multiples over multiples (such
as six over six, or nine over six, etc.) In the single-family
developments, the style of dwellings shall be a mix of
Victorian, Colonial, and Federal era homes, where
windows may be multiples over multiples or over singles.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of true stained glass,
beveled glass, frosted glass, or any other art glass in true
leaded glass panels.
[3] Commercial windows: True divided light windows shall be
permitted as retail windows, but they should be limited in
application since retail windows generally require more,
rather than less, transparency.
(e) Story height variety: The first aboveground story of a
residential building or element shall be a minimum of 10 feet
tall, floor to ceiling, and shall be a minimum of one-foot taller
than the upper stories. Retail and commercial first floor
heights shall be a minimum of 14 feet and a maximum of 20
feet from floor to floor.
(f) Shopfronts: All painted surfaces shall be finished with highgloss
paint. Adjacent stores shall have their shopfronts
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:601
designed individually rather than according to a repeated
template.
(g) Awnings: Awnings may be used on pedestrian-oriented streets
by retail and commercial establishments at their frontages to
add a measure of comfort and define an enclosed sidewalk
environment.
(h) Streetscape and landscape requirements:
[1] Upon filing of any site plan application for any
development within the plan area, a unified streetscape
design plan for the district in which the proposed
development is located shall also be required to be
submitted. The streetscape plan shall show improvements
to all internal public and private streets, and to the public
streets on which the plan area maintains frontage. The
design plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
its review and approval in conjunction with the project site
plan application. The streetscape design plan shall be
implemented contemporaneously with the construction of
the redevelopment project. The streetscape design shall
identify, but not be limited to: plant/tree species,
decorative sidewalk materials incorporating pavers and/or
stamped concrete, colors of materials, tree grates, trash
receptacles, benches, bicycle racks, street planters/pots,
fountains and sculptures, all of which shall be of high
quality decorative design.
[2] In the townhouse, single-family and two-family
developments, all sidewalks along streets shall consist of a
mix of concrete, blue stone slabs not less than two inches
thick, bricks, cobblestone, Belgian block or pavers in a
design approved by the Planning Board.
[3] Lighting throughout the plan area shall sufficiently
illuminate all areas to prevent dark corners. All lighting
sources must be shielded to eliminate off-site glare and be
capped to prevent upward glare. The area of illumination
shall have a uniform pattern of at least 0.5 footcandle but
no more than 1.5 footcandles in the mixed use district and
not more than 0.5 footcandle for the residential districts.
[4] Outdoor vending machines are prohibited.
(i) Minimum off-street parking requirements.
[1] Redevelopment objective: To provide the most efficient
and effective parking supply to meet the real parking
demand and subsequently creating a genuinely
pedestrian-friendly neighborhood. The plan acknowledges
that current trends support the theory that typical parking
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:602
standards are significantly overstated. Recently the
Institute of Transportation Engineers has announced its
support of shared parking or "time of day" parking
standards. Shared public parking in one central location is
inherently most efficient because fewer spaces are needed
to meet the combined peak demand and each parking
space is kept occupied for more time. Shared parking also
allows visitors to park once and visit multiple destinations
on foot.
[2] Deviation from the R.S.I.S. shall be accepted in this area.
There exists valuable potential for shared parking among
the complementary uses. It is contemplated that the
proposed shared parking will optimize economies of scale
by encouraging visiting single-car trips/events that have
multiple business transactions. Further efficiency shall be
achieved because residential tenants that park on site at
night, typically between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., take their
cars to work elsewhere, thus making those spaces
available to meet the daytime demands of office, retail and
commercial tenants who typically require parking from
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Therefore, the deviation from the
R.S.I.S. standards to accommodate the shared parking
model will result in the fulfillment of the parking demands
of both residential and commercial users on one site.
[3] All required parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine
feet wide by 18 feet deep. The placement of the curb shall
be permitted to extend into the required eighteen-foot
depth of the parking space a maximum of two feet,
provided that there is adequate room for an automobile
occupying the parking space to overhang the curb without
infringing upon required landscaping or pedestrian areas.
All aisles for 90° parking shall be a minimum of 24 feet
wide, provided however, that aisles within the Townhouse
District and/or a parking structure for 90° parking may be
reduced to a minimum of 22 feet. Any other angle parking
arrangements shall comply with the requirements of the
Land Development Ordinance.
[4] Any parking surfaces and structures shall provide shared
parking for the residents of the building, as well as their
visitors, shoppers, and employees of the same building.
Only residents of the building and employees may have
reserved parking spaces within the parking structure.
Shoppers and visitors will be allowed to park in the spaces
not reserved as per above.
[5] All parking surfaces and structures should be located
behind buildings fronting on Franklin Boulevard, and the
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:603
access to the parking shall not be allowed on Franklin
Boulevard.
[6] Surface parking within the mixed use district is intended
primarily for the shoppers visiting the mixed use district
business establishments. Parking at these spaces may be
limited to a maximum number of hours to assure that the
shoppers' spaces are not occupied by cars parked all day.
[7] Handicapped parking requirements shall be as per the
applicable codes.
[8] Each parcel and use is required to provide efficient offstreet
parking in accordance with the following schedule:
[a] Single-family detached: two spaces consisting of
garage and driveway space.
[b] Single-family townhome: two spaces consisting of
garage and driveway space.
[c] Two-family dwelling: two spaces per unit consisting of
garage and driveway space.
[d] Non-age-restricted apartments: 1.5 spaces per unit.
[e] Senior housing: one space per unit.
[f] Mixed use: three spaces per 1,000 square feet of
commercial with one space per residential unit (based
upon shared parking model).
(j) Minimum loading requirements for mixed use district.
[1] Loading access doors shall be situated so as to remain as
inconspicuous as possible. They shall be of a standard size
and be consistent with the color of the building. They shall
be prohibited on Franklin Boulevard.
[2] Scheduled times must be utilized to avoid conflicts with
vehicular traffic and/or obstruction to pedestrian
walkways and thoroughfares, and must be sensitive to the
residential uses within the plan area.
[3] Signed loading zone(s), restricted to limited time frames in
off-peak times, shall be provided. They may overlap
existing parking stall locations so that during nonloading
times those spaces will be available for general parking
requirements.
(k) Parking structure requirements.
[1] Wherever practical, parking structures should be
subterranean.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:604
[2] All levels of the parking structure shall be internally
mechanically ventilated.
[3] The parking structure must be adequately illuminated to
maintain a safe and secure environment.
[4] All facades shall be architecturally attractive and
architecturally consistent with the building which it is
associated with. The facade(s) facing streets shall be paid
particular attention to.
[5] Shared usage of the parking structure by all tenants and
residents of a mixed use building shall be encouraged and
arranged by the redeveloper. The shared usage model is
intended to maximize the efficiency of the sites use, reduce
standard parking need calculations, and enhance the
pedestrian-friendly character of the plan area.
(l) Streets and sidewalks.
[1] Sidewalk areas must be provided along both sides of all
streets and shall be properly sized for the safe and
convenient movement of pedestrians through and around
the plan area. In the mixed use district, the sidewalks shall
be a minimum of 20 feet wide along Franklin Boulevard
and State Highway Route 27. Streetscape and street
furniture may be permitted within an area of such
sidewalk if the Planning Board finds that it will not
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian movements.
[2] All sidewalk areas shall be attractively landscaped and
durably paved and shall be provided with appropriate
lighting for pedestrian safety.
[3] Decorative treatment shall be introduced at building
entrances and at street crossing areas to accent and
channel pedestrian flow.
(m) Signage.
[1] Residential district; single-family and two-family.
[a] All dwellings shall clearly display the street address
number of the primary building.
[2] Residential district; townhouses and apartments.
[a] All primary buildings shall clearly display the street
address number. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall
clearly display its own street address number. Each
apartment dwelling unit shall clearly display its own
apartment number.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:605
[3] Mixed use district.
[a] All dwellings shall clearly display the street address
number on the primary building.
[b] Uniform, decorative attached signage is permitted for
each retail or commercial tenant. There shall be one
sign on each street frontage of each ground floor
commercial establishment. If an awning is present,
the signage shall be located over the awning. The sign
shall not exceed 30 inches in height nor extend more
than 80% of the width of the bay it is within, but in no
case may any single sign extend more than 15 feet in
length. Signs may be lit, but only from gooseneck
fixtures mounted over the signs and directed
downward towards the sign, but shielded from the
street. Box signs shall not be permitted.
[c] Monument signs may be permitted by the Planning
Board to accent the mixed use district. The dominant
materials for these signs shall be of natural stone or
masonry with external illumination; e.g., spotlights.
[d] Redevelopers may propose a comprehensive sign
package which, if approved by the Planning Board,
may be used in whole or in part as a substitute for the
above regulations. The Planning Board may also
devise a sign package which may be used as a
substitute for the above regulations.
[e] The use of awnings is encouraged for the retail and
commercial frontages. Design standards. Awnings
provide a secondary location for signage, add color
and interest to building storefronts and facades, and
can be used to emphasize display windows and
entrances. They also serve to protect pedestrians and
display windows from the sun and rain. The ground
level of a building may have awnings, where
appropriate, to complement the architectural style of
a building. The following standards for ground-level
awnings shall be adhered to:
[i] The design of awnings shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of such buildings and nearby buildings and
should not conceal significant architectural
features, such as cornices, columns, pilasters or
other trim details. Awnings should fit within
enframed store frontages. They should not be
dominant, overwhelming elements.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:606
[ii] The maximum height from ground level to
uppermost portion of an awning shall not exceed
the height of the sill or bottom of any second-story
window or 15 feet, whichever is less. In the case
of single-story buildings, the maximum height
shall not exceed 12 feet or the top of the wall,
whichever is less.
[iii] The minimum height from ground level to
lowermost portion of awning shall be 7 1/2 feet.
[iv] The maximum horizontal projection dimension of
an awning from the building wall, including any
appurtenances, shall not exceed six feet from the
building face. Awnings may project over a public
sidewalk but shall not be closer than two feet of
the vertical plane of the curb edge or the edge of
any other public right-of-way.
[v] The maximum total vertical dimension of an
awning shall not exceed the total horizontal
projection dimension.
[vi] An awning's surfacing material shall be
constructed of canvas, cloth or vinyl.
[vii] No awning shall contain more than two colors
plus white. The color of any sign messages or
other graphic features shall be included in the
number of colors. The colors must be compatible
with the architectural color scheme of the entire
building.
[viii] Internally illuminated or backlit awnings are not
permitted.
[ix] Awning styles (shapes) shall relate to the facade's
architectural elements. The use of standardshaped
awnings and canopies is encouraged,
when appropriate. Dome, convex, concave, or
other unusually shaped awnings and canopies
should be designed with considerable care,
complementing a specific architectural element of
the building.
[x] On buildings with multiple storefronts,
compatible awning frame styles shall be used as a
means of unifying the structure but need not be
identical.
[xi] Signage on awnings shall only be located on the
front portion of the awning that is generally
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:607
parallel to the building wall face to which it is
attached. This portion is more commonly known
as the "valance." In the case of dome, convex or
long dome awnings, where a valance might not be
provided, the sign graphics shall be restricted to
the lowest 14 inches of the awning, which must
be shown to be nearly parallel to the building
wall face. In the case of dome awnings, the sign
graphics shall additionally be restricted to the
middle 1/5 of the awning, when viewed from the
front elevation, which must be shown to be nearly
parallel to the building wall face.
[xii] An awning sign shall be professionally sewn or
painted.
[xiii] The maximum vertical dimension of the sign face
(valance) shall not exceed 14 inches.
[xiv] The maximum height of letters, individual
numbers or other characters or images on the
awning shall not exceed 12 inches.
[xv] The total aggregate horizontal dimension (width)
of all individual letters, numbers or other
characters shall not exceed 60% of the length of
the awning occupied by the use.
[xvi] Maximum width of individual letters, numbers, or
other characters or images on the awning shall
not exceed 18 inches.
[xvii] The signage on the awning shall be in addition to
the attached signage allowed as per Subsection
K(7)(m)[3][b], Signage, mixed use district, of this
section.
[xviii] Given solar orientation, architectural style or
detailing, some buildings are not adaptable to
awnings. Therefore, nothing in this plan shall be
construed to necessitate the use of awnings.
[f] Applicable to all districts.
[i] The following signs and devices shall not be
permitted within the plan area: internally lit;
signs tacked, pasted, painted or otherwise
attached to poles, posts, trees, fences, sidewalks,
curbs, rocks, water towers, tanks, culverts or
bridges, except that any signs forbidding
trespassing, hunting, fishing or trapping as
authorized by the Fish and Game Laws may be
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:608
affixed to trees or fences located on the subject
property; exterior signs using moving parts
except clocks; animated, flashing, and illusionary
signs, signs using mechanical or electrical devices
to revolve, flash or display movement, or the
illusion of movement; portable signs which are
fixed on a movable stand, self-supporting without
being firmly embedded in the ground, supported
by other objects, mounted on wheels or movable
vehicle, or made easily movable in any other
manner; signs which bear or contain statements,
words or pictures of an obscene or indecent
character; signs maintained at any location
where, by reason of color, illumination, position,
size or shape, as determined by findings of the
Chief of Police, may obstruct, impair, obscure or
be confused with any traffic control sign, signal
or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead,
or confuse vehicular traffic. The following
advertisements are specifically prohibited: any
advertisement which uses a series of two or more
signs placed in a line parallel to the highway or
in similar fashion, all carrying a single
advertisement or message, part of which is
contained on each sign; any sign which advertises
or publicizes an activity, use, business, product,
real estate, or service not located or conducted on
the premises upon which such signs are located;
electronic script/bulletin boards; roof signs,
billboards and signboards, window signs, pole
signs and freestanding signs, product advertising
signage of any kind, including, but not limited to:
signage on parking meters, lightpoles, benches or
other street furniture within the redevelopment
area; fluorescent and/or glowing paint for any
signage for any building within the
redevelopment area; waterfall-style awnings,
metal awnings. Nothing in this paragraph shall
be construed to prohibit either lamppost-mounted
seasonal banners in the mixed use district or
traditional holiday decorations.
[ii] All signs shall only be attached to the first-floor
level of the building.
(8) Relationship to plans of other entities and Franklin Township's
Master Plan and Fair Share Plan. The plan is consistent with the
master plans of adjacent municipalities, Somerset County, the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan (SDRP) and Franklin
Township's Master Plan and Fair Share Plan.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:609
(a) Adjacent municipalities: Franklin lies adjacent to the
municipalities of Bridgewater Township, North Brunswick
Township, the City of New Brunswick, South Brunswick
Township, South Bound Brook Borough, Piscataway Township,
Princeton Township, Montgomery Township, Rocky Hill
Borough, Hillsborough Township, Millstone Borough and
Manville Borough. The redevelopment area is only contiguous
to the City of New Brunswick; however, the master plans of the
other contiguous municipalities were reviewed and do not
conflict with the plan.
[1] New Brunswick: New Brunswick is located to the east of
the redevelopment area across Route 27. The City has
been an ongoing partner in the Renaissance 2000 planning
process since its inception. The City has adopted three
redevelopment plans for its Renaissance 2000 Area,
covering the Henry-Oliver Avenue Area, the 1,000
Somerset Area and the Edpas Road Area. The goals and
objectives of the foregoing redevelopment plans are
compatible with those of the plan, including but not limited
to the following goals from the New Brunswick plans:
[a] Develop new businesses to provide goods and services
to adjacent communities.
[b] Create job opportunities for area residents via
commercial development.
[c] Remedy the visual appearance of the land and thus
enhance its value and the values of adjacent
properties.
[d] Relieve problems associated with dilapidated
buildings by creating a situation conducive to retail/
commercial development.
(b) Somerset County: The plan is consistent with and will help
effectuate the planning goals expressed in the County's
planning documents. The Somerset County Master Plan was
adopted in 1987. A Reexamination of the Master Plan took
place in 1998. Somerset County is currently in the process of
preparing a Smart Growth Strategic Plan (SGSP). The SGSP
will serve to update the County Master Plan adopted in 1987
and the 1998 Reexamination Report. The County has
developed guiding principles and planning objectives as part of
Phase I of the SGSP initiative and the plan is consistent with
those principles and objectives.
(c) State development and redevelopment plan: The SDRP places
the redevelopment area in Metropolitan Planning Area 1 (PAI).
The plan is consistent with the planning goals and objectives of
the SDRP as a whole and of PAI in particular. In terms of land
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:610
use, the amendment to the plan emphasizes the efficient use
of infrastructure and public facilities, and revitalization of
existing housing and commercial building stock. Affordable
housing opportunities and the creation of job opportunities
through commercial development are a priority.
(d) Franklin Township Master Plan and Fair Share Plan: The
Housing Element of the 2006 Franklin Township Master Plan
and the 2006 Fair Share Plan specifically discuss and endorse
the affordable housing component of the plan. In addition the
plan is consistent with the following Master Plan goals:
[1] Maintaining the diversity of housing, but encouraging infill
and stabilization of current residential areas rather then
continuing sprawl patterns of development.
[2] Support the redevelopment of declining areas in the
Township by periodically reexamining redevelopment
plans to ensure viability.
[3] Promote nonresidential development that is consistent
with the capacity of the land and existing and planned
infrastructure to increase the tax base and to provide
quality job opportunities for local residents.
[4] Encourage commercial and industrial development in
areas with access to major regional highways and in
established areas.
(9) Relocation and property to be acquired. The applicable sections in
the Redevelopment Agreement for Construction of a Mixed-Use
Development within the Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Area in
the Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey between
the Redevelopment Agency of Franklin Township and RPM
Development, L.L.C. shall apply.
L. Leewood Renaissance at Franklin Redevelopment Area. [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3661A]
(1) Introduction.
(a) The Renaissance Redevelopment Area is located between
Churchill and Brookline Avenues along Route 27 and up to
several blocks in depth west of Route 27. The redevelopment
plan for this area, the Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan,
was adopted by the Franklin Township Planning Board in 1999
and subsequently amended in 2000 to clarify which parcels
would not be considered for acquisition by the redevelopment
agency. Today, aspects of feasibility and highest and best use
are reconsidered in light of current market activity, trends and
viability. This amendment is proposed as an acknowledgement
of those changes in the market and as a corrective strategy for
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:611
a specific portion of the overall redevelopment area. The
following core planning principles incorporated in the
Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Plan, however, will be
maintained:
[1] The development of a design strategy for the visual
improvement of the area; employment of consistent
standards for building setbacks and design, signage,
landscaping, and parking,
[2] The establishment of necessary public involvement and
public/private partnerships,
[3] The incorporation of family housing into the
redevelopment area along with improving connections to
Naaman Williams Park.
(b) The Redevelopment Plan Amendment (hereafter referred to as
the "plan") will regulate development within the Leewood
Renaissance at Franklin Redevelopment Area within the
Renaissance Redevelopment Area. This area when properly
redeveloped will serve as an important component of
Franklin's desire to create a mixed-income residential
neighborhood that revitalizes the area and that assists
Franklin Township in fulfilling its COAH obligation. The
redevelopment area is bounded by Pine Street and Stone Place
and New Jersey State Highway 27 to Naaman Williams Park. It
is approximately 12 acres in size. The block/lot description of
the redevelopment area is provided below in Table 1.
[Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3793]
Table 1. List of Blocks and Lots within the
Redevelopment Area
Municipal Tax Block Tax Lots
141.01 1 through 15
149 1 through 33
150 26.01
150 28 through 42
150 52 through 85
150 94 through 127
150 136 through 150
151 1 through 8
151 24 through 50
(2) Redevelopment objectives and policy standards.
(a) The statements that follow define the intent and purpose
within which this plan was created. These statements set forth
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:612
a series of policies and objectives by which the redevelopment
requirements of subsequent sections of this plan will be
guided. Similarly, these statements may be used to determine
the degree to which future applications for development within
the plan area meet plan policies and objectives.
(b) It is desired, in the creation and adoption of this plan
amendment, to:
[1] Create a sustainable community of mixed-income
residential homes that assist the Township in meeting its
obligation to COAH.
[2] Reinforce the pedestrian interconnections between the
plan area and the uses within the surrounding environs.
[3] Accommodate automobiles in a manner that respects the
pedestrian spaces and does not compromise the physical
form of that pedestrian space.
[4] Provide for an intensity of development that will create an
economically viable and vibrant community.
[5] Permit on-street parking for residents and visitors.
(3) Proposed redevelopment actions.
(a) The implementation of this plan will substantially improve and
upgrade the Leewood Renaissance at Franklin Redevelopment
Area. The actions outlined herein will provide a uniform and
consistent course of action that will displace the adverse
influences that led to the deterioration and ultimate
designation of the plan area. These actions will include, but not
be limited to, the following:
[1] Consolidation and resubdivision of land within the plan
area into suitable parcels for development for the new
residential land uses.
[2] Provision for the necessary infrastructure to service and
support new development within the plan area.
[3] Construction of new structures that are consistent with
the goals and objectives of this plan.
(4) Relationship to existing development standards.
(a) The areas shall be redeveloped in accordance with the
standards detailed in this plan. The plan supersedes the
current use and bulk provisions of the Township Land
Development Regulations for these areas unless specifically
referenced. The Township's Zoning Map shall be amended to
identify the plan areas.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:613
(b) Subsections A and B of § 112-284, Administrative and
procedural requirements, of the Land Development
Regulations of the Township of Franklin shall apply to the plan.
(c) Section 112-280A(2) (deviations from standards of the plan), of
the Land Development Regulations of the Township of Franklin
shall apply to the plan.
(5) District regulations. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3793]
(a) Multifamily residential (MFR).
[1] The redevelopment objective is to encourage the growth of
affordable and mixed-income housing opportunities
through construction of a development consisting of
affordable and mixed-income housing units. No more than
209 dwelling units shall be constructed. Affordable
housing units shall be provided in number and form as
memorialized via the redevelopment agreement and in the
Township Fair Share Plan in accordance with applicable
rules of the Coalition on Affordable Housing (COAH) and
shall be distributed throughout the development. If the
redevelopment agreement for the area should be revised
and put into effect so as to exclude Lots 18-25 in Block 149
and Lots 12-15 in Block 141.01 from the redevelopment
agreement, then the maximum number of dwelling units
shall be reduced to no more than 185 units and the List of
Blocks and Lots within the Redevelopment Area provided
in Table 1 above shall be revised to eliminate these lots.
Lots 18-25 in Block 149 and Lots 12-15 in Block 141.01
shall only be developed under the MFR Zone as part of a
comprehensive redevelopment of the MFR Zone by an
entity designated as a redeveloper by the Township
Redevelopment Agency. [Added 9-26-2017 by Ord. No.
4211-17]
[2] Permitted uses.
[a] Townhouses.
[b] Single-family townhouses.
[c] Low-rise and mid-rise apartments.
[3] Area, yard and bulk requirements.
[a] Single-family townhouses, townhouses and low-rise
apartments.
[i] Minimum lot size shall be 1,000 square feet.
[ii] Maximum height shall be 45 feet/three stories.
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:614
[iii] Minimum front yard shall be five feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard shall be zero feet.
[v] Minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet.
[vi] Maximum lot coverage shall be 75%.
[vii] Maximum impervious coverage shall be 85%.
[b] Mid-rise apartment buildings.
[i] Minimum lot size shall be 25,000 square feet.
[ii] Maximum height shall be 65 feet/four stories.
[iii] Minimum front yard shall be 15 feet.
[iv] Minimum side yard shall be 15 feet.
[v] Minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet.
[vi] Maximum lot coverage shall be 75%.
[vii] Maximum impervious coverage shall be 85%.
(6) Design requirements. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3793]
(a) This section details the overall design standards for the area in
terms of streetscape design, open space and landscaping
design, building design, off-street parking and circulation.
These standards are to be used in conjunction with the bulk
standards. Any deviation from these standards should be
considered by the Planning Board and may be granted as a
design waiver.
[1] Streetscape requirements. The streetscape is the primary
image-setting area and includes all public and private
streets. The aesthetics of this area, therefore, are
extremely important. Upon filing of any site plan
application for any development, a unified streetscape
design plan shall be submitted. The streetscape plan shall
show improvements to all internal public and private
streets, and to the public streets. The streetscape design
plan shall be implemented contemporaneously with the
construction of the redevelopment project. The
streetscape design shall identify, but not be limited to,
plant/tree species, street lights, decorative sidewalk
materials incorporating pavers and/or stamped concrete,
colors of materials, tree grates, trash receptacles,
benches, bicycle racks, street planters/pots, fountains and
sculptures, all of which shall be of consistent and highquality
decorative design. The following standards should
be considered in streetscape design of this area:
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:615
[a] Deciduous street trees shall be placed along both
sides of all streets. Deciduous street trees shall be
planted 40 feet on center. Trees shall be over 12 feet
in height with a minimum three-inch caliper (dbh).
[b] Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all
streets and shall be properly sized for the safe and
convenient movement of pedestrians through and
around the plan area but no less than six feet in width.
[c] Streetscape elements and street furniture shall be
located and designed so as not to unreasonably
interfere with pedestrian movements.
[d] The use of blue stone slabs, bricks, cobblestone,
Belgian block or pavers shall be encouraged for use in
sidewalks as accents. Such decorative treatment shall
be required at building entrances and at pedestrianstreet-
crossing areas to accent and channel
pedestrian flow.
[2] Open space design, lighting, screening, and landscaping.
The goal of these standards is to improve the visual
environment of the area through landscaping and other
amenities in order to attract people to the area. People are
naturally attracted to areas that appear inviting,
comfortable and safe. The following standards have been
created to achieve this goal:
[a] All areas not covered by building, pavement or other
impervious surface shall be landscaped by a mix of
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubbery and
herbaceous plants, including grass.
[b] Open spaces shall be so located as to provide for
maximum usability, while also taking public safety into
consideration, and to create a harmonious
relationship between buildings and the open space
throughout the area.
[c] All improved open space shall incorporate elements
such as shrubbery, attractive paving materials, street
furniture, lighting, low walls, fountains, and other
architectural and artistic amenities so as to produce
and provide a pleasant environment at all levels.
[d] All plantings shall be with species proven to resist the
urban environment in this area. Evergreen screen
planting shall be a minimum of four feet in height.
Deciduous planting shall be a minimum of three feet in
height. Material shall be planted, balled, and
burlapped and be of specimen quality as established
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:616
by the American Association of Nurserymen. At initial
planting said material shall provide a screen from the
top of the planting, to within six inches of grade. Other
plant materials shall be dense and of specimen quality
as determined above. All deciduous trees shall be a
minimum of three inches in caliper (dbh).
[e] Indoor and/or outdoor plazas shall be encouraged.
Adequate landscaping and street furniture of a style
complementary to the surrounding facades shall be
used.
[f] Design emphasis on gateways and major access points
shall be encouraged. Gateways shall be marked by
walls, signage, graphics, landscaping, buffering,
distinctive streetlighting, monuments, street furniture
and paving accents.
[g] All fences and walls shall be designed as integrated
parts of the overall architectural and site design. All
materials shall be durable and finished in textures and
colors complementary to the overall architectural
design.
[h] Chain link fencing and stockade fencing are
prohibited, except temporarily during demolition and
construction and permanently in locations necessary
to screen residential development from adjoining
commercial development. Such fencing shall be no
more than six feet in height. Otherwise, only wroughtiron-
type or decorative wooden fences not more than
three feet in height shall be permitted. Fences shall be
no less than forty-percent open. Fences shall be free of
sharp spikes or points, jagged-edge or sharpened
surfaces, or other components or materials that may
cause injury. If a fence has an unfinished side, the
finished side shall face out.
[i] Sidewalk areas shall be landscaped and durably paved
and shall be properly illuminated with safe and
adequate cutoff lighting.
[j] Maintenance of landscaping on public property or
rights-of-way may be the subject of a developer's
agreement.
[k] All utilities shall be located underground. All utility
boxes shall be underground or located inside the
principal structure.
[l] All lighting sources must be shielded to eliminate offsite
glare and be designed to prevent upward glare.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:617
[m] Refuse and recyclables storage shall either be
provided inside the building or within a screening
enclosure at least six feet in height. Such enclosures
shall be constructed of durable materials with finishes
and colors that match or complement the building
architecture. Such enclosures shall be located so as to
provide convenient access to refuse collection vehicles
but shall be located so as to minimize view from
surrounding roadways and adjoining properties.
[3] General building design requirements applicable to all
structures.
[a] Buildings shall be oriented toward the street and any
inner courts or greenways so as to contribute to the
overall liveliness of the pedestrian environment.
[b] Building design. When buildings in an area are of
similar and/or compatible scale, materials and
massing, the area becomes more harmonious, thereby
providing a more comfortable human experience. The
building design standards section seeks to achieve a
continuity of design that allows for individuality of
design while still providing a distinct identity for the
area.
[c] All structures shall be situated with proper
consideration of their relationship to other buildings,
both existing and proposed, in terms of light, air, and
usable open spaces, access to public rights-of-way and
off-street parking, height, and bulk.
[d] Groups of related buildings shall be designed to
present a harmonious appearance in terms of building
silhouette; architectural style and scale; massing of
building form; surface material, finish, and texture;
decorative features; window and doorway
proportions; entryway placement and location;
signage; and landscaping.
[e] Buildings shall be designed so as to have attractive,
finished appearances from all public spaces. No
facade shall be any less detailed or less important than
another. Buildings that are to be only one story shall
have roof pitches of at least 45° to enhance the
presence of the building, where feasible.
[f] Rooftop equipment shall be screened to the greatest
extent possible either via painting it to match the roof
or facade, or by creating rooftop screening devices.
Conventional mechanical and electrical equipment
which is part of the building space, heating,
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:618
ventilating and air-conditioning system, lighting and
general power, or process equipment where groundmounted
shall be screened from view with evergreen
landscaping or screen walls that match the principal
building. Electrical equipment shall be mounted on
the interior of a building wherever possible. When
interior mounting is not practical, electrical
equipment shall be mounted in a location where it is
substantially screened from public view. In no case
shall exterior electrical equipment be mounted on the
street side or primary exposure side of any building.
[g] Signage shall comply with applicable requirements of
Article XII, Sign Regulations. The design of signage
shall complement the building architecture (e.g., use
of consistent materials).
[4] Off-street parking and circulation. Redevelopment
objective: to provide the most efficient and effective
parking supply to meet the real parking demand and
subsequently creating a genuinely pedestrian-friendly
neighborhood. Off-street parking is encouraged to be as
inconspicuous as possible and to incorporate landscaping
and screening to the greatest extent possible to minimize
its physical and visual impact. Each parcel and use is
required to provide minimum off-street parking in
accordance with the following minimum off-street parking
standards.
[a] All required parking spaces shall be a minimum of
nine feet wide by 18 feet deep. The placement of the
curb shall be permitted to extend into the required
eighteen-foot depth of the parking space a maximum
of two feet, provided that there is adequate room for
an automobile occupying the parking space to
overhang the curb without infringing upon required
landscaping or pedestrian areas. All aisles for ninetydegree
parking shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide.
Any other angle-parking arrangements shall comply
with the requirements of the Land Development
Regulations.
[b] Handicapped parking requirements shall be as per the
applicable codes.
[c] Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with RSIS.
[d] Off-street parking and loading areas shall be
coordinated with the public street system serving the
area in order to avoid conflicts with through traffic,
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-280
1:619
obstruction to pedestrian walks, and vehicular
thoroughfares.
[e] A minimum of 10% of any surface parking facility shall
be landscaped and shall include one shade tree for
every 20 parking spaces.
[f] All parking and loading areas shall be landscaped
about their periphery with shrubs, trees, and/or
ground cover.
[g] The relationship between truck delivery, vehicular
traffic, and pedestrian circulation shall be considered
when designing service entries, roadways, walkways,
and pedestrian entrances.
[h] Sidewalks shall be designed to be part of a
comprehensive system to access all facilities within
the area.
(7) Relationships to plans of other entities and Franklin Township's
Master Plan and Fair Share Plan.
(a) The plan is consistent with the master plans of adjacent
municipalities, Somerset County, the State Development and
Redevelopment Plan (SDRP) and Franklin Township's Master
Plan and Fair Share Plan.
[1] Adjacent municipalities: Franklin lies adjacent to the
municipalities of Bridgewater Township, North Brunswick
Township, the City of New Brunswick, South Brunswick
Township, South Bound Brook Borough, Piscataway
Township, Princeton Township, Montgomery Township,
Rocky Hill Borough, Hillsborough Township, Millstone
Borough and Manville Borough. The redevelopment area
is only contiguous to the City of New Brunswick; however,
the master plans of the other contiguous municipalities
were reviewed and do not conflict with the plan.
[a] New Brunswick: New Brunswick is located to the east
of the redevelopment area across Route 27. The City
has been an ongoing partner in the Renaissance 2000
planning process since its inception. The City has
adopted three redevelopment plans for its
Renaissance 2000 Area, covering the Henry-Oliver
Avenue Area, the 1,000 Somerset Area and the Edpas
Road Area. The goals and objectives of the foregoing
redevelopment plans are compatible with those of the
plan, including but not limited to the following goals
from the New Brunswick plans:
§ 112-280 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-280
1:620
[i] To remedy the visual appearance of the land and
thus enhance its value and the values of adjacent
properties.
[ii] Relieve problems associated with dilapidated
buildings by creating a situation conducive to
retail development.
[2] Somerset County: The plan is consistent with and will help
effectuate the planning goals expressed in the County's
planning documents. The Somerset County Master Plan
was adopted in 1987. A reexamination of the Master Plan
took place in 1998. Somerset County is currently in the
process of preparing a Smart Growth Strategic Plan
(SGSP). The SGSP will serve to update the County Master
Plan adopted in 1987 and the 1998 Reexamination Report.
The County has developed guiding principles and planning
objectives as part of Phase I of the SGSP initiative, and the
plan is consistent with those principles and objectives.
[3] State development and redevelopment plan: The SDRP
places the redevelopment area in Metropolitan Planning
Area 1 (PA1). The plan is consistent with the planning
goals and objectives of the SDRP as a whole and of PA1 in
particular. In terms of land use, the amendment to the plan
emphasizes the efficient use of infrastructure and public
facilities and revitalization of existing housing stock,
including providing affordable housing opportunities.
[4] Franklin Township Master Plan and Fair Share Plan: The
Housing Element of the 2006 Franklin Township Master
Plan and the 2006 Fair Share Plan specifically discuss and
endorse the affordable housing component of the plan. In
addition, the plan is consistent with the following Master
Plan goals:
[a] Maintaining the diversity of housing, but encouraging
infill and stabilization of current residential areas
rather then continuing sprawl patterns of
development.
[b] Support the redevelopment of declining areas in the
Township by periodically reexamining redevelopment
plans to ensure viability.
(8) Relocation and property to be acquired. The applicable sections in
the Redevelopment Agreement for construction of a residential
development within the Renaissance 2000 Redevelopment Area in
the Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey, between
the redevelopment agency of Franklin Township and Leewood
Renaissance at Franklin, LLC, shall apply.
§ 112-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-281
1:621
§ 112-281. General design standards.
This section details the overall design standards for the Area in terms of
streetscape design, open space and landscaping design, building design, offstreet
parking and circulation and outdoor dining. These standards are to
be used in conjunction with the parcel standards. Any deviation from these
standards should be considered by the Planning Board and may be granted
as a design waiver. It is recommended that these standards be implemented
via ordinance beyond the Redevelopment Area throughout the Renaissance
2000 area in both Franklin Township and the City of New Brunswick to
create design consistency throughout the Renaissance 2000 Area.
A. Streetscape requirements. The streetscape is the primary imagesetting
area and includes all public and private streets. The aesthetics
of this area, therefore, are extremely important. The following
standards should be considered in streetscape design of this area:
(1) Deciduous street trees should be planted 40 feet on center. Trees
shall be over 12 feet in height with a minimum three-inch caliper
(dbh) and shall be planted on the property side of any sidewalk.
(2) Trees shall be planted in a minimum five-foot-wide lawn area or
shall be planted in a continuous trench with tree grates.
B. Open space design and landscaping. The goal of the open space design
standards is to improve the visual environment of the Area through
landscaping and other amenities in order to attract people to the Area.
People are naturally attracted to areas that appear inviting,
comfortable and safe. The following standards have been created to
achieve this goal:
(1) All areas not covered by building, pavement or other impervious
surface shall be landscaped by a mix of evergreen and deciduous
trees, shrubbery and herbaceous plants, including grass.
(2) Open spaces shall be so located as to provide for maximum
usability, while also taking public safety into consideration, and to
create a harmonious relationship between buildings and the open
space throughout the Area.
(3) All improved open space shall incorporate elements such as
shrubbery, attractive paving materials, street furniture, lighting,
low walls, fountains, and other architectural and artistic amenities
so as to produce and provide a pleasant environment at all levels.
(4) All plantings shall be with species proven to resist the urban
environment in this area. Evergreen screen planting shall be a
minimum of four feet in height. Deciduous planting shall be a
minimum of three feet in height. Material shall be planted, balled,
and burlapped and be of specimen quality as established by the
American Association of Nurserymen. At initial planting said
material shall provide a screen from the top of the planting to
§ 112-281 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-281
1:622
within six inches of grade. Other plant materials shall be dense and
of specimen quality as determined above. All deciduous trees shall
be a minimum of three inches in caliper (dbh).
(5) Indoor and/or outdoor plazas shall be encouraged. Adequate
landscaping and street furniture of a style complementary to the
surrounding facades shall be used.
(6) Design emphasis on gateways and major access points shall be
encouraged. Gateways shall be marked by walls, signage, graphics,
landscaping, buffering, distinctive streetlighting, monuments,
street furniture, paving accents, flags, and/or banners.
(7) All fences and walls shall be designed as integrated parts of the
overall architectural and site design. All materials shall be durable
and finished in textures and colors complementary to the overall
architectural design.
(8) Conspicuous chain link fencing without screening and/or
landscaping shall not be permitted.
(9) Sidewalk areas shall be landscaped and durably paved and shall be
properly illuminated with safe and adequate cutoff lighting.
(10) Maintenance of landscaping on public property or rights-of-way
may be the subject of a developer's agreement.
(11) All utilities shall be located underground.
C. Building design. When buildings in an area are of similar and/or
compatible scale, materials and massing, the Area becomes more
harmonious, thereby providing a more comfortable human experience.
The building design standards section seeks to achieve a continuity of
design that allows for individuality of design while still providing a
distinct identity for the Area. The following standards have been
created to achieve such goals:
(1) All structures within the Redevelopment Area shall be situated with
proper consideration of their relationship to other buildings, both
existing and proposed, in terms of light, air, and usable open
spaces, access to public rights-of-way and off-street parking,
height, and bulk.
(2) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of building silhouette,
architectural style and scale; massing of building form; surface
material, finish, and texture; decorative features; window and
doorway proportions, entry way placement and location, signage,
and landscaping.
(3) Buildings shall be designed so as to have attractive, finished
appearances from all public spaces.
§ 112-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-281
1:623
(4) Buildings that are to be only one story shall have roof pitches of at
least 45° to enhance the presence of the building, where feasible.
D. Signage.
(1) Standards for signage are important to coordinate the appearance
of the Route 27 corridor. Although Route 27 is a state highway, it is
intended for the corridor to retain the character of a local roadway,
where controlled speed and pedestrian access and safety are
priorities. Therefore, signage is recommended to be appropriately
scaled: smaller in surface area and height. The standards in Exhibit
9 at the end of this chapter apply to various potential uses in the
Redevelopment Area.
(2) The following design standards apply to signage on all parcels:
(a) Signage shall create a sense of aesthetics, originality and
order. It shall be legible and dimensionally proportional.
(b) Signs shall be restricted to tenant identification and directional
signs, either wall-mounted or freestanding.
(c) No rooftop signs shall be permitted.
(d) Signage shall be oriented toward the roadway that directly
accesses the property.
(e) Signs visible from the exterior of any building, if illuminated,
shall be internally illuminated without a halo, but no signs or
any other contrivances shall be devised or constructed so as to
rotate, gyrate, blink, move or appear to move in any fashion.
(f) Public service devices such as clocks and temperature
indicators shall be devoid of advertising.
(g) Directional signage shall be sized as per industry standard.
E. Off-street parking and circulation.
(1) Off-street parking is an integral component of the plan. The
importance of such parking, however, is not intended to dictate
project design. Off-street parking is encouraged to be as
inconspicuous as possible and to incorporate landscaping and
screening to the greatest extent possible to minimize its physical
and visual impact. The Residential Site Improvement Standards, as
amended, shall apply where applicable.
(2) Minimum off-street parking standards.
(a) Each parcel and use is required to provide minimum off-street
parking in accordance with the following schedule:
[1] Assisted-living facility: 0.5 spaces per unit.
§ 112-281 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-281
1:624
[2] Day-care center: 1.5 spaces per employee.
[3] House of worship: one space for each three seats.
[4] Light industrial/distribution/warehousing: one space per
1,000 square feet of building area.
[5] Office: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
[6] Restaurants: one space per three seats.
[7] Retail/commercial recreation/entertainment: one space
per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(b) No parking shall be located between the building and the
roadway right-of-way.
(c) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be coordinated with
the public street system serving the Area in order to avoid
conflicts with through traffic, obstruction to pedestrian walks,
and vehicular thoroughfares. Shared parking among mixed
uses shall be encouraged and may be factored in for purposes
of calculations.
(d) A minimum of 10% of any surface parking facility shall be
landscaped and shall include one shade tree for every 20
parking spaces. The perimeter of the parking area shall be
landscaped. Large concentrations of surface parking shall be
avoided whenever possible.
(e) All parking and loading areas shall be landscaped about their
periphery with shrubs, trees, and/or ground cover.
(f) All 90° parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet in width
by 18 feet in depth. Aisles shall be a minimum of 26 feet in
width but may be reduced to 24 feet by the Planning Board at
the time of site plan approval. [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 4299-19]
(g) The relationship between truck delivery, vehicular traffic, and
pedestrian circulation shall be considered when designing
service entries, roadways, walkways, and pedestrian
entrances.
(h) Sidewalks shall be designed to be part of a comprehensive
system to access all facilities within the Area.
(i) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width, exclusive of
car overhang areas, and shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from all buildings.
F. Storage, service, and loading areas. Storage, service, maintenance, and
loading areas shall be constructed, maintained, and used in accordance
with the following conditions:
§ 112-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-281
1:625
(1) One on-site loading space shall be provided per building. For
buildings with more than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area,
one additional loading space for each additional 15,000 square feet
of gross floor area thereafter shall be required.
(2) Loading areas are permitted in rear yards, centralized courtyards,
or side yard areas, provided that they are screened from public
view.
(3) No loading, storage or service area shall be located between the
building line and the street line.
(4) Service entrances and loading areas between adjacent buildings
shall be consolidated and separated from walkways and pedestrian
entrances to the extent possible.
(5) No materials, supplies, or equipment, including trucks or other
motor vehicles, shall be stored upon a site except inside a closed
building or behind a durable material wall not less than six feet in
height screening such materials, supplies, or vehicles from
adjacent sites so as to be screened from neighboring properties
and streets. In no case shall materials stored outdoors exceed a
height of eight feet.
(6) Any outdoor storage areas shall be located within the rear portions
of a site. No storage areas may extend into a setback area.
(7) Provisions shall be made on each site for any necessary vehicle
loading, and no on-street vehicle loading or idling shall be
permitted.
G. Refuse and recycling collection areas.
(1) All outdoor refuse and recycling containers shall be visually
screened within a durable enclosure, six feet or higher, so as to be
screened from adjacent lots or sites, neighboring properties or
streets. No refuse and recycling collection areas shall be permitted
between a street and the front of a building.
(2) Refuse and recycling collection enclosures should be designed of
durable materials with finishes and colors which are unified and
harmonious with the overall architectural theme.
(3) Refuse and recycling collection areas should be so located upon the
lot as to provide clear and convenient access to refuse collection
vehicles.
(4) Refuse collection area should be designed and located upon the lot
as to be convenient for the deposition of refuse generated on site.
(5) Refuse and recycling collection areas should be effectively
designed to contain all refuse generated on site and deposited
§ 112-281 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-281
1:626
§ 112-282. Plan of action.
between collections. Deposited refuse should not be visible from
outside the refuse enclosure.
H. Screening of exterior mechanical equipment.
(1) In areas where rooftops can be viewed from adjacent roadways,
rooftop equipment shall be screened to the greatest extent possible
either via painting it to match the roof or facade, or by creating
rooftop screening devices.
(2) Conventional mechanical and electrical equipment which is part of
the building space, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
system, lighting and general power, or process equipment where
ground-mounted shall be screened from view with evergreen
landscaping or screen walls that match the principal building.
(3) Electrical equipment shall be mounted on the interior of a building
wherever possible. When interior mounting is not practical,
electrical equipment shall be mounted in a location where it is
substantially screened from public view. In no case shall exterior
electrical equipment be mounted on the street side or primary
exposure side of any building.
I. Outdoor dining. Where permitted, temporary outdoor dining as an
accessory use to a restaurant shall be permitted under the following
provisions:
(1) Restaurants shall not place any table, sign, umbrella, or other item
in such a manner as to block any walkways or building entrance/
egress, municipal signs, receptacles for garbage, public benches,
or other public amenity including fire hydrants.
(2) Restaurants must provide for the disposal of recyclable cans/
bottles and garbage. Public receptacles for garbage shall not be
used. Sidewalk areas shall be kept clean during hours of operation.
(3) No portion of any sidewalk dining equipment, including chairs,
tables, and opened umbrellas shall encroach upon the sidewalk or
in a manner to block, impede or cover adjacent store fronts, doors,
or windows in front of other business establishments.
A. Relationship between Franklin Township and First Baptist CDC. The
Township anticipates creating an independent seven-member
Redevelopment Agency, headed by an Executive Director. The sevenmember
Agency will be selected by the Township Mayor and Council
and will be comprised of Township residents. The Redevelopment
Agency will request approval of the Agency through the Local Finance
Board after the plan has been adopted. The Agency will assist the
Township in implementing elements of the plan. It is further anticipated
that the First Baptist CDC Human Services element will, at a minimum,
§ 112-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-282
1:627
be called upon to consult with the Agency on prospective developers
and development applications. The independent housing and economic
development branches of the First Baptist Church will continue to serve
as potential developers within the Redevelopment Area.
B. Development schedule. The redevelopment of the Area is anticipated to
occur in multiple phases with more than one developer. The Township
has identified the redevelopment of the Route 27/Franklin Boulevard
area as a priority because it serves as a gateway into Franklin Township
and can be a real catalyst for change in the Area. The Township
received Somerset County grant moneys to fund the request for
qualifications/request for proposal process for this six-block area to
jumpstart its redevelopment.
C. Property to be acquired. It is a goal of the Township to minimize the
number of displacements caused by Area redevelopment. This
Redevelopment Plan requires displacement in only limited areas, and
promotes private development via infill and reuse for the majority of the
Area. In cases where property must be acquired, this plan authorizes
the Township to exercise its condemnation powers on all properties in
the Redevelopment Area, to acquire property or to eliminate any
restrictive covenants, easements or similar property interests which
may obstruct the implementation of the plan.
D. Relocation. It is anticipated that relocation will be required only in
limited areas within the Redevelopment Area. Franklin Township will
provide all displaced tenants and landowners with the appropriate
relocation assistance, pursuant to applicable state and federal law,
should relocation be necessary. Such assistance will be provided
through an appropriately designated office which will assist in any
relocation of persons, businesses or other entities. The local housing
market, including Franklin and surrounding communities, contains an
ample supply of comparable replacement housing to absorb the
residents of Franklin who may be displaced by the redevelopment
process. Further, Franklin and the surrounding area contain sufficient
land and buildings which would be appropriate for relocation of existing
businesses from the Redevelopment Area. If relocation is not directly
caused by the Redevelopment Plan, the Township assumes no
responsibility for relocation of people and businesses.
E. Incentives and project funding. The Renaissance 2000 Area has an
established history of receiving and distributing grant and loan moneys
to various development projects in the Area. The following entities have
been identified which currently or can potentially provide technical
expertise and/or financial incentives to redeveloper(s). The location of
the Redevelopment Area in an Urban Coordinating Council
Neighborhood increases the likelihood of redevelopment project
funding and financing assistance of these entities. This list highlights
the key resources which can be coordinated to maximize the leveraging
of private investment.
§ 112-282 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-282
1:628
(1) Renaissance 2000 Affordable Housing Program, Administered by
CDC Properties, Inc., uses HOME funds to rehabilitate and resell
single-family homes.
(2) New Jersey Economic Development Authority (NJEDA) offers an
array of programs and services for businesses seeking to locate,
expand and remain in New Jersey.
(3) The Investment Banking Division offers long-term, lower interest
rate bond financing of $750,000 and greater for a wide range of
businesses and not-for-profit organizations. Tax-exempt bond
financing is available for qualified borrowers such as
manufacturing facilities and certain nonprofit (501)c(3)
organizations.
(4) The Community Development and Small Business Lending Division
offers financial assistance and technical assistance (including
training programs and consultations) for startup and
microbusinesses.
(5) The Commercial Lending Division offers loans and loan guaranties
from $50,000 to $3,000,000 targeted to small- and middle-market
businesses. Programs offered include, in conjunction with NJDEP,
assistance to companies involved in hazardous discharge site
investigation and cleanup with loans up to $1,000,000 for up to 10
years. Municipalities may apply for grants and loans up to
$2,000,000 per year.
(6) The Real Estate Development Division provides assistance with
land assembly, site improvements, construction and renovations for
projects of significant economic impact.
(7) NJEDA also offers tax-exempt bonds, the Business Incentive
Program, financing through the Urban Development Corporation
(UDC) and administers the Local Development Financing Fund.
(8) New Jersey Office of Sustainability (NJOS) has been given the
authority by the state to provide low-interest loan funds to qualified
sustainable businesses, to encourage the state's procurement of
environmentally preferable products and to act as an advocate for
sustainable firms.
(9) U.S. Economic Development Authority (USEDA) offers a variety of
programs and services including infrastructure financing.
(10)New Jersey and U.S. Small Business Administrations (SBAs) offer
competitive loans to qualified small businesses.
(11)U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
provides community development block grant (CDBG) moneys
which can be used in a number of different ways, and has recently
developed an Economic Development Initiative Program.
§ 112-282 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-282
1:629
(12) Housing programs.
(a) Federal loan and mortgage guaranties through the Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) and Federal National Mortgage
Agency (FNMA).
(b) Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) Affordable Housing Program.
(c) Veterans Administration mortgage guaranties.
(d) Federal low-income housing tax credits.
(e) New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency (HMFA)
bond financing and reduced rate mortgages.
(f) New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA) HOME
funding, Balanced Housing Program and Housing Advocacy
Predevelopment Grants.
(13) Private foundations.
(a) Transportation improvement funds. The New Jersey
Department of Transportation and New Jersey Transit, under
the federal Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century,
provide grants for various transportation projects that improve
safety, increase intermodality, protect the environment and
create economic opportunity. These programs include:
[1] Transportation enhancement grants for transportation
projects that improve communities' cultural, aesthetic and
environmental qualities.
[2] The sustainable communities program establishes a pilot
program to help state and local governments plan
environmentally friendly development.
[3] Bicycle and pedestrian paths programs expand funding
provisions to make bicycling and walking safer and more
viable ways of travel.
[4] NJDEP Green Acres Program. This program is
administered by the NJDEP Bureau of Green Trust
Management, and provides low-interest loans (2%) and
grants to municipal and county governments to acquire
open space, develop outdoor recreation facilities and to
finance conservation, including historic preservation,
efforts.
[5] Payments in Lieu of Taxes (PILOTs). PILOTs incentives for
developers can be considered by the municipality.
[6] NJDEP Brownfields Program. This program is run through
the Site Remediation Program and was created to promote
reuse of contaminated properties by providing guidance
§ 112-282 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-282
1:630
§ 112-283. Plan relationship to definitive local objectives.
for conducting investigations and cleanups, funding for
municipalities and businesses to conduct the work through
the Hazardous Discharge Site Remediation Fund and by
clarifying liability issues for local officials, developers and
the lending community. NJEDA administers the financial
aspect of the site remediation in connection with the
Hazardous Discharge Site Remediation Fund, while
NJDEP administers the site remediation aspects of
applications to the fund.
[7] USEPA Brownfields Program. This program is currently in
its pilot project stage, and has given grant money for
assessment projects, such as the one in Hudson County,
and has also given grant money for remedial work in
federal Urban Empowerment Zones, such as the City of
Newark and the City of Camden. Additionally, federal
legislation is pending that will allow federal income tax
credits for reclamation costs of brownfields areas.
[8] NJDEP Underground Storage Tank Removal Program
provides funding and technical guidance for removal of
leaking and substandard USTs.
[9] NJDEP Environmental Opportunity Zones. A statute
enacted in January 1996 allows municipalities to create
Environmental Opportunity Zones where local property
tax incentives will be provided during a ten-year period to
developers of contaminated properties within the
designated areas.
A. Franklin Township Master Plan. The objectives of the plan seek to
achieve the goals and objectives contained within 1994 Master Plan
Reexamination which update the goals and objectives of the 1988
Township Master Plan. The following goals of the 1994 Master Plan
Reexamination are met by the Redevelopment Plan:
(1) Maintain diversity in the type and character of development and
particularly to promote opportunity for varied residential
environments and variety in the type and cost of housing:
(a) By providing a variety of housing choices in new developments
within overall density standards as expressed in the Land Use
Element with due consideration of the environmental
preservation policies and the Circulation Element contained
herein.
(b) By providing housing for varying age groups, family sizes and
income levels.
§ 112-282 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-283
1:631
(c) By protecting sound residential areas and upgrading those that
are in declining condition.
(d) Explore other than the builder's remedy/conventional
developer set-asides as means of providing affordable housing.
(e) Conserve rural characteristics, areas of natural beauty,
sensitive environmental areas, productive agricultural areas
and important historic places.
(f) Expand the employment base and tax base, focusing on areas
with regional accessibility to avoid traffic and other
transportation problems.
(g) By relating major employment areas to existing and major
highways and arterial roads as well as centers as embodied in
the State Development and Redevelopment Guide Plan, with
due consideration to the impact on residential areas.
(h) By locating major employment areas to the periphery of the
Township to limit nonlocal traffic through residential
neighborhoods.
(2) Provide a reasonable balance between housing and job
opportunities.
(3) Emphasize convenience and neighborhood commercial centers and
limit major commercial development to nodes with regional access:
(a) By locating regional shopping centers in nodes with regional
access.
(b) By providing neighborhood and community shopping areas
where residential densities can support such commercial
activities.
(c) By limiting strip commercial development.
(4) Direct more intensive development to areas that are serviced with
utilities and use utility systems as a means of shaping the
development pattern in order to achieve optimum utilization of
utility systems and overall development policies:
(a) By insuring that the Comprehensive Plan is the primary
document upon which all other plans are based establishing
the areas of the Township that should be provided with public
utilities.
(b) By maximizing the use of existing utility systems.
(c) By encouraging infill and selective expansion of existing builtup
areas.
§ 112-283 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-283
1:632
(d) Establish a circulation system that allows free movement
between various parts of the Township, provides service to
built-up areas and fits into an area-wide transportation
network without undermining integrity of residential, historic
or rural areas.
(e) By general improvement of traffic and transportation facilities.
(f) By encouraging the use of mass transportation for both
internal and external movements.
(5) Provide for a range of quality public services such as schools,
recreation, public safety and cultural services and assure
availability of areas for such services through the planning process.
(6) Encourage an energy efficient pattern of land development by
concentrating development and densities in areas served by
utilities.
B. Renaissance 2000 Plan. This plan has built upon, and is in conformance
with, the Renaissance 2000 Plan. The development programs within the
Renaissance 2000 Plan have been incorporated into this
Redevelopment Plan. Where areas within the Redevelopment Area were
not planned for in the Renaissance 2000 Plan, the planned uses for
those areas do not conflict with the uses promulgated in the either this
plan or the Renaissance 2000 Plan.
C. Relationship to Master Plans. The proposed Redevelopment Plan is
substantially consistent with the Master Plans of adjacent
municipalities, Somerset County and the State Development and
Redevelopment Plan (SDRP).
D. Adjacent municipalities. Franklin lies adjacent to the municipalities of
Bridgewater Township, North Brunswick Township, the City of New
Brunswick, South Brunswick Township, South Bound Brook Borough,
Piscataway Township, Princeton Township, Montgomery Township,
Rocky Hill Borough, Hillsborough Township, Millstone Borough and
Manville Borough. The Redevelopment Area is only contiguous to the
City of New Brunswick; however, the Master Plans of the other
contiguous municipalities were reviewed and do not conflict with the
plan.
E. City of New Brunswick. New Brunswick is located to the east of the
Redevelopment Area across Route 27. The City has been an on-going
partner in the Renaissance 2000 planning process since its inception.
The City has adopted three Redevelopment Plans for its Renaissance
2000 Area, covering the Henry-Oliver Avenue Area, the 1,000 Somerset
Area and the Edpas Road Area. (See Ren2000 Area: Redevelopment
Plans and Areas Map.)108
108. Editor's Note: These plans are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 112-283 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-283
1:633
(1) Henry-Oliver Avenue Redevelopment Plan: The primary objective of
this plan is "to revitalize the Henry-Oliver District by removing all
blighting conditions and influences therefrom, including, but not
limited to, those conditions and influences which have led to the
stagnation and/or unproductive use of lands, providing for the
productive utilization of cleared land areas through the
redevelopment of same for their highest and best use and with uses
which are compatible with a viable residential neighborhood, which
redevelopment may require removing all structures in a single area
in order to provide for an integrated and compatible development."
(Page 17)
(a) This Plan rezones the Henry-Oliver Avenues area from Special
Development to C-5C, a highway commercial zoning district
which permits highway-oriented uses such as office,
restaurants (including drive-ins) and bars, retail uses including
department stores, discount, outlet and wholesale stores,
indoor and outdoor theaters, supermarkets, home-building
supply stores (excluding lumberyards), shopping malls and
centers, automobile dealerships, hotel and conference centers,
motels, park-and-ride facilities, educational training centers,
business and office equipment supply stores, car washes,
transportation and communications offices and facilities,
public transportation passenger stations and parking facilities,
and transmission towers and communications facilities.
(b) These uses are permitted on lots of a minimum of 10,000
square feet with a front yard setback of 25 feet, side yards of
20 feet/50 feet and rear yards of 20 feet. Maximum height
permitted is 40 feet, and maximum lot coverage is 50%.
Parking is permitted in the front yard. The signage standards
for this district are similar to those required herein. No
billboards are permitted and it is encouraged that "maximum
effort should be made to establish a common sign band along
all retail buildings fronting on Somerset Street." (Page 15) The
signage standards for all uses are as follows:
Freestanding Signs Attached Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Line
Setback
(feet)
Maximum Sign
Area
(square feet)
All
uses
30 12 20 1 square foot for
each 1 foot
width of front
building facade;
not to exceed 50
square feet
§ 112-283 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-283
1:634
(2) 1,000 Somerset Redevelopment Plan: This plan covers the area
roughly between Camner Avenue and the Railroad right-of-way
along Route 27. The 1995 Redevelopment Plan places this area in
the HD Highway Development Zoning District. However, this was
amended to the C-5C Highway Commercial District in December
1996. A portion of this property has been developed as the Aldi
Food Store. Off-street parking is permitted in the front yard. The
goals of this plan are as follows:
(a) Increase the utilization of H-D (Highway Development) land by
enhancing its attractiveness for retail usage.
(b) Accommodate uses for vacant land that is likely to remain so
without inclusion in a redevelopment plan.
(c) Develop new businesses to provide goods and services to the
adjacent community.
(d) Relieve problems associated with dilapidated buildings by
creating a situation conducive to retail/commercial
redevelopment.
(e) Create job opportunities for area residents via commercial
development.
(f) To remedy the visual appearance of the land and thus enhance
its value and the values of adjacent properties.
(g) Design the development of the parcel to minimize the number
of access points on to Route 27.
(h) Maintain existing acceleration and deceleration lanes to and
from the site on Route 27 and look to their potential
enhancement.
(i) Install all utility lines underground to improve the aesthetic
appearance of the area.
(3) Edpas Road Redevelopment Plan: The primary objective of this
plan is "to revitalize the Edpas Road District by removing all
blighting conditions and influences therefrom, including, but not
limited to those conditions and influences which have led to the
stagnation and/or unproductive use of lands, providing for the
productive utilization of cleared land areas through the
redevelopment of same for their highest and best use and with uses
which are compatible with a viable residential neighborhood, which
redevelopment may require removing all structures in a single area
in order to provide for an integrated and compatible development."
(Page 16)
(a) This plan governs the residential area to the rear of the
foregoing two Redevelopment Areas in the City. The plan
places the area in the R-6 Multifamily Zoning District and
§ 112-283 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-283
1:635
permits maximum residential densities of 28 units per acre in
three-story structures.
(b) The City's Zoning Map places the majority of the remaining
area, not in City Redevelopment Areas, across Route 27 from
the Franklin Redevelopment Area in the R-6 Multifamily
Zoning District. The R-6 area includes St. Peter's Cemetery and
the residential areas between the cemetery and Quentin
Avenue, and Van Dyke Avenue and Jennings Court.
(c) The goals and objectives of the foregoing redevelopment plans
are compatible with those of the Franklin Township Plan. In
terms of design standards for uses, although development
standards in the Franklin Redevelopment Area and the City
zoning standards in the Renaissance 2000 New Brunswick
area are generally compatible, it is recommended that a joint
design standard document be adopted by both municipalities
to ensure consistent design particularly in the areas of
signage, the location of off-street parking, building design and
landscaping.
F. Somerset County Master Plan.
(1) The 1987 Somerset County Master Plan is structured to be the
intermediary planning document between the State Development
and Redevelopment Plan and individual Municipal Master Plans.
The Redevelopment Plan is consistent with the following goals of
the 1987 County Plan:
(a) To relate development activities to long-range trends and the
essential utilities and services necessary to support future
development in an economical and environmentally sound
manner.
(b) To focus future development opportunities in and around
logical areas of existing development by encouraging a variety
of housing types, convenient employment opportunities, and
investments in utilities and transit facilities in defined areas.
The effort should be to prevent further sprawl development by
increasing the capacity and efficiency of existing core areas of
development in order to attract new development.
(c) To discourage sprawl development patterns, and to that end,
discourage the extension of water, sewer and highway systems
into areas considered inappropriate for development. Public
and quasi-public investments should be directed to upgrading
and providing additional capacity to the existing systems by
modernizing them, improving their capacities, and replacing
deteriorated sections.
§ 112-283 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-283
1:636
(d) To preserve a safe, healthy and visually pleasing environment
by fostering building and landscape designs that encourage
visually pleasing buffers, facades, and spatial relationships.
(2) In the 1987 Somerset County Master Plan, the area is located in a
growth management area and a corridor development area along
Route 27.
(a) The following policies of the growth management area as set
forth by the county are consistent with the plan:
[1] Maintain a balance between housing, jobs and support
services.
[2] Coordinate planning, zoning and utility plans/extension
policies.
[3] Maintain adequate open space/recreation.
[4] Upgrade or expand community facilities, i.e. schools, day
care.
[5] Promote mixed-use and high quality design standards.
(b) The following policies of the Corridor Development Area are
consistent with the plan:
[1] Improve highway safety and capacity.
[2] Coordinate planning at all levels in order to implement a
unified transportation management program.
[3] Limit large-scale commercial development to corridors/
nodes with regional highway access which can be served
with transit services and public facilities.
[4] Minimize strip development and cluster in nodes.
[5] Plan for low-cost capital improvements.
G. State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(1) The SDRP places the Redevelopment Area in Metropolitan
Planning Area 1 (PA1). The proposed Redevelopment Plan is
consistent with the planning goals and objectives of the SDRP as a
whole, and of PA1 in particular. In terms of land use, the proposed
plan emphasizes the efficient use of infrastructure and public
facilities, including recreation facilities, and revitalization of
existing housing and commercial building stock. Affordable
housing opportunities for the elderly and the creation of job
opportunities through commercial development are a priority.
(2) Public/private partnerships are already a strong presence in the
Area as a part of Renaissance 2000. The proposed plan makes great
§ 112-283 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-283
1:637
§ 112-284. Administrative and procedural requirements.
efforts to encourage efficient transportation and circulation in the
Redevelopment Area, including promotion of pedestrian safety and
access to mass transit.
(3) This Redevelopment Plan is the product of joint planning in two
municipalities within two different counties, and has been funded
by a Somerset County Economic Development Program grant.
A. Amending the Redevelopment Plan. Upon compliance with the
requirements of applicable law, the Township Council of Franklin
Township may amend, revise or modify this Redevelopment Plan, as
circumstances may make such changes appropriate.
B. Duration of Redevelopment Plan. The Redevelopment Plan, as
amended, shall be in full force and effect for a period of 30 years from
the date of approval of this plan by the Township Council.
C. Conveyance of land. The Township Council or Redevelopment Agency
may sell, lease, or otherwise convey to a redeveloper for
redevelopment, subject to the restrictions, controls and requirements
of this Redevelopment Plan, all or any portion of the land within the
Redevelopment Area which becomes available to disposal by the
municipality as a result of public action under this plan. The Township
reserves the right to formulate an agreement under any of the abovereferenced
arrangements and to enforce resale covenants.
D. Criteria and procedures for redeveloper(s) selection and
implementation of Redevelopment Plan. The following restrictions and
controls on redevelopment are hereby imposed in connection with the
selection of a redeveloper(s) and shall apply notwithstanding the
provisions of any zoning or building ordinance or other regulations now
or hereafter in force. Items in Subsection D(1)(a) through (e) and D(2)
hereunder shall be implemented by appropriate covenants or other
provisions in redeveloper(s) agreements and/or disposition
instruments.
(1) Applicants for designation as redeveloper must submit the
following materials to the designated entity for review and
approval:
(a) Documentation evidencing financial responsibility and
capability with respect to the proposed development;
(b) Estimated offering price and deposit for acquisition of any
land(s) to be acquired from the municipality for development;
(c) Estimated total development cost;
(d) Fiscal impact analysis addressing the effect of the proposed
project on municipal services and tax base;
§ 112-283 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-284
1:638
(e) Estimated time schedule for start and completion of
development; and
(f) Conceptual plans and elevations sufficient in scope to
demonstrate the design, architectural concepts, parking,
traffic circulation, landscaping, active and/or passive
recreation space, and sign proposals for all uses and, in
addition, bedroom distribution and size of dwelling units for
any residential development, and loading requirements for any
proposed nonresidential use.
(2) The redeveloper(s) will be obligated to carry out the specified
improvements in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan.
(3) The redeveloper(s), its successors or assigns shall devote land
within the Redevelopment Area to the uses specified in this
Redevelopment Plan.
(4) The redeveloper(s) shall begin and complete the development of
said land for the use(s) required in this Redevelopment Plan within
a period of time which the Township Council or Redevelopment
Agency fixes as reasonable.
(5) Until the completion of the improvements, the redeveloper(s) will
not be permitted to sell, lease, or otherwise transfer or dispose of
property within the Redevelopment Area without prior written
consent of the designated entity.
(6) Upon completion of the required improvements, the conditions
determined to exist at the time the Redevelopment Area was
determined to be in need of redevelopment shall be deemed to no
longer exist, and the land and improvements thereon shall no
longer be subject to eminent domain as a result of those
determinations.
(7) No covenant, agreement, lease, conveyance or other instrument
shall be effected or executed by the redeveloper(s), the Township
Council or Redevelopment Agency, or the successors, lessees, or
assigns of either of them, by which land in the Redevelopment Area
is restricted as to sale, lease, or occupancy upon the basis of race,
color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or marital
status.
(8) Neither the redeveloper(s) nor the Township Council or
Redevelopment Agency, nor the successors, lessees, or assigns or
either of them shall discriminate upon the basis of race, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or marital status in the sale,
lease or rental or in the use and occupancy of land or improvements
erected or to be erected thereon, or any part thereof, in the
Redevelopment Area.
§ 112-284 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-284
1:639

ARTICLE XXXVI
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 112-285. Establishment and composition.
§ 112-286. (Reserved)109
§ 112-287. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
the Board members and shall also select a Secretary who may or may not
be a Board member or another municipal employee.
§ 112-288. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall annually appoint, fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A.40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Township
of Franklin appointed by the Township Council to serve for terms of four
years. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so determined
that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms
shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after their
appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall exceed
four years. Thereafter, the terms of each member shall be for four
years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the
term of any present member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of
whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed.
B. There shall also be appointed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment four
alternate members who shall be designated by the Township Council at
the time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2,"
”Alternate No. 3” and ”Alternate No. 4.” In the event that a choice must
be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate members
shall vote in the order of their numerical designation. The terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be so determined that, to the
greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be
distributed evenly over the first two years of their appointment,
provided that the initial term shall not exceed two years. Thereafter, the
term of each alternate member shall be two years. The terms of not
more than two alternates shall expire in any one year. [Amended
3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3599]
C. No member of the Zoning Board may hold any elective office or position
under the municipality.
109. Editor's Note: Former § 112-286, Removal and vacancies, was repealed 2-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 3656. See now Ch. 13, Art. XXII.
§ 112-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-288
1:641
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
§ 112-289. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts, grants or escrow fees, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
§ 112-290. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 112-291. Powers.
§ 112-292. (Reserved)110
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereby, and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general rules hereby laid down that
equity shall be done in cases where the strict construction of the
provisions of this chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and
duties of the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by
statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it
in said N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or subsequent statutes in such case
made and provided, and it shall from time to time furnish to any person
requesting the same, a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its
decision.
110. Editor’s Note: Former § 112-292, Appeals and applications, was repealed 2-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 4261-19.
§ 112-288 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-293
1:642
§ 112-293. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer
from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 112-294. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire
by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall be been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or less
such permitted use has actually been commenced, within one year from the
date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination of the
Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the Township Council, or
to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination of any manner of
such appeal or proceeding.
§ 112-295. Powers granted by law.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers as are granted by law to:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of the Zoning Ordinance;
B. Hear or decide requests for interpretation of the Map or Zoning
Ordinance, or for decisions upon which such board is authorized by the
Zoning Ordinance to pass;
C. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property; or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property; or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully
existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq. would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship;
§ 112-293 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-295
1:643
D. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this act would be advanced by a deviation from
the Zoning Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation
would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40.55D-62 et seq.;
provided, however, that no variance from those departures enumerated
in § 112-295D shall be granted under this subsection; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to review a
request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
E. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq. to
permit:
(1) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
or principal structure;
(2) An expansion of a nonconforming use;
(3) Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use;
(4) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio;
(5) An increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwellingunit
buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
(6) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10%
the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal
structure.
(a) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-77 et seq.
(b) If an application for development requests one or more
variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in
§ 112-295D, the decision on the requested variance or
variances shall be rendered under § 112-295C.
F. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinance. Any application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 112-295 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-295
1:644
§ 112-296. Additional powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in
§ 112-295 of this chapter, have power given by law to:
§ 112-297. Time for decision.
§ 112-298. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance
or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a
notice of appeal in the manner set forth in § 112-292 of this chapter, and in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
G. In respect to any airport safety zones delineated under the Air Safety
and Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), no
variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section,
permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which
would be prohibited under standards promulgated pursuant to that Act,
except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of
Transportation. An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
B. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
C. Grant to the same extent and subject to the same site plan approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional use approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an
application for approval of a use variance.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date:
(1) An appeal is taken from the decision of any administrative officer;
or
(2) The submission of a complete application for development to the
Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72b.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 112-295 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-299
1:645
§ 112-299. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to Township
Council.
Any party desiring to appeal the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
where it has approved or granted a use variance pursuant to the provisions
of § 112-295C of this chapter may appeal to the Township Council, provided
that such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of
such final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 112-300. Variance applications. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No.
4012-13; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 4089-14; 2-26-2019 by Ord. No.
4261-19]
§ 112-301. Other matters before the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 4012-13;
2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4261-19]
A. The Township hereby adopts, and incorporates herein, the Variance
Submission Checklist contained in Schedule 8.111
B. An application for D variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d shall include all applicable forms, data, information, fees,
etc. outlined on the Variance Submission Checklist contained in
Schedule 8.
C. An application for C variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c, whether before the Planning or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, shall include all applicable forms, data, information, fees,
etc. outlined on the Variance Submission Checklist contained in
Schedule 8.
A. The Township hereby adopts, and incorporates herein, the General
Application Checklist contained in Schedule 11.112
B. Applicants wishing to appear before the Zoning Board of Adjustment for
matters other than for a variance, such as appeals (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a), interpretations (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b) and certification of
preexisting nonconforming use, shall submit all applicable data,
information, fees, etc. contained on the General Application Checklist
contained in Schedule 11. This checklist shall also be used by other
parties wishing to appear before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment on matters for which the Township does not provide a
specific application form and/or checklist.
111. Editor's Note: Schedule 8 is attached to this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: Schedule 11 is attached to this chapter.
§ 112-299 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-301
1:646
ARTICLE XXXVII
Planning Board.
§ 112-302. Establishment.
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. in Franklin
Township a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following four
classes:
A. Class I: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the Township Council to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is a member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 he shall
be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there is both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the Township Council to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Township Council. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one member may be a member of the
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be
a Class IV Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV
members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the
Class II member of the Planning Board.
E. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23-1, there are hereby created two
alternate memberships to the Franklin Township Planning Board.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the Township Council for
Class IV members and shall meet the qualifications for Class IV
members of the nine-member Planning Board. Alternate members shall
be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall
be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall
be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall
expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the
terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
(1) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
§ 112-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-302
1:647
§ 112-303. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
F. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
the Mayor's official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee
in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms
of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a
Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
environmental commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.113
(2) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever
he is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of
his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment as determined by
resolution of the Township Council; provided, however, that no
term of any member shall exceed four years and further provided
that nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of
the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 112-302 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-304
1:648
§ 112-304. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 112-305. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 112-306. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and
experts an other servicing personnel as it may deem necessary not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, in the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
§ 112-307. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance
of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taken of testimony, the provisions
of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A et
seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality including any areas outside its
boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the municipality in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance114 of the municipality in accordance with
the provisions of said ordinances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
114. Editor's Note: See Arts. XXII, Subdivision of Land, and XXIII, Site Plan Review,
respectively, of this chapter.
§ 112-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-307
1:649
§ 112-308. Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizen Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required by the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
§ 112-309. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years and amendments thereto and
recommend same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55d-26(a) and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b).
H. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70C.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit as the case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Township Council for the aid and assistance of the
Township Council or other agencies or officers.
§ 112-307 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-309
1:650
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Provisions Applicable to Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 112-310. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any person or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on
the hearing of such matter and not participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 112-311. Meetings.
§ 112-312. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings if
any made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the reviewing board. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for
in the rules of the Board.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or at
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, c. 231, Laws of New
Jersey 1975. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be deemed a
regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9.
§ 112-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-313
1:651
§ 112-313. Fees.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which is not otherwise provided by ordinance may be provided for and
adopted as part of the rules of the Board and copies of said rules or of the
separate fee schedule shall be available to the public.
§ 112-314. Hearings.
§ 112-315. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 1938 (N.J.S.A. 2A-67A1 et seq.) shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at this expense.
A. Public notice shall be given in time for a publication date in the official
newspaper of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
§ 112-313 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-315
1:652
whether located within or without the municipality in which
application's land is located. Such notice shall be given by:
(1) Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on said current tax
duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
(2) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
C. Notice to a partnership may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to the corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
D. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required by
the given pursuant to § 112-315B to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Somerset County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the New
Jersey State Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to a state highway.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10h.
H. All notices hereby above specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
I. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
J. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
matters to be considered, identification of the property proposed for
§ 112-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-315
1:653
§ 112-316. List of property owners furnished.115
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12C, the Department of
Community Development shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is more, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of
names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to § 112-315B of this chapter.
§ 112-317. Decisions.
§ 112-318. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of such
decision or memorialization thereof.
§ 112-319. Appeals.
Any party desiring to appeal the decision of the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment where they have approved or granted a variance
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 112-295 and § 112-307H of this chapter may
appeal t the Township Council, provided that such appeal shall be made
within 10 days of the date of publication of final decision of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board.
development by street address if any, and by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office and the location and times at which the maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board which shall include findings of fact
and conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the reviewing board who shall make a copy such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 112-315 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-320
1:654
§ 112-320. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on said property.
Any approvals or other relief granted by either Board shall be conditioned
upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the making
of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the
municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 112-320.1. Submittal of digital copies of application materials.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 4089-14]
In addition to other submittal requirements in Chapter 112, all application
submittals to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be submitted in digital format in Adobe Acrobat format (.PDF/A or .PDF/
E standard of a resolution of at least 400 dpi). The requirement for digital
submittals shall include all required application forms as well as all other
application submittals, including but not limited to all submittals prepared
by licensed professionals, and all surveys, subdivision plans, site plans,
architectural plans, environmental assessments, traffic reports, stormwater
reports, stormwater maintenance agreements, planning reports, cover
letters or other official correspondence, deeds, easements, and cost
estimates. In addition to other submittal requirements in Chapter 112,
submittal of such digital submittals shall be required to constitute an
application for development and shall be resubmitted as the submittals
may be changed or amended. Single- or two-family homeowners preparing
submittals on their own behalf for application before the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be subject to this requirement.
Further, this requirement shall not apply to submittal of the W-9 form which
shall be submitted in hard copy only.
§ 112-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-320.1
1:655

ARTICLE XXXIX
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 112-321. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Township and such other officers as may
from time to time be designated by the Mayor and Council. The police
officers of the Township shall bring to the attention of the Code
Enforcement Officer any violations. In no case shall a permit be granted
for the construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion, removal or
destruction of any building which would be in violation of any provision in
this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his duly
authorized assistants to cause any building, plans or permits to be inspected
and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any conditions found
to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter, and he shall have the
right to enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course of
his duties.
§ 112-322. Records.
§ 112-323. Applications for building permits.
All applications for building permits shall be made in the manner prescribed
in the Building Code.
§ 112-324. Certificates and permits.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to keep a record of
all applications for building permits, a record of all permits issued, and
a record of all certificates of occupancy, together with a notation of all
special conditions involved. He shall file and safety keep copies of all
plans submitted and the same shall form a part of the records of his
office and shall be available for the use of the Township Council or of
other officials of the Township of Franklin.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the
governing body summarizing for the period since his last previous
report all building permits and certificates issued by him and all
complaints of violations and the action taken by him consequent
thereto. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the Township Tax
Assessor at the time it is filed with the Township Council.
A. Temporary use permits. It is recognized that it may be in accordance
with this chapter to permit temporary activities for a limited period of
time, which activities may be prohibited by other provisions of this
chapter. If such uses are of such a nature and so located that at the time
of petition they will in no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of
the land and activities normally permitted in the zone or they contribute
materially to the welfare of the Township, particularly in a state of
emergency under conditions peculiar to the time and place involved,
§ 112-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-324
1:657
§ 112-325. Violations and penalties.
the Board of Adjustment may, subject to all regulations for the issuance
of building permits elsewhere specified, direct the Code Enforcement
Officer to issue a permit for a period not to exceed six months. Such
period may be extended not more than once for an additional period of
six months.
B. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of or to occupy any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, located,
erected, changed, converted or enlarged wholly or partly, until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for those premises.
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the
street on which said building or dwelling faces is at least paved
with all layers except finishing coat and all utilities have been
installed, and when required, curbs and sidewalks have been
installed as well. Such occupancy permit shall be granted or denied
within 10 days from the date that a written application is filed with
the Building Inspector stating that the erection or alteration is
completed. In the event of a denial, the applicant shall have a right
of appeal to the Mayor and Council which will set a date for the
hearing, at which time the applicant shall be heard and have an
opportunity to be represented by counsel and present witnesses.
(3) A duplicate copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be filed with
the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer. Copies shall be
furnished on request to the Planning Board or to any person having
a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
C. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the commencement of a use
or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, or
installation of a structure or building. The Zoning Permit shall
acknowledge that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or variance duly authorized by a
municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70 of the
Municipal Land Use Law. There shall be no fees charged for a zoning
permit.
A. If, before a final approval of a subdivision has been obtained, any
person who transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision on which by this chapter the
approving authority is required to act, such person shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $1,000, and each parcel, plat or lot so disposed of
shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1) Any owner or agent, any person or corporation who shall violate
any other provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or
§ 112-324 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-325
1:658
with any of the requirements thereof, and who shall erect,
structurally alter, enlarge, rebuild or move any building or
buildings or any structure, or who shall put into use in violation of
any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder,
or who shall refuse reasonable opportunity to inspect any premises,
shall be subject to the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000;
imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 90 days; a period of
community service of not to exceed 90 days. Each and every day
such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation. [Amended 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3959]
(2) The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof
where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall
exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have
assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall each be
guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction therefor shall be
liable to the penalties specified in Subsection A(1) above.
[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
(3) In addition to the foregoing, such other remedies set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 shall be available to the municipality.
B. Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership or other entity who shall violate any term, condition or
restriction contained in any easement, or any legal restriction upon real
property which shall have been created in accordance with or pursuant
to any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable for the
penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, or required
to implement a restoration plan prepared by the Planning Board, or
collectively to the fine, restoration and imprisonment. [Amended
2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall
exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have
assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall each be
guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction therefor shall be
liable to a find or imprisonment or both hereinbefore specified.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, such other remedies set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 shall be available to the municipality.
§ 112-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-325
1:659

ARTICLE XL
Fees
[Amended 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 3560]
§ 112-326. Payment required.
§ 112-327. Schedule of fees.
All developers or appellants to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment,
Construction Official, Township Engineer or Township Council shall pay the
applicable fees in accordance with Schedule 7 at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-328. (Reserved)116
§ 112-329. Tax map and geographic information system (GIS)
maintenance fees.
A. All fees as hereinafter required shall be payable to the administrative
officer at the time of filing any application for development; provided,
however, that fees required for matters relating to the Township
Council shall be payable to the Township Clerk.
B. All permits, determinations, resolutions or certificates of approval are
subject to the payment of all fees provided for in this chapter, and no
approvals shall be given by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
until proof has been submitted to them that the requisite fees have, in
fact, been paid to the administrative officer.
A. The following fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of adoption
of a resolution of subdivision or site plan approval by the Municipal
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment of Franklin Township for the
cost of making upgrades and modifications to the Tax Maps and
geographic information system (GIS) of Franklin Township relating to
said applications. These fees are subject to modification as needed by
adoption of a resolution of the Township Council.
Tax Map Fee GIS Fee
Minor subdivision:
2 to 3 lots $300.00 $300.00
Tax Map Fee GIS Fee
Final major subdivisions:
4 to 7 lots $750.00 $750.00
8 to 12 lots $1,300.00 $1,300.00
13 to 19 lots $1,800.00 $1,800.00
20 lots or more $2,100.00 $2,100.00
116. Editor's Note: Former § 112-328, Waiver of fees, was repealed 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3767.
§ 112-326 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-329
1:661
Tax Map Fee GIS Fee
Plus $75.00 per lot in excess of 20
Site plans $300.00 $300.00
B. Payments by escrow fees required hereunder shall be an expressed
condition of any subdivision or site plan approval granted by the
Franklin Township Municipal Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
C. At the time the final plat is submitted for signature of the municipal
officials, the applicant shall submit CAD-generated data file(s),
prepared by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor, directly translatable
into an identical image of the file map. The file shall be transmitted on a
standard three-and-one-half-inch floppy disk or standard compact disk.
D. The format shall be either:
(1) A CADD drawing; or
(2) An ASCII drawing interchange file (i.e., a "DXF" extension file)
compatible with AutoCAD Release 13 or later.
E. All required information shall appear on separate layers of the drawing.
F. Text shall also appear on a separate layer of the drawing.
G. The file must be drawn at its real New Jersey Plan Coordinates NAD83
(or the most current State Plane Coordinate System) position and the
view must be unrotated so that the NJPCS North points
orthographically up (vertical) in the screen. The drawing shall identify,
at a minimum, three monument markers distributed around the corners
of the tract. These monument markers shall be identified in US survey
feet.
H. The information required in the data file(s) shall be:
(1) All required information submitted on the final plat which shall
appear on separate layers of the drawing.
(2) The location of all existing and proposed signage and catch basins,
to be given as a layer in the CADD drawing.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed culverts, given as the
center of the structure at the center line of the roadway, to be given
as a layer in the CADD drawing.
(4) The data file(s) shall contain any site description information, as
required by the Franklin Township Municipal Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment. This data includes site description
information shown on the preliminary plan and/or site plan, and
any data given by the applicant after initial plans are submitted.
Site description information shall include the following information
§ 112-329 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-329
1:662
as deemed applicable by the Franklin Township Municipal Planning
Board:
(a) Wetlands.
(b) Marshes, ponds, lakes.
(c) Vegetated areas.
(d) Endangered species habitats.
(e) Steep slopes.
(f) Floodplains.
(g) Conservation easement and open space.
(h) Streams and stream corridors.
(i) Distinctive scenic and/or historic features.
I. At the discretion of the applicant, the Municipal Surveyor who
maintains the Tax Map can be requested to do the required conversion
to CAS based on those hourly fees listed in the Surveyor's annual
professional services agreement.
§ 112-329 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-329
1:663

ARTICLE XLI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 112-330. Continuance of existing applications for development.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be continued, but any appeals arising from decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by this chapter.
§ 112-331. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Township Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Township Clerk shall also file with the said County Planning Board copies of
all other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use.
§ 112-332. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, including "An ordinance to limit and
restrict to specified districts or zones or to regulate therein, buildings and
structures, according to their construction and the nature and extent of
their use in Franklin Township, Somerset County, New Jersey", originally
adopted August 8, 1940, all amendments and supplements thereto, and
"An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
subdivision of land within the Township of Franklin pursuant to the
authority set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and amendments and
supplements thereof; setting forth the procedure to be following by the
Planning Board in apply and administering these rules, regulations and
standards; and providing penalties for the violation thereof" which are
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 112-333. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication
according to law, and filing with the County Planning Board in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 112-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-333
1:665

ARTICLE XLII
D&R Canal Area Redevelopment Plan
[Added 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3622]
§ 112-334. Introduction.
A. Historic preservation is an important priority within Franklin Township,
and the Township has been aggressive in its efforts to preserve
evidence of its long and rich history. Such efforts have resulted in the
preservation of individual historic sites and numerous historic villages
through historic district designation, preservation-oriented
development regulations, creation of the Township's Historic
Preservation Commission, purchase of historic sites, preservation of
green belts around historical villages and the Township's historic grant
program.
B. The D&R Canal plays a particularly important role in the Township's
history. The construction of the canal in the 19th Century reinforced the
Township's important location in the region, and the preponderance of
historic sites and districts along the Canal bears this out. In fact, a
number of local, state and/or nationally designed historic districts are
located along the Canal in Franklin and surrounding communities,
including the D&R Canal Historic District, the Kingston Historic
District, the Griggstown Historic District, the Rocky Hill Historic
District and the East Millstone Historic District, as well as numerous
individual sites and structures that tell the story of the Canal's
importance to the history of the Township and region.
C. While efforts to preserve the Township's history have been widely
successful, the condition of certain sites and structures in the
Township's historic areas negatively impact the Township's heritage. At
the Township's request, three such areas were evaluated in the "D&R
Canal Area Redevelopment Study" prepared by Heyer, Gruel &
Associates in order to determine whether each qualified as an area in
need of redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment Housing
Law (LRHL). The three areas evaluated consisted of the Stavola Area
(Block 8, Lot 1 and Block 9, Lot 1); Laurie Rubber Area (Block 60, Lots
12 through 21 and Block 2, Lots 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 and 10), and the Franklin
Inn - Onka Bus Area (Block 512, Lot 4). Based on the results of that
study, the Planning Board found that these three areas were indeed in
need of redevelopment and that the redevelopment process could help
facilitate the preservation of historic structures that are currently at
risk. Following the Planning Board's findings, the Township Council
determined that these areas constituted "areas in need of
redevelopment."
D. The three areas that are the subject of this redevelopment plan (i.e., the
Stavola, Laurie Rubber and Franklin Inn - Onka Bus areas indicated
above) are all located in designated historic districts adjacent to the
Delaware and Raritan Canal and the Millstone River. Additionally, all
§ 112-334 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-334
1:667
§ 112-335. Contents of the redevelopment plan.
This redevelopment plan serves as the formal planning document for the
revitalization and/or redevelopment of these areas. According to the LRHL,
the redevelopment plan shall include an outline for the planning,
development, redevelopment or rehabilitation of the project area sufficient
to indicate:
three areas are located along the Millstone River Valley Byway, a New
Jersey state-designated scenic byway. A corridor management plan
is currently being prepared by NJDOT which will include a vision
statement, a visual survey of resources, a survey of development along
the byway, safety and accident analyses, a signage study and a multimodal
usage study. The strategic plan for the corridor will evaluate
tourism opportunities, provide a marketing plan and will provide
summary recommendations for the corridor. It is anticipated that the
plans will provide recommendations for safety improvements along the
byway. The plans are estimated to be completed in Spring 2006.
E. Map 1 shows the locations of these areas within the Township as a
whole. The location of the areas is shown in greater detail in Maps 2
and 3.117
F. Map 2 shows the location of the "Stavola Area," consisting of two lots at
the corner of Old Georgetown Road and Canal Road, both located
within the Delaware and Raritan Canal and Rocky Hill Historic Districts
and each containing a structure of historic significance.
G. The "Laurie Rubber Area," shown on Map 3, consists primarily of vacant
property in East Millstone that was formerly the site of a rubber factory
and, before that, a gin mill. The area is located within the Delaware and
Raritan Canal Historic District and the East Millstone Historic District.
H. The "Onka Bus-Franklin Inn Area," also shown on Map 3, is located
within the Delaware and Raritan Canal Historic District and just outside
of the heart of the East Millstone village. The site consists of an automaintenance
use and a historic inn. The inn is an important historic
resource dating to colonial times.
I. This report is written pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7 of the LRHL which
provides that "no redevelopment projects shall be undertaken or
carried out except in accordance with a redevelopment plan adopted by
ordinance of the municipal governing body upon its finding that the
specifically delineated project area is located in an area in need of
redevelopment or an area in need of rehabilitation or in both..."
according to criteria set forth in Section 5 or Section 14 of P.L. 1992,
c.79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5 or 40A:12A-14), as appropriate.
117. Editor's Note: Maps referenced are on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-334 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-335
1:668
§ 112-336. Area description and analysis.
Franklin Township is a large and diverse community consisting of rural,
suburban, and more urbanized areas. The Township consists of nearly 47
square miles with a population in 2000 of nearly 51,000. The Township is
located in a triangle between three regional population and employment
centers: New Brunswick to the east, the Bridgewater-Somerville-Raritan
area to the north, and the Princeton corridor to the south. As shown on Map
1,118 the three redevelopment areas are located in less developed portions
of the Township, along its western border. All the sites are located adjacent
to the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park. The canal parallels the east
bank of the Millstone River, which forms the western boundary of Franklin
Township.
A. Its relationship to definitive local objectives as to appropriate land uses,
density of population and improved traffic and public transportation,
public utilities, recreational and community facilities and other public
improvements;
B. Proposed land uses and building requirements in the area;
C. Adequate provision for the temporary and permanent relocation, as
necessary, of residents in the project area, including an estimate of the
extent to which decent, safe and sanitary dwelling units affordable to
displaced residents will be available to them in the existing local
housing market;
D. An identification of any property within the redevelopment area which
is proposed to be acquired in accordance with the redevelopment plan;
E. Any significant relationship of the redevelopment plan to:
(1) The master plans of contiguous municipalities;
(2) The master plan of the county in which the municipality is located;
and
(3) The State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant
to the State Planning Act P.L. 1985, c. 398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et
seq.)
A. The Stavola Area.
(1) The Stavola Area, shown on Map 2, consists of two properties at the
corner of Canal Road and Old Georgetown Road. Located five miles
from Princeton and directly across the D&R Canal and the
Millstone River from the Borough of Rocky Hill, the area is rural
and characterized by steep slopes. The area forms part of the
designated Rocky Hill and D & R Canal Historic Districts, all of
which are listed on the State and National Register of Historic
118. Editor's Note: Said Map is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-335 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-336
1:669
Places. The structures on each of these lots were also found eligible
for individual listing on the National Register in a study conducted
by A.D. Marble Associates in 2002. The structures on these lots
are the last remaining remnants of a historic mill village located
on the east side of the Millstone River. Both have been used as
rental residences in recent years, but they are currently vacant and
boarded up.
(2) The structure on Block 8, Lot 1 was constructed in the early 1700s,
is representative of 18th century Dutch architecture, and was
associated with prominent landowning families in the area. Some of
the walls of the structure on Block 9, Lot 1 were constructed
possibly as early as the late 18th century, though the structure has
been largely rebuilt since that time. The structure served as a
saloon for mill workers and canal travelers in the late 19th century.
(3) The redevelopment study found that the area's historic significance
is not being properly utilized for the furtherance of the public
welfare. The two residential buildings in the area are in a
deteriorated condition, rendering them substandard, unsafe and
unfit for occupation. The redevelopment study found that because
the buildings are unfit for occupation, and because there are no
barriers preventing access to the buildings, the location of the
subject buildings adjacent to the heavily used Delaware & Raritan
Canal Park poses a threat to public safety for anyone entering the
buildings. However, the redevelopment study found that the area's
location adjacent to the Canal and within designated historic
districts provides an important opportunity for historic
preservation.
(4) The development of these resources, however, is hindered by
difficult topographical and site conditions, and the years of neglect
the sites have experienced. Block 8, Lot 1 is an irregularly shaped
one-tenth-acre lot occupying the crook created by the sharply
angled intersection of Old Georgetown Road and Canal Road. The
lot is located in the floodplain and has a steep slope on its east side.
Block 9, Lot 1 is four acres in size and is located opposite Old
Georgetown Road from Block 8, Lot 1. It consists of two sections, a
residential section and an agricultural section. The residential
section, which contains the structure described above, is in the
floodplain. The larger, agricultural section of the property is
located atop a steep slope located just east of the structure and is
unused and contains some landscaping. These constraints must be
taken into account in the planning of the area. Further, applications
for development on lands near the Delaware and Raritan Canal
must be submitted to and receive a favorable approval from the
Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
B. Laurie Rubber Area.
§ 112-336 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-336
1:670
(1) The Laurie Rubber Area consists of several parcels of primarily
vacant land in the historic East Millstone community, which
consists of a roughly seventy-acre village dating to the early 1800s.
The area is in a key location near the center of the historic East
Millstone community and adjacent to the D&R Canal State Park
(see Map 3). The area is located within both the Delaware and
Raritan Canal Historic District and the East Millstone Historic
District, both of which are listed on the State and National Register
of Historic Places. The historic East Millstone community is also
located within one of the Township's historic overlay zoning
districts. The Laurie Rubber Area consists of Block 60, Lots 18
through 21 and Block 62, Lots 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 and 10.
(2) The main parcel, Block 60, Lots 18 through 21, is located between
the D&R Canal and Market Street. The parcel is the site of a former
rubber factory that closed its operations in February 1983. Though
they were determined by the Franklin Township Historic
Preservation Commission to be historically significant, the factory
buildings deteriorated rapidly during the 1980s and were
demolished in 1990. The main parcel, Block 60, Lots 18 through 21,
is currently a vacant, grassy field, interspersed with young trees.
As discussed in the redevelopment study, the property's current
bucolic appearance belies its long history as East Millstone's major
industrial site. As early as 1846, mattresses were being produced
on the site using a husking mill. By 1859, the site was being used as
a distillery, converting grain produced in the surrounding rural
area into gin and also for the production of bakers' yeast. In 1910,
the facility was converted into a rubber-recycling factory which
operated until February 1983, just before the ECRA
(Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act) went into effect. An
ECRA file (Case No. 84-278) was opened on the facility in 1984
when it appeared the property was going to be sold. The facility
was found at the time to contain environmental contamination.
However, the ECRA case was closed when the sale fell through. By
1989, significant deterioration had occurred at the facility, which
was found by the Township Office of Fire Prevention to pose an
imminent health and safety hazard. A demolition permit was issued
in 1990, and the site was cleared and cleaned to its current state.
While it is believed that some degree of environmental cleanup
occurred, the level of contamination that remains is unknown. The
unknown level of remaining contamination on the site has likely
hindered its redevelopment.
(3) Several parcels between Market and Williams Streets are included
in the Laurie Rubber Area as well, because they remain under
common ownership with the main parcel. Most of these parcels are
also vacant; however, two of the parcels contain a garage and a
storage building. Possible environmental contamination may have
occurred on this property and has likely contributed to the lack of
§ 112-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-336
1:671
redevelopment. An environmental study will need to be conducted
prior to redevelopment.
(4) It is noted that applications for development on lands adjacent to
the Delaware and Raritan Canal must be submitted to and receive a
favorable approval from the Delaware and Raritan Canal
Commission. The Commission's requirements pose a substantial
impediment to new construction in the area between Market Street
and the canal and limit the amount of new construction that could
take place elsewhere in the area.
C. Onka Bus-Franklin Inn Area.
(1) The Onka Bus-Franklin Inn Area, at 4.4 acres in size, is located on
the north side of Amwell Road, across from the heart of the historic
East Millstone community and within the Delaware and Raritan
Canal Historic District (see Map 3). The area is located adjacent to
the D&R Canal Park and is across Amwell Road from a small park
and several historic buildings currently used for retail and offices.
The Onka Bus-Franklin Inn Area consists of Block 512, Lot 4.
(2) The area contains a historic inn adjacent to the canal. The inn has
been documented on the Historic American Building Survey
(Reference No. NJ-648). The two-story frame inn was originally
constructed as a farmhouse in 1752 but was expanded into an inn
during the 19th century. The inn closed during the Prohibition era,
and the property has been under its current ownership since the
mid-20th century. Since the 1960s, the inn has housed a canoe
rental service, an antique store, and is currently leased to the
Blackwells Mills Canal House Association. A small used bookstore
is operated in the building on an intermittent basis. The exterior of
the inn appears to be in fair condition and has recently been
scraped, primed and repainted. However, damage to the interior
has been recorded.
(3) The area includes a complex of much newer buildings, located to
the east of the inn, that had recently served as a bus depot but now
appears to be used primarily for vehicular maintenance and repair.
There is a gravel parking area between these newer buildings and
the historic inn, as well as a parking area in front of the newer
buildings. A large gravel yard on the east side of the property and
visible from the Village of East Millstone is used for vehicle storage
and additional parking. The property formerly included a gas
station and contained six underground oil storage tanks, which
were removed in 1991. An assessment of environmental
contamination on the site would be needed if the site were to be
redeveloped.
(4) The redevelopment study found that the presence of the bus depot
use is deleterious to the surrounding community and the historic
inn, that its presence hinders the rehabilitation of the Franklin Inn
§ 112-336 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-336
1:672
§ 112-337. Community input.
§ 112-338. Goals and objectives of the redevelopment plan.
Maintaining the character of the Township's existing historic villages (e.g.,
Griggstown and East Millstone) is one of the Township's primary land
use planning goals, as reflected in the Township's Master Plan. This
redevelopment plan is consistent with the Master Plan's historic
preservation goals and objectives, and, in fact, is intended to achieve them
with respect to these areas. The primary goal of this redevelopment plan is
the preservation and enhancement of the historic resources located in and
around historic villages. The specific intent and objectives related to the
three areas follow.
and is harmful to the adjacent East Millstone historic village, and
that the negative visual impacts from the use are visible from both
the Inn and the East Millstone community.
(5) Applications for development on lands adjacent to the Canal must
be submitted to and receive a favorable approval from the
Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission. The Commission's
requirements significantly limit the amount of new or additional
development that could take place in the area.
A. Community input has been an important component of this
redevelopment plan. The Township initiated an outreach effort
designed to solicit input from residents in the surrounding areas,
property owners, and community and historic preservation
stakeholders. The redevelopment plan was prepared based on the input
received at those meetings as well as from the input of Township
representatives, professional staff and consultants.
B. At the onset of the preparation of this redevelopment plan, the
Township Council held an open public meeting during which interested
residents and community stakeholders were welcome to offer their
opinions regarding the planning of these three areas. This meeting was
very well attended and numerous people offered input. In addition, the
Township solicited and received written comments for a number of
weeks following the public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting
and written input received can be found in the appendix.119
C. The Township also held separate meetings with the State's Brownfields
Redevelopment Inter-Agency Team (BRIT) and the Delaware and
Raritan Canal Commission in order to fully understand redevelopment
options in the three areas.
A. Stavola Area. The intent of this plan with respect to this area is the
acquisition, enhancement and preservation of the historic structures
119. Editor's Note: The appendix to the redevelopment study is on file in the Township Clerk's
office.
§ 112-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-338
1:673
located on the two properties in the area. The Township intends to
acquire the structures as the most direct and effective means of
ensuring their preservation and enhancement. After the structures are
obtained, the Township will have the buildings secured with respect
to vandalism and trespassing, will seek to restore the exterior of the
buildings in a manner that is appropriate to the historic context of
each building and which will involve the removal of any modern
appurtenances on the building exteriors. Preservation of these
buildings is important, as they represent the last remnants of a historic
mill village located along the east side of the Millstone River. As a
result, it is intended that tours of the buildings could be conducted on
a periodic basis in coordination with a nonprofit organization dedicated
to historic preservation (e.g., the Meadows Foundation).
B. Laurie Rubber Area. The intent of the redevelopment area with respect
to the Laurie Rubber Area is the provision of open space and
redevelopment that is consistent with scale and character of the
historic East Millstone village. On the main parcel (i.e., the land
between Market Street and the canal), the primary intent of the
redevelopment plan is the provision of open space capitalizing on the
parcel's proximity to the canal, although the plan allows for singlefamily
development in accordance with the R-10H District if such
development were to be permitted by the D&R Commission. On the
south side of Market Street, the redevelopment plan calls for
redevelopment that is consistent with the nature of the historic village,
consisting of single-family residential development in accordance with
the requirements of the R-10H District and/or the adaptive reuse of the
existing buildings for single-family residential or professional office use.
C. Franklin Inn-Onka Bus Area.
(1) The principal objective regarding the Franklin Inn — Onka Bus
Area are: the preservation and restoration of the historic Franklin
Inn building and the acquisition of the Onka Bus facility for the
purposes of converting it to open space. However, if conversion of
the Onka site to open space is found to be infeasible, than the
objective would be the reuse of the Onka Bus building and site in a
manner that is more compatible with the historic East Millstone
Village and which capitalizes on, and is more consistent with, its
location adjacent to the D&R Canal. If the Onka Bus facility is
redeveloped, the rear portion (which adjoins Colonial Park) would
ideally be offered to the County for open space purposes.
(2) The objective regarding the Franklin Inn site is the restoration,
permanent preservation and continued maintenance of the building
and surrounding area in a manner that stresses its unique historic
relationship to the Canal area in conjunction with the adjacent
Bridgetender's House. In order to achieve this, it is intended that
the Franklin Inn would be separated from its current ownership
through municipal acquisition. This acquisition would involve
subdivision of the existing site, placing the Franklin Inn and Onka
§ 112-338 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-338
1:674
§ 112-339. Relationship to Township land development regulations.
Bus facilities on separate lots. The Franklin Inn would then be
managed by either the Township or another entity interested in the
preservation, restoration and management of this historic building
(e.g., the Meadows Foundation which has expressed such interest).
The building would be used in a manner that is consistent with the
historic nature of the building and surrounding area. As indicated
in the Maps 4a and 4b,120 parking would be provided to the rear
of the Inn for the purpose of serving visitors of the Inn and the
adjacent Bridgetender's House.
(3) As indicated above, it is intended that the Onka Bus facility would
be put to open space use or reused in a manner that is more
compatible with the surrounding area. Conversion of the Onka Bus
site to open space is reflected in Map 4a. Reuse and redevelopment
of the Onka Bus facility would occur only if the following is
provided (such redevelopment is depicted on Map 4b):
(a) Provision of a larger natural buffer between the canal and the
developed portion of the site;
(b) Reduction in the amount of impervious surface (i.e., paved
area);
(c) Improvements to on-site stormwater management;
(d) Provision of a trailway connection between Colonial Park and
the Delaware and Raritan Canal towpath;
(e) Improvement of the Amwell Road street frontage; and
(f) Aesthetic improvements to the Onka Bus building and site.
A. The areas shall be redeveloped in accordance with the standards
detailed in this redevelopment plan. The plan supersedes the use and
bulk provisions of the Township land development regulations for these
areas unless specifically referenced. Other standards, definition,
submission and development review requirements relating to all zones
in the Township, including affordable housing development fees, shall
apply. In addition, development and redevelopment in these areas shall
continue to be subject to the review of the Township Historic
Preservation Commission and shall be subject to the Township Historic
Preservation Ordinance, including but not limited to applicable
architectural review standards of such ordinance. The Township's
Zoning Map shall be amended to identify the redevelopment area.
B. Any deviation from standards of this plan that results in a "d" variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall be addressed as an amendment to
the plan rather than via variance relief through the Township's Zoning
120. Editor's Note: The maps referenced are on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-338 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-339
1:675
§ 112-340. Land use and building requirements.
The following land use standards apply to the individual districts comprising
the redevelopment area.
Board of Adjustment. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant
relief from other bulk and dimensional requirement of this plan to the
same extent as the Board may grant relief from bulk and dimensional
requirements pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law. All development
must be approved by the Planning Board and shall be submitted
through the normal site plan and subdivision procedures as identified
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D et seq.
C. The Planning Board may grant deviations from the regulations
contained within this redevelopment plan where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of
property or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions,
preexisting structures and physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, the strict application of any area, yard, bulk
or design objective or regulation adopted pursuant to this
redevelopment plan, would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional or undue hardship upon, the developer or
redeveloper of such property. The Planning Board may also grant a
deviation from the regulations contained within this redevelopment
plan related to a specific piece of property where the purposes of this
redevelopment plan would be advanced by such deviation from the
strict application of the requirements of this plan and the benefits of
granting the deviation would outweigh any detriments.
D. The Planning Board may grant exceptions or waivers from design
standards from the requirements for site plan or subdivision approval
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for site plan review and/or subdivision approval within the
plan, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the plan is
impracticable or would exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to this site. No deviations may be granted under
the terms of this section unless such deviations can be granted without
resulting in substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the redevelopment
plan. No deviations may be granted which will result in permitting a use
that is not a permitted use within in this redevelopment plan. An
application requesting a deviation from the requirements of this
redevelopment plan shall provide public notice of such application in
accordance with the public notice requirement set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
A. Stavola Area. Old Georgetown District (District Map on Map 5).121
(1) Principal permitted uses: low-intensity public or quasi-public use.
121. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-339 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-340
1:676
(2) Lot and bulk requirements: No change shall be permitted to
existing lot area, lot frontage or yard setbacks, and no increase
shall be permitted with respect to impervious coverage or lot
(building) coverage.
(3) Additional development standards.
(a) Existing trees and vegetated areas shall be preserved to the
maximum degree possible. Particular attention shall be paid to
the preservation of individual trees (particularly those with a
diameter at breast height greater than three inches) and to the
preservation of vegetated areas around the perimeter of the
site.
(b) Any rehabilitation of existing buildings shall be done in a
manner that is consistent and compatible with the historic
context/architecture and integrity of each of the buildings and
shall involve the removal of any modern appurtenances on the
building exteriors.
B. Laurie Rubber Area. Market Street Zone (see District Map 6).122
(1) Principal permitted uses:
(a) Open space.
(b) Uses permitted in the R-10H District, including single-family
dwellings.
(c) Adaptive reuse of the existing buildings as single-family
residential or professional office use (excluding medical or
dental offices and other such offices that involve regular
visitation from clients or customers).
(2) Lot and bulk requirements.
(a) Adaptive reuse of the existing buildings:
[1] Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: no less than currently existing.
[4] Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
[6] Maximum lot (building) coverage: 20%.
[7] Maximum impervious surface coverage: 40%.
[8] Minimum parking lot setback: 10 feet.
122. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 112-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-340
1:677
[9] Off-street parking: as required by Township Development
Ordinance, but not exceeding eight on-site parking spaces.
[10] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
(b) Uses permitted in the R-10H District: subject to requirements
of the use applicable in the R-10H District.
(3) Signage.
(a) Adaptive reuse of the existing buildings for professional office
use.
[1] Permitted signage and maximum number of signs: one
business identification sign shall be permitted. Such sign
shall be limited to either a wall-mounted or projecting sign
mounted to the building.
[2] Maximum sign area: four square feet.
[3] Sign design: The signage shall be constructed only of highquality
materials such as carved wood, architecturallytreated
metal, and/or stone. All sign appurtenances, such
as mounting brackets for a projecting sign, shall be
similarly composed of high-quality materials that are
consistent with the design of the sign.
[4] Placement: The sign shall only be placed on a building
facade that faces street frontage. If a projecting sign is
employed, it shall: be positioned perpendicular to the
building facade; not project more than three feet from the
building facade, including any sign appurtenances; have at
least eight feet of clearance to the ground if located in an
area traversed by pedestrians; not project into an area
traversed by vehicles; and not project into the public rightof-
way.
[5] Maximum height: The maximum height to the top of the
sign and sign appurtenances shall be 14 feet or the height
of the sill or bottom of any second-story window,
whichever is less.
[6] Illumination: Only an externally-lighted sign shall be
permitted. Such lighting shall be of such design so as to
illuminate only the face of the sign and shall be of such
power minimally necessary for such illumination. The
design of such lighting shall be compatible with the
historic character of the neighborhood and shall be
complementary to the design of the sign and building.
(b) Uses permitted in the R-10H District: subject to requirements
applicable in the R-10H District.
§ 112-340 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-340
1:678
(4) Additional development standards.
(a) Existing trees and vegetated areas shall be preserved to the
maximum degree possible. Particular attention shall be paid to
the preservation of individual trees, particularly those with a
diameter at breast height greater than three inches, and to the
preservation of vegetated areas around the perimeter of the
site especially where adjoining residences.
(b) The adaptive reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings
shall be done in a manner that is consistent and compatible
with the architecture of the existing buildings and that is
consistent and compatible with the historic character of the
East Millstone Village.
(c) The parking lot setback area shall contain sufficient and
attractive planting, and/or stone walls (no greater than three
feet in height) and/or fencing designed to screen views of the
parking lot from adjoining properties and the street.
(d) Fences shall be no more than 50% opaque (i.e., picket or postand-
rail), shall be constructed of wood and shall be no greater
than four feet in height. If intended to screen a refuse area,
fencing may be more opaque but shall be constructed of wood
and shall be no greater than six feet in height.
C. Franklin Inn-Onka Bus Area.
(1) Onka Bus District:
(a) Principal permitted uses:
[1] Public or quasi-public use such as open space, museum,
library, community meeting space or other such uses.
[2] Restaurant, non-drive-through.
[3] Inn or bed-and-breakfast. An "inn" shall be defined as a
commercial establishment providing lodging and meals for
transients during short-term visits. Any structure used for
such a purpose shall provide not more than 10 guest rooms
for travelers and shall have full occupancy by paying
guests at not more than 25 persons. A "bed-and-breakfast"
shall be defined as an owner-occupied single-family
residence providing short-term lodging and a morning
meal to transients for compensation. The limit of time a
guest may stay in either such establishment shall be
limited to two weeks.
[4] Professional, medical or dental office.
[5] The following retail uses: antique store; candy store; ice
cream parlor; art and craft supply store; bookstores; and
§ 112-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-340
1:679
camera and photographic supply store. No other type of
retail uses shall be permitted.
[6] Art and photographic gallery and/or studio.
[7] Place of instruction for art, craft, music, dance and/or
photography.
(b) Lot and bulk requirements.
[1] Minimum lot area: four acres. However, lesser lot area
shall be permitted commensurate with the amount of any
land dedicated for open space.
[2] Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: no less than currently existing.
[4] Minimum side or rear yard: no less than currently existing.
[5] Maximum lot (building) coverage: 10,000 square feet.
[6] Floor area ratio (FAR): no greater than currently existing,
minus the rear warehouse/bus depot portion of the facility,
except if an art gallery or antique store is proposed, in
which case the rear warehouse/bus depot may be included
in the permitted FAR.
[7] Maximum impervious surface coverage: 25%, but no
greater than minimally necessary to meet the off-street
parking requirement for the use (plus associated
sidewalks, outdoor eating area and other necessary and
appropriate impervious surfaces). Any land dedicated for
open space may be included as part of the lot area in the
calculation of permitted impervious coverage.
[8] Minimum parking lot setback (front): 50 feet.
[9] Minimum parking lot setback (side): 50 feet from edge of
canal or 25 feet from side lot line whichever is greater (to
west): 25 feet from side lot (to east).
[10] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
[11]Off-street parking: as required by the Town Development
Ordinance.
(2) Franklin Inn District.
(a) Principal permitted uses: Public or quasi-public use, such as
open space, museum, library, community meeting space or
other such uses. Ancillary to the use of the building by a public
or nonprofit [501c(3)] entity, retail facilities serving a fundraising
purpose may be provided.
§ 112-340 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-340
1:680
(b) Lot and bulk requirements.
[1] Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage: 125 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: no less than currently existing.
[4] Minimum side rear yard: no less than currently existing.
[5] Maximum lot (building) coverage: 20%.
[6] Maximum impervious surface: 50%.
[7] Minimum parking lot setback (front): 50 feet.
[8] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
[9] Off-street parking: as required by the Town Development
Ordinance.
(3) Signage requirements for the Onka Bus and Franklin Inn Districts.
(a) Permitted signage and maximum number of signs.
Freestanding signage and building-mounted signage shall be
permitted in the following manner:
[1] Freestanding signage: Freestanding signage shall only be
provided in the form of a hanging sign. Not more than one
hanging sign shall be permitted per site. A hanging sign is
defined as a freestanding sign that is supported by the
extended arm of a single post.
[2] Building-mounted signage: Building-mounted signage
shall only be provided in the form of wall or projecting
signage. Not more than one wall or projecting sign shall be
permitted per business tenant.
(b) Maximum sign area: six square feet per sign.
(c) Maximum height: A hanging sign shall be no greater than six
feet in height as measured to the top of the sign with the
supporting post no greater than eight feet in height. The
maximum height to the uppermost portion of a buildingmounted
sign shall be 14 feet or the height of the sill or bottom
of any second-story window, whichever is less.
(d) Sign design: The signage shall be constructed only of highquality
materials, such as carved wood, architecturally-treated
metal, and/or stone. All sign appurtenances, such as mounting
brackets for a projecting sign, shall be similarly composed of
high-quality materials that are consistent with the design of
the sign.
§ 112-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-340
1:681
(e) Minimum setback: No part of a sign or sign appurtenances
shall be located closer than 10 feet from the front lot line or 20
feet from a side lot line.
(f) Placement of building-mounted signage: Signage shall only be
placed on a building facade that faces street frontage. If
projecting signage is employed, it shall: be positioned
perpendicular to the building facade; not project more than
three feet from the building facade, including any sign
appurtenances; have at least eight feet of clearance to the
ground if located in an area traversed by pedestrians; and not
project into an area traversed by vehicles.
(g) Illumination: Only externally-lighted signs shall be permitted.
Such lighting shall be of such design so as to illuminate only
the face of the sign and shall be of such power minimally
necessary for such illumination. The design of such lighting
shall be compatible with the historic character of the
neighborhood and shall be complementary to design of the sign
and building.
(4) Additional development standards. The following development
standards shall apply in both the Franklin Inn and Onka-Bus
Districts, as may be applicable:
(a) A naturally planted landscape buffer shall be provided between
the developed portion of the site and the D&R Canal. The
buffer shall be at least 50 feet in width as measured from the
edge of the Canal. The buffer shall consist of existing
vegetation and such additional native vegetation as is deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and the D&R Canal
Commission to provide a sufficient visual buffer and to
properly restore the Canal bank.
(b) The buffer along the Canal shall be provided in such a manner
that allows for possible future provision of a trailway
connection between Colonial Park and the D&R Canal towpath.
(c) The Planning Board may modify the fifty-foot landscape buffer
for the purpose of allowing an outdoor eating area accessory to
a restaurant, provided the following is satisfied: approval of the
D&R Canal Commission; minimal removal of existing trees
(with replacement of trees removed); bank stabilization and
restoration is achieved; sufficient waste collection is provided;
the outdoor eating area does not adversely affect the possible
future provision of a trailway connection between Colonial
Park and the D&R Canal tow path.
(d) The rear warehouse/bus depot portion of the Onka Bus facility
shall be removed in association with any proposal for
redevelopment of the facility, except if used in association with
an art gallery or antique store. If so retained, the exterior of
§ 112-340 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-340
1:682
the warehouse/bus depot portion of the Onka Bus facility shall
be improved to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(e) Redevelopment of the Onka-Bus facility shall incorporate
stormwater management improvements sufficient to bring the
site into compliance with all applicable requirements.
(f) An outdoor bathroom facility may be provided to the rear of the
Franklin Inn building to service the Inn and the adjacent
Bridgetender's House.
(g) Redevelopment and rehabilitation of the Onka Bus building
shall be done in a manner that substantially improves the
aesthetics of the building and that makes the building more in
keeping with its adjacency to a historic village and its location
within the Delaware and Raritan Canal Historic District.
(h) To the maximum extent possible, alternative paving materials
such as pavers shall be utilized in the parking area with asphalt
paving limited to areas necessary for handicapped access.
Curbing shall be Belgian block.
(i) No outside storage of vehicles or any other equipment or
storage shall be permitted.
(j) Redevelopment shall incorporate improvements to the
streetscape along Amwell Road consisting of a landscaped
front yard between Amwell Road and the building and the
parking lot (required above to be set back at least 50 feet from
the front lot line) and deciduous street trees along Amwell
Road of size, type and spacing consistent with Township
standards. The only impervious surfaces permitted within this
area shall be access drives leading to parking areas located
further back on the site and any curbing and sidewalks which
may be provided. If curbing is provided along the Amwell Road
frontage, it shall be Belgian block and shall be set back at least
10 feet from the white line delineating the edge of the
travelway.
(k) The parking lot setback areas shall contain sufficient and
attractive plantings and/or low fencing or walls designed to
screen views of the parking lot from adjoining properties and
the street.
(l) There shall be no removal of existing trees, except for that
minimally necessary and permitted by the D&R Canal
Commission for the provision of a trailway connection and the
provision of parking behind the Franklin Inn building. If any
trees must be replaced, an equivalent number must be planted
to replace them.
§ 112-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-340
1:683
§ 112-341. Relationship to definitive local objectives.
§ 112-342. Relationship to plans of other agencies.
The plan is consistent with the master plans of adjacent municipalities,
Somerset County and the State Development and Redevelopment Plan
(SDRP), as well as the planning policies of the Delaware and Raritan Canal
Commission.
(m) Fences shall be no more than 50% opaque (i.e., picket or postand-
rall), shall be constructed of wood and shall be no greater
than four feet in height. If intended to screen a refuse area,
fencing may be more opaque, but shall be constructed of wood
and shall be no greater than six feet in height.
(n) The shared use of parking between the two facilities shall be
encouraged.
D. Relocation. The plan does not require or propose the relocation of any
residents.
E. Property to be acquired. The redevelopment plan may require the
acquisition of properties through the use of eminent domain in
accordance with the LRHL. This plan authorizes the Township to
exercise its condemnation powers on all properties in the
redevelopment area, to acquire property or to eliminate any restrictive
covenants, easements or similar property interests which may
undermine the implementation in the plan. Private acquisition of these
properties by the redeveloper shall be pursued prior to any action by
the Township.
A. Franklin Township's Master Plan documents set forth a series of
planning goals and objectives for the Township. One of the principal
themes that runs through the Master Plan, most specifically in the Land
Use Element and the Historic Preservation Element, is the preservation
of historic resources and historic villages. One of the Master Plan's key
planning goals is preserving the character of the Township's historic
villages, including East Millstone and Griggstown. Related Master Plan
objectives consist of the following: enhancing design standards for
villages; discouraging the intrusion of incompatible uses; and
maintaining the "hard edge" between villages and environs. The new
Master Plan, currently under development, continues the emphasis on
historic preservation and maintenance of the character of the
Township's historic villages.
B. As mentioned above, these objectives of the Master Plan have guided
the development of this redevelopment plan. The "Relationship to plans
of other agencies" section, below, describes the relationship of the
redevelopment plan to the master plans of contiguous municipalities
and the County, the State Development and Redevelopment Plan and
the planning policies of the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
§ 112-340 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-342
1:684
A. State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(1) The redevelopment plan is consistent with and/or implements the
historic preservation goals, policies and strategies of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan (SDRP). As one might
expect, historic preservation is a key goal of the State Development
and Redevelopment Plan (SDRP). In fact, historic preservation is
addressed as part of the eight key goals of the SDRP in Goal No. 7:
"Preserve and enhance areas with historic, cultural, scenic, open
space and recreational value." As well, the following is an SDRPpolicy
related to historic preservation:
"Protect, enhance and, where appropriate, rehabilitate historic,
cultural and scenic resources by identifying, evaluating and
registering significant historic, cultural and scenic landscapes,
districts, structures, buildings, objects and sites and ensuring
that new growth and development is compatible with historic,
cultural and scenic values."
(2) The SDRP suggests a number of potential strategies intended to
help achieve the SDRP's policy of enhancement, preservation and
use of historic assets, including the adaptive reuse of historic
buildings and the following:
(a) Historic resources and development regulations. Protect the
character of historic sites, landscapes, structures and areas
through comprehensive planning, flexible application of zoning
ordinances, construction codes and other development
regulations.
(b) Historic resources and infrastructure. Locate and design
public and private capital improvements to protect historic
resources and their settings from the immediate and
cumulative effects of construction and maintenance of these
improvements.
(c) Identification and delineation of scenic and historic corridors.
Participate in the coordination of state, regional and local
government identification and delineation of scenic and
historic corridors throughout New Jersey, and take the
necessary steps to protect them.
(d) Greenways, scenic and historic corridors. Establish within a
regional greenway system publicly accessible portions of
scenic and historic corridors to provide passive and active
recreational and cultural opportunities.
(e) Development patterns and design to support scenic and
historic values. Manage development and redevelopment to
maintain, complement and enhance scenic and historic values
within identified and delineated scenic and historic corridors.
§ 112-342 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-342
1:685
(f) Protection and preservation of scenic and historic corridors.
Protect scenic and historic corridors by appropriate means and
preserve them by using easement purchase, density transfers,
fee-simple purchase and other innovative and effective
mechanisms.
(g) Museums. Support museums, libraries, interpretive centers,
archives and other public buildings as repositories of past
culture and showcases for contemporary culture, and locate
them in centers, where appropriate, as interconnected
components of community-based learning networks.
(h) Economic development. Use historic preservation as a tool to
promote economic development.
(3) The State Development and Redevelopment Plan (SDRP)
designates the Township of Franklin within a number of planning
areas. All three areas subject to this redevelopment plan are
located in the state-designated Rural/Environmentally Sensitive
Planning Area (PA4B). According to the SDRP, this planning area
consists of rural areas containing valuable ecosystems or wildlife
habitats worthy or preservation. The SDRP envisions that any
development or redevelopment planned in Rural/Environmentally
Sensitive Planning Areas would respect the natural resources and
environmentally sensitive features of the area. With respect to
historic preservation in Rural/Environmentally Sensitive Planning
Areas, the State Plan indicates the following specific policy
objective:
"Encourage the preservation and adaptive reuse of historic or
significant buildings, historic and cultural sites, neighborhoods
and districts in ways that will not compromise. either the historic
resource or the ability for a center to develop or redevelop.
Outside centers, coordinate historic preservation needs with open
space preservation efforts. Coordinate historic preservation with
tourism efforts."
B. Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
(1) The D&R Canal Commission is responsible for planning for the
future of the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park. The Canal
Commission sees an important role for the park that extends
beyond its value as a water supply system and popular recreational
destination. The Commission envisions the park as a spine for a
network of preserved wildlife habitat and recreation sites that
extends across central New Jersey, reaching into every community
in the region and giving definition to the region. By preserving
corridors along these streams as well as other associated natural
and historic sites, the Commission envisions a continuous network
of open space and historic sites that will help assure the
preservation of the physical and historic character of the region.
§ 112-342 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-342
1:686
(2) The Commission's vision is reflected in the development plan for
the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park (2003-2013) adopted by
the Commission in February 2003. The development plan outlines
30 projects it wishes to implement in order to further the
Commission's principal planning objectives, which include:
improved access to the park; restoration of Canal Park's historic
structures; and provision of links to neighboring natural and
historic places. The development plan acknowledges that
implementation of many of these projects will depend on the
formation of partnerships with counties and municipalities, with
nonprofit environmental and historic organizations and, where
appropriate, with corporations and businesses.
(3) Two of the 30 projects identified in the Commission's development
plan directly relate to this redevelopment plan. Foremost, the
development plan seeks to establish a link to Colonial Park. While
Colonial Park adjoins the Canal State Park, there is currently no
connection between the parks since the towpath is located on the
opposite side of the canal from Colonial Park. Connection of these
two parks will further the Commission's objective of providing a
regional system of interconnected open space and recreation
resources, with the Canal Park serving as the "spine." The
development plan identifies the construction of a pedestrian bridge
(possibly through the use of Federal T-21 funding) as the potential
means of providing this connection. However, with the recent
expansion of Colonial Park involving lands adjoining the Franklin
Inn/Onka Bus Area, opportunity exists to provide such a connection
through the Franklin Inn/Onka Bus site. This redevelopment plan
calls for such a connection. The genesis of this idea was the
Township's meeting with Commission staff.
(4) Another project potentially affected by this redevelopment plan is
the planned restoration and reuse of the East Millstone bridge
tender house (which is located immediately adjacent to the
Franklin Inn but outside of the redevelopment area). The
development plan indicates that the bridge tender house is an
important part of the Canal's history and that its restoration and
use will increase the public appreciation of the Canal as a historic
resource. The proposed restoration and reuse of the adjacent
Franklin Inn site would be compatible with the Commission's plans
for the bridge tender house, as would the planned improvement of
the Onka Bus facility.
(5) Preservation of the historic homes in the Stavola Area (which
represent last remaining remnants of a historic mill village) is
certainly consistent with the Commission's objective of preserving
historic resources along the Canal. The redevelopment plan's
proposals regarding the Laurie Rubber area (i.e., redevelopment
and/or preservation consistent with the scale and character of the
§ 112-342 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-342
1:687
neighborhood) are also consistent with the Commission's planning
objectives.
C. Somerset County.
(1) This redevelopment plan is consistent with and will help effectuate
the planning goals expressed in the County's planning documents.
The Somerset County Master Plan was adopted in 1987. A
reexamination of the master plan took place in 1998. The
protection and enhancement of historic, cultural and
archaeological sites and structures is identified as one of the "key
goals" of the County's Master Plan. Other key goals include the
preservation of agricultural areas and rural character and the
provision of contiguous open space areas. The plan outlines a
number of policies, implementation tools and planning strategies
intended to further the County's planning goals. The master plan
identified increased public awareness, supportive planning
measures and financial incentives as key planning strategies for
the protection and enhancement of historic, cultural and
archaeological sites and structures.
(2) Somerset County is currently in the process of preparing a Smart
Growth Strategic Plan (SGSP). The SGSP will serve to update the
County Master Plan adopted in 1987 and the 1998 Reexamination
Report. The County has developed guiding principles and planning
objectives as part of Phase I of the SGSP initiative. Promotion of the
County's historic heritage is among the many guiding principles
already developed by the County, along with other related items,
such as: protection of natural systems; preservation of rural
resource areas, farmland and agriculture; and provision of a
diverse, interconnected system of preserved open space and a
variety of recreational opportunities.
D. Adjacent municipalities.
(1) Borough of Rocky Hill. The Stavola Redevelopment Area is located
directly across the D&R Canal and Millstone River from the
Borough of Rocky Hill. The Rocky Hill Historic District (which
crosses the Millstone River into Franklin Township) was placed on
the State and National Registers of Historic Places in 1982.
Historic preservation is a key theme of the Borough's Master Plan.
The plan indicates that the "perpetuation and protection" of the
Borough's historic character is of "utmost importance to the
planning goals of the Borough." The plan outlines a number of
policies, strategies and planning standards intended to further the
County's planning goals. Principal to the Borough's vision is
perpetuation of the historic development pattern and character via
protection of the Borough's historic core and the retention of the
low-density green belt surrounding it. By preserving the historic
development pattern and planning for the preservation of historic
§ 112-342 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-342
1:688
§ 112-343. Administrative and procedural requirements.
structures, the redevelopment plan is consistent with the Rocky
Hill Master Plan.
(2) Borough of Millstone.
(a) The Laurie Rubber and Onka Bus-Franklin Inn areas are
located in the East Millstone area of the Township. The East
Millstone area is located across the D&R Canal and Millstone
River from the Borough of Millstone. These two communities
are separated from one another approximately 1/4 mile and are
connected across the D&R Canal and Millstone River via the
Millstone Causeway.
(b) Historic preservation is important in Millstone. The area was
settled during colonial times and played a significant role
during the American Revolution. The construction of the
Delaware and Raritan Canal in the 19th century solidified its
importance to the region. A significant portion of the Borough
is located within a historic district placed on the State and
National Registers of Historic Places. According to the
Borough's Vision Plan 2004, "preservation of historic,
culturally and architecturally significant sites and important
visual features play an important role in maintaining the
historic small town character of Millstone." The Borough is
currently in the process of developing a new master plan that
principally seeks to preserve and enhance the historic nature
of Millstone while addressing the Borough's affordable housing
obligations and other planning objectives. This redevelopment
plan is consistent with the Borough's planning efforts.
A. Amending the redevelopment plan. Upon compliance with the
requirements of applicable law, the Township Council may amend,
revise or modify the redevelopment plan, as circumstances may make
such changes appropriate.
B. Duration of plan. The plan, as amended, shall be in full force and effect
for 30 years from the date of approval of this plan by the Township
Council.
C. Conveyance of land. The Township Council may sell, lease, or otherwise
convey to a redeveloper for redevelopment, subject to restrictions,
controls and requirements of this redevelopment plan, all or any
portion of the land within the redevelopment area which becomes
available to disposal by the Township as a result of public action under
this plan.
§ 112-342 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-344
1:689
§ 112-344. Additional requirements.
The following restrictions and controls on redevelopment are hereby
imposed in connection with the selection of a redeveloper and shall apply
notwithstanding the provisions of any zoning or building ordinance or other
regulation now or hereafter in force. The restrictions shall be implemented
by appropriate covenants or other provisions in redeveloper agreements
and/or disposition instruments.
A. Applicants for designation as redeveloper must submit the following
materials to the designated entity for review and approval:
(1) Documentation evidencing financial responsibility and capability
with respect to the proposed development;
(2) Estimated offering price and deposit for acquisition of any land(s)
to be acquired from the municipality for development;
(3) Estimated total development cost;
(4) Fiscal impact analysis addressing the effect of the proposed project
on municipal services and taxes;
(5) Estimated time schedule for start and completion of development;
and
(6) Concept plans and elevations sufficient in scope and detail to
demonstrate the design, architectural concepts, parking, traffic
circulation, landscaping, active and/or passive recreation space for
all uses.
B. The redeveloper will be obligated to carry out the specified
improvements in accordance with the redevelopment plan.
C. The redeveloper, its successors or assigns shall devote land within the
redevelopment area to the uses specified in the redevelopment plan.
D. The redeveloper shall begin or complete the development of said land
for the use(s) required in this redevelopment plan within a period of
time that the Township Council fixes as reasonable.
E. Until the completion of the improvements, the redeveloper will not be
permitted to sell, lease, or otherwise transfer or dispose of property
within the redevelopment area without prior written consent of the
Township Council, except that this condition shall not apply to any
lender to the redeveloper in connection to the plan.
F. The Township may designate a redeveloper for a portion of the
redevelopment area with or without undertaking a request for
proposals (RFP) process.
G. Upon completion of the required improvements, the conditions
determined to exist at the time the redevelopment area was determined
to be in need of redevelopment shall be deemed to no longer exist, and
§ 112-344 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-344
1:690
the land and improvements hereon shall no longer be subject to
eminent domain as result of those determinations.
H. No covenant, agreement, lease, conveyance, or other instrument shall
be effected or executed by the redevelopers, the Township Council, or
the successors, lessees, or assigns of either of them by which land in the
redevelopment area is restricted as a sale, lease, or occupancy upon the
basis of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, or
marital status.
I. Neither the redeveloper nor the Township Council, nor the successors,
lessees, or assigns of either of them, shall discriminate upon the basis
of race, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, or marital status
in the sale, lease or rental of the use and occupancy of land or
improvements erected or to be erected thereon, or any part thereof, in
the redevelopment area.
§ 112-344 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-344
1:691
Chapter 115
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 260, § 260-6C.
§ 112-344 FRANKLIN CODE § 112-344
1:692
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 115, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 115-1. Compliance with regulations required; construal.
§ 115-2. Impoundment. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
All horses, cattle, swine, goats, domestic and other fowl and animals found
running at large within the Township may be taken by any person to the
public pound, whereupon it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
to receive and confine any such horses, cattle, swine, goats, domestic or
other fowl and animals until it or they shall be lawfully sold or redeemed.
§ 115-3. Redemption of impounded animals. [Amended 10-8-1981
by Ord. No. 1070; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
If the owner of any horses, cattle, swine, goats, domestic or other fowl
or animals impounded shall apply to the Animal Control Officer for the
redemption thereof and shall tender to him the legal fee for letting out each
animal impounded, in addition to the legal fees for keeping and feeding the
same,123 then, upon the receipt of such sum or sums by the Animal Control
Officer, such animal or animals shall be surrendered and delivered to the
owner thereof.
A. No person shall, within the Township, keep or harbor horses, cattle,
goats, swine, domestic or other fowl or animals, except in accordance
with regulations established by this article; nor shall any person permit
any horses, cattle, goats, swine, domestic or other fowl or animals
owned or harbored by him to run at large on the streets, roads,
highways or public or private lands within the Township, except in
accordance with regulations established hereunder; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the
keeping or harboring of any horses, cattle, swine, goats, domestic or
other fowl or animals by any farmer in the usual course of husbandry
nor the running at large of such horses, cattle, swine, goats, domestic
or other fowl or animals upon the farmer's own lands in the usual
course of husbandry.
B. No person shall within the Township of Franklin, purposefully or
knowingly feed deer, Canada geese or wild turkey through ground level
feeding stations, salt licks or other established and permanent means
by which to feed wildlife, except in accordance with New Jersey
Division of Fish and Wildlife provisions. [Added 11-27-2001 by Ord.
No. 3254]
123. Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter for redemption fees.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:693
§ 115-4. Sale of impounded animals. [Amended 1-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 1263; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
§ 115-5. Interference with impoundment prohibited.
No person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any horses, cattle, swine, goats,
domestic or other fowl and animals that shall have been found running at
large from the custody of any person who shall be driving or taking the same
to the pound or shall break open or attempt to break open any public pound
within the Township or shall take or let out any animal impounded therein.
§ 115-6. Odors from pens or enclosures.
The keeping of any pen or enclosure for fowl, goats, swine or other animals
or of any slaughterhouse, tannery, piggery or factory in such a manner
that offensive odors emanate therefrom to the detriment or discomfort of
persons in the neighborhood thereof is declared to be a nuisance.
A. All impounded livestock not redeemed by the owner or owners within
seven days after they are impounded shall be placed for adoption.
B. All other impounded animals not redeemed by the owner or owners
within seven days after they are impounded may be adopted for the sum
of $20, and all proceeds shall be immediately delivered to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township of Franklin.
§ 115-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-6
1:694
ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 115, Art. II, of the 1990
Code); amended in its entirety 11-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3993]
§ 115-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female, or
altered.124
CAT VACCINATION AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of four
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CHIPPED — The placement of a microchip or passive or inert radio
frequency identification device, internal or external to the animal, to enable
identification of the animal.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
FARM — A farm as set forth in the Township's Right to Farm Ordinance at
Chapter 112, Article XXI, as may be amended from time to time, or farmland
qualified for assessment.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, includes
every person having a right of property or custody in such dog or cat and
every person who has such dog or cat in his keeping or who harbors or
maintains a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or
about any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats seized
either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
§ 115-8. Licensing required; fees; term; nontransferability.
A. Dogs.
(1) Dogs shall be duly licensed and shall bear evidence of such license
at all times, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age
shall, in the month of January or as soon thereafter as such dog
becomes of licensing age, license said dog.
124. Editor's Note: The former definition of “cat of licensing age,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19.
§ 115-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-8
1:695
§ 115-9. Late licensing fee.
§ 115-10. (Reserved)127
§ 115-11. Waiver of fees. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19]
The Township may provide a waiver of the fees set forth in § 115-8A to those
owners who meet the following criteria:
(2) The annual fee for such license shall be $14.80 (effective January 1,
2019) for each altered (spayed/neutered) dog and each unaltered
dog and, in addition thereto, the sum of $1.20 for the registration
tag of each altered dog and $4.20 for each unaltered dog.
[Amended 9-13-2018 by Ord. No. 4239-18]
(3) The owner or person keeping or harboring any dog may, if the
license tag is mislaid, stolen or lost, procure a duplicate tag upon
the payment of an additional $2.
(4) Licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the
last day of January of each year.
(5) Dog licenses are not transferable from one owner to another.125
A. Dogs.
(1) Fees for licenses issued after February 1 of each year shall include
those license and registration tag fees set forth in § 115-8A.
(2) In addition thereto, a late fee shall be imposed as follows:
Months Late Fees
February to April $5
May to July $10
August to October $15
November to December $20
(3) The aforementioned late licensing fee shall not apply to dogs which
have been acquired by the owner after February 1, provided that
the license is acquired within 30 days of acquisition. The owner,
however, shall present sufficient proof to establish the date upon
which the dog was acquired.126
A. Are totally disabled according to the provisions of the federal Social
Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq. or disabled under any federal law
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Cats, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19.
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Cats, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19.
127. Editor's Note: Former § 115-10, Licensing exemptions, was repealed 3-26-2019 by Ord. No.
4276-19.
§ 115-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-11
1:696
§ 115-12. Licenses not to be issued to minors. [Amended 3-26-2019
by Ord. No. 4276-19]
No license to own, keep or harbor a dog in the Township shall be issued to
or in the name of a minor.
§ 115-13. Rabies vaccination required; exemptions. [Amended
3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19]
administered by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs if the
disability is rated as 60% or higher;
B. The person is annually eligible to receive assistance under the
"Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled" (PAAD) program
P.L. 1975, c. 194 (N.J.S.A. 30:4D-20 et seq.); or
C. Has a total income not in excess of $10,000 per year exclusive of
benefits under any one of the following:
(1) The federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq. and all
amendments and supplements thereto;
(2) Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any
other federal law which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu
of benefits referred to in, or for persons excluded from coverage
under Subsection A of this section, including, but not limited to, the
federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974, 45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.,
and federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or
(3) Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its
political subdivisions, or agencies thereof, for persons not covered
under Subsection A of this section, except that the total amount of
benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under Subsection B
or C of this section shall not be in excess of the maximum amount of
benefits payable to, and allowable for exclusion by, an owner in
similar circumstances under Subsection A of this section.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog shall procure and
possess a licensed veterinarian's certificate indicating that such dog
has been inoculated against rabies with a vaccine approved by the State
Department of Health and setting forth the date of such inoculation and
the duration of immunity. The certificate of inoculation shall be
exhibited to the dog licensing official of the municipality when
application for a dog license is made. No dog licensing official shall
grant a dog license until said veterinarian's certificate is shown in
evidence as proof of rabies inoculation. Said certification shall also be
produced by any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog upon the
request of any dog licensing enforcement official.
B. The dog licensing official may grant an exception to the requirement
that a veterinarian's certificate be presented prior to issuance of a dog
license when the dog is in the custody of the Township Animal Control
§ 115-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-13
1:697
§ 115-14. Running at large prohibited.
No dog or cat shall be permitted to run at large in this Township.
§ 115-14.1. Leashing required; exceptions.
Any dog off of the premises of the person owning, keeping or harboring it
shall be accompanied by a person who is capable of controlling it and who
has the dog securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more
than six feet long except as permitted by Subsections A and B herein:
§ 115-14.2. Damage to person or property prohibited.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat shall permit the same
or suffer it to do any bodily injury to any person not on his property or to do
any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of persons
other than the owner or person having the care, custody or control of such
Division for failure to have a valid dog license. The owner shall be
permitted to obtain from the dog licensing official at the request of the
Animal Control Officer a temporary dog license which will allow release
of the dog from the Animal Control Division to permit the owner to
obtain a veterinarian's certificate of rabies inoculation as specified in
Subsection A above. The dog owner shall have the dog inoculated and
present a veterinarian's certificate to the dog licensing official within
10 days of issuance of the temporary license. The Department of Animal
Control shall be responsible for insuring that the owner complies with
this requirement.
C. The dog licensing official may grant exemption to the rabies inoculation
requirement:
(1) Upon presentation to the licensing enforcement official of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of an infirmity, other
physical condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such
dog shall be deemed inadvisable.
(2) Dogs in veterinary hospitals, kennels, pet shops, pounds or
shelters, dogs in transit or dogs brought into the state temporarily
for the sole purpose of showing in dog shows or exhibitions.
A. Hunting dogs may be unleashed in permitted areas in the pursuit of
legal game during such seasons as are established by the state, and the
training or exercising of unleashed hunting dogs during other seasons
shall be permitted, provided that the dog is accompanied by and under
the control of an adult owner, custodian or trainer.
B. Dogs may be unleashed in special areas provided for such purposes,
commonly known as "dog parks," provided that the dog is accompanied
by and under the control of an adult owner, custodian or trainer. A dog
park is defined as a fenced/double-gated area set aside for the
socializing and exercising of dogs.
§ 115-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-14.2
1:698
dog or cat or to do damage to any animals owned by any other person other
than the owner or person having the care, custody or control of such dog or
cat.
§ 115-15. Procedure after infliction of dog or cat bite.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat shall, whenever
such dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person, immediately report,
within 24 hours, said bite to the Health Officer or his representative and
quarantine the animal for a period of not less than 10 days in the home or at
a place designated by the Health Officer or his designated representative.
During confinement or at the conclusion of 10 days, the animal shall be
examined by the Health Officer, his designated representative or a qualified
veterinarian. Following a veterinarian's certificate indicating the dog's or
cat's condition to the Health Officer, the Health Officer shall then forward a
copy of such certificate to the victim or his examining physician. A copy of
such certificate shall be forwarded regardless of whether or not the report
from the veterinarian is positive or negative.
§ 115-16. Nuisances prohibited; curbing of dogs.
§ 115-17. Noise disturbances.
No person shall own, possess or harbor any pet animal or pet bird that
frequently or for continued duration make sounds that create a noise
disturbance across a residential real property line. For the purpose of this
section, a noise disturbance from a barking dog shall be defined as that
created by a dog barking continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30
minutes, unless the dog is provoked.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any public property where people congregate or walk
or upon any private property without the permission of the owner of
said private property.
B. The restriction in this section shall not apply to that portion of the street
lying between the curblines, which shall be used to curb such dog under
the following conditions:
(1) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by
the local health authority.
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
section, in a sanitary manner approved by the local health
authority.
§ 115-14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-18
1:699
§ 115-18. Proper care required.
No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient and wholesome
food and fresh water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care
and treatment. For the purpose of this section, proper shelter shall be
defined as a doghouse with sound sides, top and bottom with a slanted roof
to provide runoff from rain and snow. There shall be a covering over the
entranceway to prevent rain, wind and snow from entering the structure,
and shall be large enough for the animal to stand up in a natural position
and turn around without touching the top or sides.
§ 115-19. Feral cats; borrowing of traps; deposits.
§ 115-20. Animal Control Officer.
The governing body of the municipality shall appoint a certified Animal
Control Officer who shall be responsible for animal control within the
jurisdiction of the municipality and who shall enforce and abide by the
provisions of this article.
§ 115-21. Seizure of dogs; impoundment; notice to owner; disposal.
A. If feral (wild) cats become destructive or an annoyance, it shall be the
responsibility of property owners to set and maintain traps for the
removal of such feral (wild) cats inhabiting their private property. Once
trapped, the Township Division of Animal Control will accept the
animals for disposal. For purposes of this section, the term "private
property" shall include common areas owned by homeowners'
associations, regardless of whether or not the homeowners' association
has granted permission to the Township to enter upon said common
areas for the purpose of enforcing owners regarding dogs and/or cats
running at large.
B. A borrowing fee of $3 per day shall be charged for each trap borrowed.
A deposit of $50 shall be collected for each trap. The borrowing fee
shall be deducted from the deposit, and any balance remaining shall be
refunded to the borrower upon return of the trap.
A. Any person appointed for the purpose by the governing body of the
municipality shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as
provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
§ 115-18 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-21
1:700
§ 115-22. Disposal of unclaimed dogs and cats.
When any dog or cat so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given, or has been detained for seven days after seizure
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
(5) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to
or observed by a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured or
creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animals is known any person authorized by the governing body shall
forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar or on
the owner or the person keeping or harboring said animal, if known, a
notice, in writing, stating that the animal has been seized and will be
liable to be destroyed or offered for adoption if not claimed within seven
days after the service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as above set
forth and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not
claimed said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance not exceeding $4 per dog, and if the
dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a license and
registration tag for said dog, any person authorized by the governing
body may cause the dog to be destroyed in manner causing as little pain
as possible and consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19. No
dog or other animal so caused and detained or procured, obtained, sent
to brought to a pound or shelter shall be sold or otherwise made
available for the purpose of experimentation. Any person who sells or
otherwise makes available any such dog or other animal for the purpose
of experimentation shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
E. After observation, any animal seized under this section suspected of
being rabid shall be immediately reported to the executive officer of the
Local Board of Health and to the Department of Health.
§ 115-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-22
1:701
when notice cannot be given, in accordance with the laws of the state, and
if the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog or cat has not claimed
such dog or cat and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its seizure and
detention, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of seizure and the owner
or person keeping or harboring the dog has not produced a current license
and registration tag for the dog, the contractor or Animal Control Officer
or other designated authority may cause the dog or cat to be destroyed in
a manner causing as little pain as possible, or offer same for adoption, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16. Failure of the owner of such dog or cat
to claim the animal within such seven days shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 115-23. Enforcement agencies.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
the Animal Control Officer and the Local Board of Health.
§ 115-23.1. Interfering with person performing duties.
No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 115-23.2. Stray cats. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4276-19]
Any cat for which there is no owner as described in § 115-7 shall be deemed
a stray. Stray cats may be confiscated by the Township of Franklin Animal
Control Officer or his/her designee. All stray cats will be held at the animal
control facility for at least seven days unless advised by a veterinarian to
euthanize for humane or public health reasons.
§ 115-23.3. Property held in common ownership.
The provisions of Articles I and II shall be applicable to any property
held in common ownership where the entity holding title to such property
has executed an agreement with the Township of Franklin authorizing the
Township or any agent, servant or employee thereof to enter onto such
property and to enforce the provisions of Articles I and II.
§ 115-23.4. Violations and penalties.
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction for a
first offense be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, at the discretion of the court. Every day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 115-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-23.4
1:702
ARTICLE III
Animal Control
[Adopted 4-11-1974 by Ord. No. 660 (Ch. 115, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 115-24. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL — Any domesticated dog or cat or house pet, four-legged and
nonswimming or nonflying, which is oriented to an outside environment, but
not including livestock or other farm animals or game animals subject to
control by the State Game Commission.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — See definition of "Animal Control Officer in
§ 115-31.[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
ANIMAL SHELTER — A structure constructed by the Township to provide
temporary boarding and care for animals described herein and subject to
Township regulations.
BOARDING FEE — A fee established by ordinance to defray the daily cost
of housing animals in the animal shelter.
CONTRACT — A legal document, authorized by the Township Council,
whereby the Township provides only boarding services or full animal control
services to adjacent municipalities.
DISPOSAL AND EUTHANASIA FEE — A fee established by ordinance to
defray the cost of the Township of humane disposal of unclaimed animals.
REDEMPTION — The reclaiming of an animal confined in the animal shelter
by its owner upon presentation of proof of possession by license or other
documentation.
REDEMPTION FEE — A minimum fee established by ordinance to defray
boarding cost and processing cost during the period an animal is confined
in the animal shelter, including the time from which the animal was picked
up by the Animal Control Officer up to 24 hours, after which an additional
daily boarding fee shall be charged.
SALE — The sale of any unclaimed animal confined in the animal shelter up
to seven days, not reclaimed by the owner if known, or other party in lieu of
submitting the animal to euthanasia, following purchase of a license where
applicable.
§ 115-25. Fees. [Amended 1-22-1976 by Ord. No. 789; 10-11-1979
by Ord. No. 970; 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 1506; 1-14-1992 by Ord. No.
1688; 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 3009; 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3417]
The following fees are hereby established, which are payable to the
Township of Franklin Animal Shelter and which shall be deposited in the
Township Trust fund to defray the cost of the animal control operations. No
§ 115-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-25
1:703
animal shall be released by the Animal Control Officer until all appropriate
fees and license cost, if applicable, shall have been paid and a receipt issued
by the Animal Shelter.
A. General fees.
(1) Adoption fee: $30 per animal. [Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No.
3625]
(2) Daily boarding fee: $10 per day for impounded animal plus
redemption fee.
(3) Spay/neuter fee: $30 per animal adopted from Township Animal
Shelter and/or Township adoption event. [Added 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 3761]
B. Disposal, euthanasia and pickup fees. [Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 3625]
Disposal and Euthanasia Fees
Disposal Euthanasia
Cat $20 $25
Dog (small) $30 $35
Dog (large) $50 $50
Other (rabbit, rodents, etc.) $20 $20
Dead animal pickup fee plus disposal
Pickup Fee Disposal Fee
Small animal $15 $15
Large animal $20 $30
C. License fees. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
(1) Limited pet shop: $100.
(2) Pet shop, sale of cats and dogs: $150.
(3) Grooming parlors: $75.
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
D. Redemption fee: [Added 8-8-2006by Ord. No. 3625]
(1) Cat: $20.
(2) Dog (small): $30.
(3) Dog (large): $35.
(4) Other small animals: $20.
E. Surrender Fee: [Added 8-8-2006by Ord. No. 3625]
§ 115-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-25
1:704
§ 115-26. Applicability of certain fees.
§ 115-27. Immunization and payment of fees required prior to
release from shelter.
Immunization must be obtained and license fees shall be paid to the Clerk
before an animal is released from the animal shelter.
§ 115-28. Municipal boarding service fees. [Amended 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 1478]
(1) Cat: $20.
(2) Dog: $25.
(3) Litter fee (all animals): $20.
(4) Other small animals: $20.
F. Animal pickup from owner fee: [Added 8-8-2006by Ord. No. 3625]
(1) Cat: $25.
(2) Dog: $25.
G. Transportation fee: *$75. *(Transport of any head for rabies testing that
is not involved in a rabies investigation. Only applies to cats and dogs of
residents of Franklin Township). [Added 8-8-2006by Ord. No. 3625]
A. Requested pickup fees and dead animal fees do not apply to stray dogs
or persons finding and/or reporting stray dogs to the Animal Control
Officer.
B. Requested pickup fee applies to animal owners who request the Animal
Control Officer to pick up an animal at their residence or bring their
own animal to the municipal animal shelter.
A. Municipal boarding service fees shall apply uniformly in all contracts
which establish such services with adjacent municipalities.
B. Those municipalities serviced by the Township shall transport all
animals to the Township animal shelter with their own transportation.
C. The contracting municipality shall pay the daily boarding fee and
disposal and euthanasia fee only in the event that the owner, when
known, fails to reclaim the animal or when the owner is not known and
the animal is not sold or disposed of by other humane means. Whenever
the owner reclaims the animal, all fees shall be paid by him and not the
contracting municipality.
D. Whenever an animal from a contracting municipality is adopted, all
pertinent fees shall be deposited with the Township.
§ 115-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-29
1:705
§ 115-29. Contractual animal control service rates.
§ 115-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the court.
Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
A. The rates established herein shall apply whenever the Township and
any adjacent municipality or municipalities shall agree to contract for
complete animal control service, including pickup, care, reclamation,
disposal and allied functions, for the entire municipality not having its
own animal control officer or animal shelter.
B. The administrative fee established herein includes overtime, social
security, administrative and general fringe benefits and equipment use
expenses.
C. The maintenance fee established herein includes cost of gas, grease,
oil, other vehicle expenses and building maintenance expenses.
D. The fees established herein are base fees, subject to annual review by
the contracting parties, and may be amended by amending the basic
contract only to reflect cost-of-living and other inflationary increments.
These fees are not all inclusive, and any specific contract drawn under
this section may contain provisions relating to additional fees.
§ 115-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-30
1:706
ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Dogs
[Adopted 7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1495 (Ch. 115, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code); amended in its entirety 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1724]
§ 115-31. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section
apply throughout §§ 115-31 through 115-35 of this article.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — An entity acting alone or in concert with
other local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control law of
the Township, county and state and the shelter and welfare of animals.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual employed, contracted with
or appointed by the Township for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement
of this article or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensure of
animals, control of animals or seizure and impoundment of animals.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having control or
custody of an animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog declared potentially
dangerous pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. as amended.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog declared vicious pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. as amended.
§ 115-32. Registration required; conditions; fees.
§ 115-33. through § 115-34. (Reserved)128
§ 115-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction by
the Judge of the Municipal Court, be subject to the penalties as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each instance where such person
shall not comply with the provisions hereof shall be considered as a
A. It is unlawful for an owner to have a potentially dangerous dog in the
Township without an annual license issued under this article.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall issue a license to the owner of a
potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the Animal Control
Officer sufficient evidence of compliance with any and all conditions
imposed under N.J.S.A. 4:19-24, as amended.
C. The annual cost of such license shall be $700, payable at the time of
issuance of the license.
128. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 115-33, Muzzling and restraint required, and 115-34,
Confiscation, were repealed 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1724.
§ 115-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-35
1:707
separate incident and subject to a separate prosecution, each day that the
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 115-35 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-35
1:708
ARTICLE V
Licensing of Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3998]
§ 115-36. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — An individual or group or individuals
who, with or without salary or compensation, house and care for homeless
animals in the home of an individual or in other facilities, with the intent
of placing the animals in responsible, more permanent homes as soon as
possible.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION FACILITY — The home or other facility
in which an animal rescue organization houses and cares for an animal.
CERTIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person 18 years of age or
older who has satisfactorily completed the course of study approved by
the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services and the Police Training
Commission; or who has been employed in the State of New Jersey in the
capacity of, and with similar responsibilities to those required of, a certified
animal control officer pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1983, c. 525129 for a
period of three years before January 17, 1987.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
FOSTER HOME — Placement of a cat or dog with an individual or group
that is not an animal rescue organization for the purpose of temporarily
caring for the cat or dog, without the individual assuming ownership and
with the intent of the individual or group relinquishing the cat or dog to a
suitable owner when one is located.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every
person having a right of property in that dog and every person who has
that dog in his keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship of any other
animal, including, but not limited to, a cat, shall include every person having
a right of property in that animal and every person who has that animal in
his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose of
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
§ 115-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-36
1:709
sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather than
for business or research purposes.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or other animals
seized under the provisions of this act or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs or other animals are received,
housed and distributed.
STERILIZE — To render an animal incapable of reproducing by either
spaying or neutering.
§ 115-37. License required.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Township Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs in the Township where such establishment is
located, for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
§ 115-38. Form of application.
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purposes for which it is
to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
local municipal and health authorities showing compliance with the local
and state rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at such
establishments.
§ 115-39. Exemption from individual licenses.
Any person holding a license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by a licensee and kept at the establishments; the
licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 115-40. License period; revocation; hearing.
A. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter, or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all licenses
shall expire on the last day of June of each year, and be subject to
revocation by the Township on recommendation of the Somerset County
Health Department or the local board of health for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations of the county department or local board
governing the same, after the owner has been afforded a hearing by
either the county department or local board.
B. The license for a pet shop shall be subject to review by the Township,
upon recommendation by the County Department of Health or the local
health authority for failure by the pet shop to comply with the rules and
regulations of the county department or local health authority
governing pet shops or if the pet shop meets the criteria for
recommended suspension or revocation, after the owner of the pet shop
has been afforded a hearing.
§ 115-36 FRANKLIN CODE § 115-40
1:710
§ 115-41. License restrictions.
The Township may issue a license for a pet shop that permits the pet shop
to sell pet supplies for all types of animals, including cats and dogs, and sell
animals other than cats and dogs but restricts the pet shop from selling cats
or dogs, or both.
§ 115-42. Annual report.
Every pet shop licensed in the Township shall submit to the Township
annually and no later than May 1 of each year records of the total number
of cats and dogs, respectively, sold by the pet shop each year, and the
Township shall provide this information to the local health authority.
§ 115-43. License fees.
§ 115-44. Permitting dogs to go off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
C. The Township, based on the criteria for the recommendation of the local
health authority provided in this section, may suspend the license for 90
days or may revoke the license if it is determined at the hearing that the
pet shop:
(1) Failed to maintain proper hygiene and exercise reasonable care in
safeguarding the health of animals in its custody; or
(2) Sold a substantial number of animals that the pet shop knew, or
reasonably should have known, to be unfit for purchase.
A. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
less dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25.
B. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10.
C. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 115-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-44
1:711

ARTICLE VI
Pet Shop Sales
[Adopted 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4182-17]
§ 115-45. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under § 501(c) (3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — Any retail establishment, which is not part of a kennel,
wherein animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, rabbits, hamsters or gerbils are sold, exchanged, bartered or
offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail for personal
appreciation and companionship, rather than for business or research
purposes. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 115-46. Restrictions on sale of animals.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
§ 115-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-46
1:713
Chapter 121
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 121-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1896]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUXILIARY BUILDING NUMBER — A number designation for a cluster
of units sharing common walls within a subdivision, i.e., an apartment
complex, townhouse complex, mall, commercial or industrial building,
corporate complex, etc., subdivided so as to accommodate several tenants.
BUILDING — A house, residence, dwelling, store, recreational facility, or
other structure used for residential, commercial or public purpose which
has frontage on, or access to, a street in the Township.
BUILDING NUMBER — A number designation existent or assigned to a
dwelling unit, commercial building or industrial building in the Township.
STREET — Any paved or unpaved road, highway, avenue, lane, pedestrian
mall, alleyway, or cartway for the passage of motor vehicles and pedestrians
and located within the borders of the Township.
§ 121-2. Assignment of numbers. [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1896]
A. The Chief of Police and/or his/her designee is empowered to assign
building numbers and auxiliary building numbers for all properties
henceforth constructed in the Township following the effective date of
this chapter.
B. The Chief of Police and/or his/her designee is empowered to assign
building numbers and auxiliary building numbers for those existing
properties without said numbers and to renumber properties within the
Township where deemed to be in the best interest of public safety.
C. The Chief of Police and/or his/her designee shall review the names and
numbers assigned to municipal and private streets within the
municipality and the numbering of properties and buildings within the
municipality to determine if the assignment of names and numbers
conforms with the guidelines established in § 121-3.
D. Upon completion of the review, the Chief of Police and/or his/her
designee shall determine what changes, if any, are necessary in the
naming or numbering of the municipal or private streets, or in the
numbering of properties or buildings in order to effectuate the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Any changes which are made pursuant to the provisions of Subsections
C and D of this section shall be reflected on the appropriate Municipal
§ 115-46 FRANKLIN CODE § 121-2
1:714
§ 121-3. Display of numbers. [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1896]
§ 121-4. Implementation. [Added 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1896]
Tax and House Numbering Maps and the 9-1-1 Maps for inclusion in the
9-1-1 database.
A. The owner of any building or occupied lot for which an official property
number is designated and assigned shall be required at his/her own
expense to place the official number at a point near where the driveway
enters the street, or in such a manner that the number is easily visible
from the street, or both.
B. All building and property numbers shall be a minimum three inches
high, and reflective numbers are highly encouraged.
C. In those cases where more than one building exists on a lot or private
road, land, or way, an address sign shall be placed near the point of
access to the street showing the official number designation of each
building located upon the lot or private roadway. Each building shall
also have the number designation clearly posted in front of or on the
structure.
D. The cost of erecting and maintaining an address sign shall be borne by
the owners of the buildings who are also responsible for notifying any
tenants of their official 9-1-1 locatable address.
E. The Township shall reserve the right to require posting of signs at
curbside and on the building, where deemed necessary in the best
interest of public safety.
F. In the event the property owners fails and/or refuses to number his/her
property, the Township shall provide written notice of such failure to
comply to the owner of the property. The owner shall remedy the
violation within 10 days of such notice.
A. One correct name shall be used for each street in Franklin Township
and where two separate and noncontiguous streets within the Township
have the exact same name, a distinctive prefix or suffix shall be
assigned to distinguish the streets, or a new name shall be assigned to
one street.
B. If two existing streets have names that have resulted in confusion due
to any similarity, and a name change is not practical, the property
numbering on the streets shall be made to contrast significantly as an
added safety measure. Numbering by the mile post system may be used
as an alternative, if applicable.
C. Each property with frontage on or access to any street shall be assigned
an official property number, except where one or more buildings or lots
are located on an unnamed private road, lane or way having access to a
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:715
street. In that situation only one official number shall be assigned, and
it shall be based upon the number which best describes the location
of the access point on the street. If more than one occupied building
exists, each building shall be known as the number assigned, followed
by a letter, beginning with "A" and continuing alphabetically.
D. Official property numbers shall proceed from a logical point of origin
and shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to the numbers
assigned to other lots with frontage on or access to the same street.
E. Odd numbers shall be assigned to properties on one side of a street and
even numbers assigned to properties on the other side of the street with
sufficient flexibility so that the numbering system may accommodate
maximum density as allowed by zoning regulations now in effect. If
existing lot frontage is less than the minimum zoned frontage, the
numbering shall compress to accommodate the existing lot frontage.
F. Upon any subdivision of land in Franklin Township resulting in lots
other than those delineated in the Official Municipal Tax Map, the
Police Department shall assign a property number to each lot resulting
from the subdivision. Any new street shall have a unique name which
shall be registered with the Township 9-1-1 Coordinator for entry into
the database and shall have a street sign erected by the property owner
prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
G. Any individual, corporation or organization granted a construction
permit for a new street and/or development after the enactment of this
chapter shall be responsible for installing and maintaining, until such
street is accepted by the Township, a reflective street name sign at all
intersecting streets that the new street shall intersect. The street name
sign shall also display the numbering sequence of each intersection
block in each direction. All street name signs shall be manufactured in
accordance with the specifications of the Director of Public Works and
shall be consistent with existing street name sign designs used
throughout the Township.
H. If a large lot has more than one available property number and it
contains a building, then the property number that describes the
location of the driveway, or access point shall be assigned.
I. A rural mail box shall have three-inch high numbers on both sides of the
mailbox. If the mailbox is remotely located on another street or
clustered with several other mailboxes, then a street name and number
sign consistent with the provisions of § 121-4G shall be mounted on the
mailbox or cluster, and a three-inch high property number shall be
posted at the driveway entrance(s).
J. In the event existing building number sequences may conflict with the
provisions of this section, the Chief of Police and/or his/her designee
may, in his/her discretion, permit such existing sequence to remain
where such existing sequences do not substantially interfere with the
9-1-1 emergency telephone system.
§ 121-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 121-5
1:716
§ 121-5. Uniform display required in building complexes.
Building number and auxiliary building number signs required in multiple
dwelling projects, corporate parks and similar complex developments shall
be installed in uniform locations to the extent possible.
§ 121-6. Numbering of new buildings; inspections. [Amended
6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1896]
At the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for new buildings within the
Township, the Construction Official and/or his/her designee shall conduct
inspections to determine compliance with these provisions. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued where the property owner has failed to comply
with this chapter.
§ 121-7. Maintenance of signs by property owner.
Building numbers and auxiliary building number signs, as required by this
chapter, shall be periodically maintained, as needed, to provide continued
high visibility The property owner shall be responsible for said
maintenance.
§ 121-8. Notification of postal authorities. [Amended 6-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1896]
The Chief of Police and/or his/her designee assigning building numbers
shall be responsible for providing a copy of written notification establishing
building numbers or auxiliary building numbers to the United States
Postmaster responsible for the area in which the property is located.
§ 121-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478; amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1896]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the
court. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 121-10. Enforcement. [Added 1-6-2009 by Ord. No. 3807]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any of the following
Township personnel, agents or employees:
A. The Township Zoning Officer or his designee;
B. The Township Zoning Inspector or his designee;
C. The Township Fire Official and Fire Inspectors;
§ 121-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-10
1:717
Chapter 125
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
§ 125-1. Purpose and findings.
§ 125-2. Nonapplicability.
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor
include any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or permitted
to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws of the United
States, the State of New Jersey or other municipal ordinances not consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 125-3. Closing hours; personnel and safety/security requirements.
It shall be unlawful to operate a business or commercial establishment to
which the public is invited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
EST (2300 hours to 0600 hours) unless:
D. The Township Construction Official and Uniform Construction Code
Inspectors;
E. Any Township Police Officer; and
F. The Township Manager or his designee.
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited, in the interest of the protection of the employees,
patrons and law enforcement officers.
B. It has been determined that unprotected and understaffed business and
commercial enterprises are prey to the criminal element in our society
during the late night and early morning hours, and that certain security
devices must be provided in order to protect the general public who use
these establishments.
A. There are at least two employees on continuous duty in that part of the
business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited; or
B. The business or commercial establishment has in its employ a security
officer or the premises has in operation a security device approved by
the Township of Franklin Police Department, which may consist of a
silent and/or audible burglar alarm connected to a central security
§ 121-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 125-3
1:718
§ 125-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 132
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Right of entry — See Ch. 298.
monitoring station designed to activate a police response, and in
addition, shall have in operation a video camera system connected to
a central security monitoring system, or such other device which can
be activated instantaneously to notify law enforcement officers that a
crime or disorderly offense is in progress.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, or entity other than the employee
of the business or commercial establishment assigned to work during
the hours designated by this chapter who shall violate or cause to be
violated a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
B. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall be
deemed a separate offense for purposes of this chapter.
§ 125-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:719

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 132-1. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or
maintain such violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof or to fail or
refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation, except as variation
may be allowed by action of the Fire Official, in writing. Proof of such
unlawful act or failure to act shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such
act is that of the owner. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner or
the occupant shall not be deemed to relieve the other.
§ 132-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property. It
shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, including buildings,
structures, equipment, etc. Except for the provisions of Article IV, this
chapter shall not apply to owner-occupied one- or two-family dwellings.
§ 132-3. Compliance with other provisions.
This chapter shall be in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
Township covering fire prevention.
§ 132-4. Purpose; construal.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the
Township for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace,
safety and welfare, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for that
purpose.
§ 132-5. Amendment; power to repeal.
Amendments to this chapter shall be conditioned upon the receipt of
concurring resolutions from the four fire districts of Franklin Township. This
section does not in any way preclude the Township Council from repealing
this chapter in its entirety.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:721

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
§ 132-6. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983. c. 383, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced
locally within the Township of Franklin.
§ 132-7. Designation of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Department of Fire Prevention.
§ 132-8. Fire Prevention Board.
§ 132-9. Department of Fire Prevention.
A. Membership. The Fire Prevention Board shall consist of five members
by written appointments. Four members shall be Fire Commissioners,
including one Commissioner from each Fire District of the Township of
Franklin. The duration of term of the Fire Prevention Board members
shall be established by the Fire Districts collectively. The fifth member
of the Fire Prevention Board shall be a member of the Franklin
Township Fire Chiefs Association, to be appointed on an annual basis by
said Association. Said member may not concurrently serve as a Fire
Commissioner during the term of appointment.
B. Alternates. There shall be five alternate members of the Fire Prevention
Board by written appointment, one for each regular Board member.
Alternate members shall be appointed by their respective organizations
and may attend all meetings of the Board. They shall be entitled to vote
on Board matters in the absence of their respective regular members.
C. Liaison. There shall be one regular and one alternate Township Council
liaison member who shall be appointed by the Township Council for
one-year terms. [Amended 2-26-2002 by Ord. 3274; 12-11-2003 by
Ord. 3414]
A. There is hereby established a Department of Fire Prevention, which
shall be headed by a Fire Official who shall be known as the "Director of
Fire Prevention." Said Fire Official shall be appointed by the Township
Manager after consultation with the Fire Prevention Board.
B. Said Department of Fire Prevention shall include such inspectors and
other employees as are deemed necessary for the day-to-day operation
of the Department.
C. The salaries, benefits, personnel regulations and terms of office for all
employees of the Department of Fire Prevention shall be in accordance
with the standards as promulgated for all other nonpolice employees of
the Township of Franklin.
§ 132-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-9
1:723
§ 132-10. Board of Appeals.
D. The Department of Fire Prevention shall coordinate the following
functions for administrative purposes:
(1) Fire school operations.
(2) Fire prevention inspections, permits and fees.
(3) Fire communications.
(4) Firemen's life insurance.
(5) Aid to fire service.
(6) Aid to rescue service.
E. Such funds as mutually deemed necessary by the Fire Prevention Board
and the Township Council shall be reflected in the local municipal
budget.
F. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted pursuant thereto in all
buildings, structures and premises within the Township of Franklin,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings. (See Article
IV exceptions.)
G. The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of
life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
A. Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively), any person aggrieved by
any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to
the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Somerset or to the
Franklin Township Board of Appeals, if constituted.130
B. Appeals for any action of the Fire Official which are not directly related
to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code or local amendments shall be
made, in writing, to the Franklin Township Board of Fire Prevention.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 132-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-10
1:724
ARTICLE III
Permits and Fees
§ 132-11. Additional required permits, inspections and fees.
[Amended 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1850; 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1867;
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 3032; 12-11-2003 by Ord. 3414; 9-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 3485A; 4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 3749; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
3888]
A. In addition to the life hazard use Types A through D and permit Types 1
through 5, along with the inspections and fees required pursuant to the
Act and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the
following additional permits, inspections and fees shall be required.
B. The following buildings, uses and premises contained in this section are
subject to the permit and periodic inspection requirements as hereby
established. (Exception: Operations which are incidental or auxiliary to
the agricultural use of farm property shall be required to obtain
applicable permits and to comply with fire regulations but shall be
exempt from payment of the required permit fee.)
(1) Permit types.
(a) Type 6 permits:
[1] Business, factory, industrial, mercantile and storage uses
which are less than 1,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[2] Commercial activities or operations not otherwise defined
herein which do not operate from physical structures but
which conduct business from a real property location in
Franklin Township.
[3] Clubs, halls and similar facilities, including firehouses,
with an occupancy load exceeding 99 persons, which are
not otherwise defined as life hazard uses and which are
used for assembly purposes not more than 12 times a year.
[4] Family day-care provider facilities as registered by the
New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services.
[5] Houses of worship with an occupant load of 99 or less.
(b) Type 7 permits:
[1] Business, factory, industrial, mercantile and storage uses,
which are at least 1,000 square feet but less than 3,000
square feet in gross floor area.
[2] Houses of worship with an occupant load of 100 or more,
but less than 300.
(c) Type 8 permits:
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:725
[1] Business, factory, industrial and storage uses, which are at
least 3,000 but less than 6,000 square feet in gross floor
area.
[2] Mercantile uses other than hardware stores and home
improvement centers which are at least 3,000 but less
then 6,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[3] Eating and drinking establishments with less than 50
occupants, in which no alcoholic beverages are consumed.
[4] Liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas
installations for the filling and refilling of portable
containers for consumption by the general public, and
having storage containers of up to 1,000 gallons individual
water capacity or with an aggregate water capacity of up
to 2,000 gallons.
[5] House of worship with an occupant load of 300 or more.
(d) Type 9 permits:
[1] Business, factory, industrial and storage uses which are at
least 6,000 but less than 12,000 square feet in gross floor
area.
[2] Mercantile uses other than hardware stores and home
improvement centers which are at least 6,000 but less
than 12,000 square feet in gross floor area.
[3] Hotels and motels with 100 rooms or less, and not defined
as life hazard uses.
[4] Buildings where fewer than 100 persons assemble for
amusement or entertainment, including recreation centers
and health spas.
[5] Retail or commercial common areas.
(e) Type 10 permits: business uses which are at least 12,000 but
less than 24,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(f) Type 11 permits: business uses which are at least 24,000 but
less than 50,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(g) Type 12 permits: business uses which are at least 50,000 but
less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(h) Type 13 permits: business uses which are at least 100,000 but
less than 200,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(i) Type 14 permits: business uses which are at least 200,000 but
less than 400,000 square feet in gross floor area.
§ 132-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-11
1:726
(j) Type 15 permits: business uses which are 400,000 square feet
or more in gross floor area.
(k) Type 16 permits: trade shows, craft shows, exhibits,
expositions, auctions, art sales, oriental rug sales, concerts,
wrestling matches, festivals, dinners, dances, balls and similar
events in exhibit centers, convention centers, cultural centers,
hotels and similar facilities, and including similar non-schooltype
uses in school buildings.
[1] Exceptions:
[a] Dinners, dances, balls and similar uses preapproved
for hotel and restaurant assembly rooms.
[b] Seminars, meetings and similar uses preapproved for
hotel and restaurant assembly areas.
[c] Meals, meetings, parties and similar uses
preapproved for school buildings.
(l) Type 17 permits:
[1] Multiple-family dwellings not otherwise defined as life
hazard uses.
[2] Living units in multiple family dwellings.
[3] Asphalt (tar) kettles.
(2) Required inspections. All additional uses as listed in the
aforementioned schedule shall be periodically inspected for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, but not less than the
following schedule:
(a) Permit Types 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15: once every 12
months.
(b) Permit Type 16: once per event. Special events that require
inspections or reinspections on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
will be required to pay additional fees of $75 per hour.
(c) Permit Type 17:
[1] Multiple-family dwellings: once every 12 months.
Inspection shall cover the entire facility, except for
interiors of dwelling units.
[2] Living units in multiple family dwellings: once every five
years.
[3] Asphalt (tar) kettles: one each job site.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:727
(d) Vacant retail or commercial spaces require inspection every 12
months and the fee will be 50% of the original fee based on the
square footage.
(3) Permit fees for additional listed uses shall be as follows:
(a) List of fees.
[1] Type 6 permits: $100 per year.
[2] Type 7 permits: $150 per year.
[3] Type 8 permits: $200 per year.
[4] Type 9 permits: $250 per year.
[5] Type 10 permits: $300 per year.
[6] Type 11 permits: $350 per year.
[7] Type 12 permits: $400 per year.
[8] Type 13 permits: $600 per year.
[9] Type 14 permits: $700 per year.
[10] Type 15 permits: $800 per year.
[11] Type 16 permits: $150 per event.
[12] Type 17 permits:
[a] Multiple-family dwellings: $100 per year if less than
30 living units. If 30 or more living units, the fee shall
be $100 per year, plus $5 per year per unit over 29
units.
[b] Living units in multiple family dwellings: $60 per
living unit every five years.
[c] Asphalt (tar) kettles: $75 per job site.
(b) When two or more listed uses exist under the same ownership
at a given location, the highest use shall be paid at full fee, and
subsequent uses shall be paid at 50% of the scheduled fees.
(4) Permits. The application fees for permits required by N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.7 shall be as follows:
(a) Type 1 - $85.
(b) Type 2 - $166.
(c) Type 3 - $425.
(d) Type 4 - $600.
§ 132-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-11
1:728
(5) Hydrant fees. Fire hydrant flow test fees. For the performance of
fire hydrant flow tests the following fee schedule shall govern:
(a) For the first two hydrants: $100.
(b) For each additional hydrant tested at the same time and
location: $25.
(6) Other fees:
(a) Photocopies of fire investigation reports:
[1] Copies one to 10: $0.75 per page.
[2] Copies 11 to 20: $0.50 per page.
[3] Copies 21 and over: $0.25 per page.
(b) Fire hydrant test reports: $15 per two hydrants. Fire hydrants
not tested within the previous 6 months shall be outdated and
require retesting at fees specified by § 132-11B(6).
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:729

ARTICLE IV
Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Alarm
Compliance
[Amended in its entirety 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 1703; amended
12-11-2003 by Ord. 3414]
§ 132-12. Where required.
§ 132-13. Owner responsibility.
The owner or the authorized agent of the owner shall apply for a CSDCMAC
on the application form provided by the Fire Prevention Department. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in
§ 132-18.
§ 132-14. Conditions of CSDCMAC.
A CSDCMAC shall not be transferable. If the change of occupancy specified
on the application for a CSDCMAC does not occur within six months, a new
application shall be required.
§ 132-15. Inspection required.
No CSDCMAC shall be issued until inspection by the Fire Prevention
Department indicates compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19.
§ 132-16. Smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm locations.
A. Before any Use Group R-3, R-4 or R-5 structure in Franklin Township is
sold, leased, or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy for
residential purposes, the owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke
detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC)
compliance evidencing compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19, from the
Franklin Township Department of Fire Prevention. Exception: A
CSDCMAC shall not be required for newly constructed Use Group R-3,
R-4 or R-5 buildings at the time of initial occupancy.
B. In all R-3, R-4 or R-5 structures in Franklin Township protected with an
automatic residential fire suppression system, said system shall be
operational at the time of inspection for a CSDCMAC. The fee for
approval of automatic residential fire suppression systems at the time
of inspection for a CSDCMAC shall be as set forth in § 132-18.
Exception: A CSDCMAC shall not be required for newly constructed
Use Group R-3, R-4 or R-5 buildings at the time of initial occupancy.
A. In all Use Group R-3, R-4 or R-5 dwellings subject to the requirements
of N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 smoke detectors shall be installed on each level of
the premises and outside of each separate sleeping area. The required
smoke detectors shall be located and maintained in working order in
accordance with Standard 74 of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA 74-1984).
§ 132-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-16
1:731
§ 132-17. Power supply for smoke detectors locations.
§ 132-18. Fees. [Amended 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1850; amended
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 3414; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3888]
B. In all Use Group R-3, R-4 or R-5 dwellings subject to the requirements
of N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in the
immediate vicinity of all sleeping rooms.
(1) Exception: Carbon monoxide alarms shall not be required for
dwellings that do not contain fuel-burning appliances or have
attached garages.
(2) The carbon monoxide alarms required above shall be located and
maintained in working order in accordance with standard 720 of
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 720-1998).
A. Smoke detectors as required by this article may be battery-powered
and shall be listed in accordance with ANSI/UL 217.
(1) A/C-powered smoke detectors shall be accepted as meeting the
requirements of this section.
(2) Exception: Use Group R-3, R-4 and R-5 structures which the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code requires to have A/C-powered
interconnected, and/or standby battery-powered smoke detectors
at the time of construction, shall be required to maintain said
detectors in order to obtain a CSDCMAC. In the event said detector
locations do not comply with NFPA 74, additional battery-powered
detectors shall be provided to comply with said standard.
B. The carbon monoxide alarms required by this section are permitted to
be battery-powered, hard-wired, or plug-in type. The carbon monoxide
alarm is required to be manufactured, listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 2034, (Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.).
A. CSDCMAC fees:
(1) Application fee: $50 per dwelling unit for initial inspection plus one
reinspection if needed.
(2) For each additional reinspection: $50.
(3) For rush inspections scheduled with less than seven days' notice:
$150.
(4) To reschedule no-show inspections or reinspections: $50.
B. No-show shall be held to mean:
(1) Owners/agents who fail to meet an inspector within five minutes of
the appointed time.
§ 132-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-18
1:732
(2) Owners/agent who do not have a key to enter premises for
scheduled inspection or reinspection.
(3) Electrical power to a premises is disconnected and smoke detectors
to be tested are powered by electrical current from the structural
wiring system.
C. Residential fire suppression systems.
(1) For initial inspection of automatic residential fire suppression
systems at time of CSDCMAC inspection: $25.
(2) For each reinspection of automatic residential fire suppression
systems: $25.
D. Penalty: The penalty for failure to obtain a CSDCMAC prior to the sale,
lease or other change in occupancy for any R-3, R-4 or R-5 structure
shall be $500.
§ 132-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-18
1:733

ARTICLE V
Fire Lanes
[Amended 12-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1613]
§ 132-19. Establishment; purpose; factors in establishment.
§ 132-20. Markings.
§ 132-21. Signs.
Traffic signs for fire lanes shall be installed in accordance with the following
standards of this chapter:
A. The Fire Official of the Township is authorized to establish fire lanes on
property devoted to public use, including but not limited to schools,
shopping centers, churches, restaurants, apartments and apartment
complexes, hotels, motels, and similar uses involving the parking of a
sufficient number of motor vehicles to warrant regulation of said
vehicles for the protection of persons and property in case of fire or
other emergency.
B. Fire lanes shall be approved by the Chief of Police and adopted by
formal resolution of the Franklin Township Board of Fire Prevention.
Said resolutions shall not be declared null and void unless specifically
rescinded by the Board of Fire Prevention.
C. Fire lanes shall be established to ensure that fire and other emergency
vehicles will have unobstructed access to such properties and the
structures, persons, vehicles, fire hydrants and other fire equipment
thereon in case of fire or other emergency.
D. The location, length, and width of said lanes shall be determined by the
Fire Official and shall be based on the use of the property, the size, type
and location of structures thereon, number of vehicles operated and
parked, number of persons using and occupying the premises, existing
means of ingress and egress, area of property, parking lots, and all
other relevant factors.
A. Fire lanes shall be identified by a four-inch wide yellow line painted on
the pavement within said lanes, parallel to curbs or the pavement
edges, and between three and four feet from the curbs or pavement
edges.
B. Where the Fire Official determines that additional pavement marking is
needed to clearly identify any fire lane, he may require the words "FIRE
LANE" to be painted on the pavement between the painted yellow line
and the curb or pavement edge. These words shall be yellow block
letters not less than 12 inches high with four-inch wide strokes.
C. Fire lane pavement markings shall be painted as frequently as needed
to maintain clear identification.
§ 132-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-21
1:735
§ 132-22. Time for compliance.
§ 132-23. Additional powers of Fire Official.
The Fire Official is further authorized, with approval of the Board of Fire
Prevention, to regulate, restrict, and prohibit the parking, stopping, or
standing of motor vehicles in said fire lanes, and to impose other regulations
deemed necessary to ensure that said areas are free from obstruction.
§ 132-24. Obstruction prohibited; enforcement; towing fine or
penalty.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in, or to obstruct in any
manner, fire lanes as herein so defined, or to obstruct with any motor
vehicle any public or private fire hydrant, building Fire Prevention
Department connection, or similar fire protection device or equipment.
A. Signs shall be a rectangular shape with red letters and border on a
white background, and shall be a minimum of 12 inches by 18 inches
with the longer dimension vertical.
B. Signs shall be made of metal or comparable durable material, and all
corners shall be rounded.
C. Signs shall be illuminated or reflectorized so as to be clearly visible
during hours of darkness.
D. The message on signs shall read: "NO PARKING FIRE LANE."
E. There shall be a sufficient number of signs for each fire lane to face all
directions of traffic flow into and within said areas, and so as not to
exceed a maximum distance of 100 feet between signs facing the same
direction of traffic flow.
F. Signs shall be mounted at right angles to the direction of and facing the
traffic they are intended to serve, and shall be installed so that the
bottom of each sign is five feet above the pavement. The bottom of the
sign may be seven feet above the pavement where subject to pedestrian
traffic at that location.
G. Signs shall be kept in good condition and clearly legible at all times.
Damaged, destroyed or missing signs shall be promptly replaced.
A. All new fire lanes not previously adopted by the Township of Franklin
shall comply fully with the provisions of this article.
B. All existing fire lanes currently identified as fire zones per previous
editions of this article may continue to be so identified until June 30,
1992, after which date all existing fire lanes noted herein shall comply
fully with the provisions of this article.131
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 132-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-24
1:736
A. The Township police, duly elected Township Fire Company Chiefs and
Assistant Chiefs, and official Township Fire Prevention Department
inspectors shall have concurrent jurisdiction together with the Fire
Official of Franklin Township, to enforce the provisions of this section
by the issuance of Township Municipal Court summons to vehicles
found parked in violation of this article.
B. The Municipal Court shall assess a penalty of not less than $50 for a
first violation and for any subsequent violations not more than $200
and/or 10 days' community service. [Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord.
No. 3070]
C. Any vehicle found parked in any fire lane in violation of this article by
the Fire Official or any police officer may be deemed a hazard to the
citizens of Franklin Township and may be towed to garage facilities
approved by the Police Department, at the vehicle owner's expense.
§ 132-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-24
1:737

ARTICLE VI
False Alarms
§ 132-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
FALSE FIRE ALARM — Any alarm for which there is no evidence of smoke
or fire or for which there is evidence of any equipment failure or evidence
of inadvertence on the part of any property owner, agents, servants and
employees and which registers in or is called into the Police Department
with a fire company responding to the location of the alarm.
§ 132-26. Reports and investigations; summonses.
In the case of a false fire alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department. In addition, in the case of false
fire alarms, the Fire Official shall cause an investigation to be made and
keep a record of such alarms on file. The Fire Official shall be empowered
to issue a Municipal Court summons in accordance with § 132-27.
§ 132-27. Violations and penalties.
A. For the second false fire alarm in any given calendar year, a first
warning may be issued; for the third false fire alarm in the same
calendar year, a second warning may be issued; for the fourth false fire
alarm in the same calendar year, the first summons may be issued; for
the fifth fire alarm in the same calendar year, a second summons may be
issued; for each false fire alarm in excess of five in the same calendar
year, additional summonses may be issued for each such additional
false fire alarm.
B. For the first summons issued in a calendar year, a fine of $100 shall be
paid to the Township; for a second summons issued in the same
calendar year, a fine of $200 shall be paid to the Township for each
summons in excess of two in a calendar year, a fine of $500 shall be paid
to the Township.
C. The Fire Official shall be empowered to deviate from the penalty
sequence provided by this section where it is his determination that
extenuating circumstances so warrant.
§ 132-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-27
1:739

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 132-28. Storage of explosives and blasting agents.
The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the
Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey, except as otherwise
may be allowed by permit or regulation.
§ 132-29. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas.
Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited within the Township
of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey. "Bulk storage" shall be defined
as a vessel or combination of vessels with water capacity in excess of 2,000
gallons.
§ 132-29.1. Open fires. [Added 12-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1613]
It shall be unlawful within the Township for any person to kindle, maintain
or assist in maintaining any bonfire or other exposed fire without first
obtaining a permit for said fire from the Township Department of Fire
Prevention.
§ 132-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-29.1
1:741

ARTICLE VIII
Reporting of Fire Emergencies
§ 132-30. Failure to report.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person or persons, having
knowledge of the same, to fail to report to the Police Department and/or
the Fire Official, immediately upon gaining such knowledge, the activation
of any fire-protection system or device or to fail to report the occurrence of
any fire or attempted arson or to fail to report the spill or leakage of any
flammable or combustible liquid or gas or of any hazardous material.
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:743

ARTICLE IX
Additional Regulations
§ 132-31. Equipment and utility rooms.
§ 132-32. Emergency disconnects.
All gas- or oil-fired heating appliances shall be equipped with at least one
remote emergency disconnect switch as required by the Fire Official.
§ 132-33. Records of tests and inspections. [Amended 12-11-2003
by Ord. No. 3414]
A complete written record of all tests and inspections required by Chapter
5 of the Fire Prevention Code shall be maintained on the premises by the
owner or occupant in charge of said premises, and copies of all such records
shall be submitted to the Fire Official upon request. These records shall be
on forms specified by the Fire Official.
§ 132-34. Refuse containers.
§ 132-35. Fire extinguishers.
§ 132-36. Fire alarm systems. [Amended 12-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1613]
A. No storage of flammable or combustible materials shall be permitted
within any furnace or boiler room or in any mechanical or utility room
which contains open-flame, heat-producing appliances.
B. Equipment room signs. All entry doors for equipment and utility rooms
shall be provided with identification signs as approved by the Fire
Official. These rooms shall include but not be limited to mechanical
rooms, electrical and/or gas control rooms, sprinkler control rooms and
fire alarm control panel rooms.
A. Refuse containers shall not be located within 10 feet of any building,
structure or structure overhand.
B. Exceptions shall be as follows:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Fully enclosed compactors fabricated of heavy metal.
A. Fire extinguishers shall be installed and maintained at all occupancies
as required by standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
B. Exceptions shall be for dwelling units within one- and two-family
dwellings.
§ 132-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-36
1:745
§ 132-37. Asphalt (tar) kettles.
§ 132-38. Modified bitumen system roofing operations.
A. Resetting fire alarm systems. Activated fire alarm systems which result
in a Fire Prevention Department being dispatched to that location shall
not be cleared or reset without approval from a responding Fire
Prevention Department officer or fire inspector from the Department of
Fire Prevention.
B. Silencing fire alarm systems. In other than one- or two-family dwellings,
activated fire alarm systems shall not be silenced until it has been
clearly determined by responsible on-site personnel that the system
activation is not due to smoke or other fire conditions on the premises
where the system is located.
A. Asphalt (tar) kettles shall not be used inside or on the roof of any
structure and shall be located a safe distance from all structures and
combustible materials while in operation. Every kettle shall be
equipped with a tight-fitting cover. Fired asphalt (tar) kettles shall not
be left unattended.
B. Fire protection. A minimum of one 20-B:C rated portable fire
extinguisher shall be provided within 30 feet of each asphalt (tar) kettle
while said kettle is in operation. A minimum of one additional 20-B:C
rated portable fire extinguisher shall be located on the room being
serviced by the operation. All site employees shall be adequately
trained in the use of portable fire extinguishers.
A. Liquid propane gas tanks for modified bitumen system roofing
operations shall be adequately chained to a cart or stand to prevent
tanks from falling over. A minimum of a one-hour fire watch shall be
maintained on each job site at the end of each work operation.
B. Fire protection. A minimum of one twenty-five-pound ABC portable fire
extinguisher shall be provided for each torch on the job and shall be
located in the immediate area where the torch is being operated. Each
torch operator shall also carry a two- to three-pound ABC auxiliary
portable fire extinguisher on a tool belt. All site employees shall be
adequately trained in the use of portable fire extinguishers.
§ 132-36 FRANKLIN CODE § 132-38
1:746
ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 132-39. Adoption of state penalties.
All penalties as indicated in Chapters 18 and 18B of Title 5 of the New
Jersey Administrative Code (Uniform Fire Code) shall be adopted for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter, except those penalties imposed as
hereinafter provided for violations of this chapter not included within the
Uniform Fire Code or authorized by the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 132-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
Except as otherwise provided by law, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter, including the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and
amendments and supplements thereto, shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each and every day that a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall continue after notification thereof by the
Department of Fire Prevention shall be deemed and considered a separate
and specific violation of this chapter. Such penalties as hereinabove
provided shall not be exclusive and, in addition thereto, any violation may
be abated by a civil acting instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 132-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-40
1:747
Chapter 134
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
§ 134-1. Cigarette vending machines prohibited.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors by automatic
vending machines, all cigarette vending machines are hereby prohibited in
the Township of Franklin.
§ 134-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under his or her control shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each day
on which such a machine is owned, operated, rented or permitted on the
premises shall result in an additional fine.
Chapter 138
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 93. Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 125.
§ 132-40 FRANKLIN CODE § 134-2
1:748
ARTICLE I
Standards; Training; Licensing
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1586 (Ch. 138 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 138-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 1-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1752; 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 3096; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591;
3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3748]
Chapter 24 of the State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.) regulating
retail food establishments, temporary retail food establishments and
agricultural markets, mobile retail food establishments, vending of food
and beverages and community residences and bed-and-breakfast
establishments shall be enforced in the Township of Franklin.
§ 138-2. Food handler’s training course. [Amended 12-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1614; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591; 6-12-2012 by Ord. No.
3979]
§ 138-3. Applicability.
No provisions of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 138-4. License and compliance with state regulations required.
[Amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3768]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food establishment as
defined in and governed by Chapter 24 of the State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq., established by this article without first having procured a
license from the Township so to do and without complying with any or all
of the provisions concerning the operation and maintenance of the same as
A. At each establishment where food is handled, at all times when such
establishment is open for business, there shall be on duty at each
separate food preparation station at least one person who shall have
successfully completed a food handlers training course given by the
Somerset County Health Department or a similar course offered within
the State of New Jersey. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
prohibit more than one person being so trained. Said training shall be
valid for a period of two years.
B. A training log containing the employee's name, date of training and
certificates of successful course completion shall be kept on site for
informational purposes.
C. All retail food establishments shall comply with the food handlers
training requirements as a condition of the license.
D. Any costs of an accepted food handler training course shall not be
borne by the Township of Franklin or Somerset County.
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-4
1:749
contained in the aforementioned State Sanitary Code. Said license shall be
effective from January 1 to December 31 of the year of issuance and shall
be renewable during the month of January.
§ 138-5. License fees. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165;
7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1906; 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1988; 8-12-2008
by Ord. No. 3768; 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 3979]
A. The fee for the review of building plans prior to or as part of
applications for retail establishments shall be $100.
B. The annual fee for licensing of retail establishments are hereby fixed as
follows:
(1) Restaurants:
(a) Capacity of one to 49 seats: $250.
(b) Capacity of 50 to 100 seats: $350.
(c) Capacity of 101 to 150 seats: $450.
(d) Capacity of 151 to 200 seats: $550.
(e) Capacity of 201 plus seats: $600.
(2) Other than restaurants:
(a) Less than 5,000 square feet: $250.
(b) 5,000 to 10,000 square feet: $350.
(c) More than 10,000 square feet: $700.
C. The fee for nonprofit organizations possessing IRS 501C3 status with
retail food operations ancillary to their primary function shall be
waived.
D. The annual fee for licensing of other types of retail establishments are
hereby fixed as follows:
(1) Mobile trucks: $150.
(2) Vending machines: $25.
(3) Temporary retail food establishment:
(a) For one location for more than 14 consecutive days and
multiple events: $200. This license shall be valid from January
1 to December 31.
(b) For one location for not more than 14 consecutive days and one
event: $75.
§ 138-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 138-5
1:750
§ 138-6. License revocation and suspension. [Amended 10-10-2000
by Ord. No. 3162; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3768; 6-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 3979]
[1] The fee for nonprofit organizations possessing IRS 501C3
status conducting temporary retail food operations as
described in this section shall be waived.
[2] For the purpose of Subsection D(3), a "temporary retail
food establishment" shall be defined as any establishment
which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period
of time in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public
exhibition or similar transitory gathering, including
church suppers, picnics or similar organizational meeting,
as well as agricultural markets conducted on a regular
basis.
(4) Infrequent retail food establishment:
(a) Sporadic Agricultural markets, covered dish suppers or similar
types of infrequent church or nonprofit-type institution meal
service shall be exempt from having to procure a license as
required by § 138-4, provided that all requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24.1 through 8:24-8.12 are met.
(5) Day-care/nursery schools
(a) Provide lunch service: $100.
(b) Do not provide lunch service: $50.
E. In the event a retail food establishment receives a "C" conditionally
satisfactory or unsatisfactory rating, a fee for reinspection will be
charged as follows: [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4183-17]
(1) First reinspection: $100.
(2) Second reinspection: $200.
(3) Third or subsequent reinspection: $300.
F. In the event a licensee shall have received two "C" Conditionally
Satisfactory ratings in the preceding year, the license fee noted in
§ 138-5B shall be doubled.
G. Failure to renew licenses during the month of January as set forth in
§ 138-4 shall result in a late fee of $25 or 25% of the license fee set forth
herein, whichever shall be greater.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Township Council for the violation by the
licensee of any provision of this article or Chapter 24 of the State
Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:24-11 et seq., or whenever it shall appear that
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-6
1:751
§ 138-7. Violation and penalties. [Added 1-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1752]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made hereunder shall severally, for each and every
violation and noncompliance, forfeit and pay a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. The imposition of a penalty for a
violation of this article shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue;
such violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time, and each 10
days that such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person to
whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper
manner or in violation of any law of the state or any provision of this
Code or other ordinance or that the person or persons conducting the
retail food establishment are of an unfit character to conduct the same
or that the purpose for which the license has been issued is being
abused to the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Township Council.
C. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served
upon the licensee at least two weeks prior to the date set for such
hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds
to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending such license.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by regular and certified mail to such person to be notified
at the business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing
before the Township Council, the person aggrieved shall have an
opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and, upon due
consideration and deliberation by the Township Council, the complaint
may be dismissed or, if the Township Council concludes that the
charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel
or suspend the license held by the licensee.
D. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Township
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the
Township Council.
§ 138-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 138-7
1:752
ARTICLE II
Inspections; Training Requirements and Costs
[Adopted 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3914]
§ 138-8. Inspections of food establishments. [Amended 6-12-2012
by Ord. No. 3979]
§ 138-9. Copies of inspection reports available for public
inspection.
Copies of inspection reports may be obtained by filing a request pursuant to
the requirements of the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47A:1-1 et seq.,
A. No license shall be issued to a retail food establishment until it has
passed a preopening inspection by Somerset County Health
Department.
B. When retail food inspections are conducted by the Somerset County
Health Department, the following grading system shall apply:
(1) A" shall mean that the retail food establishment is found to be
operating in substantial compliance with all local and state codes
and regulations.
(2) "B" shall mean that the retail food establishment is found to be
operating in acceptable compliance with all state codes and
regulations.
(3) "C" shall mean receiving a conditionally satisfactory inspection,
with three or more critical violations requiring correction and
reinspection.
(a) If the food establishment grade is "C" Conditionally
Satisfactory, upon subsequent correction of violations and
reinspection, the establishment can receive a grade of no
higher than "B" Satisfactory until the next routine inspection.
(4) An "unsatisfactory" rating shall mean that the retail food
establishment is operating with one or more violations that
constitute gross insanitary or public health hazards.
C. Inspections shall be performed annually, except that reinspections shall
be performed where retail food establishment receives a grade of less
than "B" Satisfactory.
D. A retail food establishment may be inspected more than once annually if
the Health Officer deems it appropriate.
E. The retail food inspection evaluation placard shall be posted
immediately in a conspicuous place near the public entrance of the
establishment in such a manner that the public may view the placard.
§ 138-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-9
1:753
with the Somerset County Health Office at least 10 days after the inspection
has been performed.132
132. Editor’s Note: Former § 138-10, Food handler’s course acknowledged and approved by
Board of Health, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 3979.
§ 138-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 138-9
1:754
Chapter 142
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Trees — See Ch. 222.
Recycling — See Ch. 284.
Scrap metal dealers — See Ch. 308.
§ 138-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-9
1:755

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 142-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials for the purposes of heating and cooking. It shall not
include the cinders produced in steam-generating plants.
BUILDING RUBBLE — The waste material resulting from the construction
or demolition of buildings or roads, tree trunks and limbs and other similar
material.
COLLECTOR — A person licensed to transport refuse for others as provided
in this chapter.
CONTRACTOR — A person engaged in the business of construction, repair
or demolition of buildings under a building permit issued by the Township.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. It shall not include foodprocessing
wastes from canneries, packing plants or similar industries nor
large quantities of condemned food products.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Health of the
Township or any duly authorized representative of the Department of Public
Health.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township or any
duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
REFUSE — Garbage, ashes, rubbish and building rubble as herein defined.
RUBBISH — All waste materials not included in "garbage" and "ashes,"
except large dead animals, large machinery or vehicles or such other waste
materials as are not commonly produced in homes, stores and institutions.
§ 142-2. Applicability.
The collection and removal of garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be done
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the
general supervision of the Department of Public Health and Police
Department and shall be subject to such additional rules and regulations as
those Departments may from time to time prescribe not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 142-3. Receptacles required. [Amended 6-13-1968 by Ord. No.
409]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in or about any dwelling or upon
any land or other premises within the Township any garbage or any refuse
of any kind which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of dust or odor or
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:757
which attracts insects and vermin, except in covered receptacles. The cover
shall be tight and flyproof. No receptacles in which refuse is contained shall,
when filled, exceed 50 pounds in weight.
§ 142-4. Time limit for accumulation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to retain, accumulate or to permit the
accumulation of any refuse in excess of one week. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to permit the retention of any refuse which is or becomes
obnoxious or offensive by reason of dust or odor or which attracts insects
and vermin.
§ 142-5. Removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the removal from premises
owned or occupied by him of any refuse produced on such premises except
in accordance with the preceding section or by a refuse collector duly
licensed by the Township as hereinafter set forth.
§ 142-6. Garbage receptacles.
Receptacles for garbage shall be of a type designed by the manufacturer
sufficiently strong for the purpose and may be pails or cans with a capacity
of not less than 2 1/2 nor more than 20 gallons. They shall be watertight and
shall have close-fitting covers, and said receptacles shall be kept covered,
except when opened for the filling or emptying of material.
§ 142-7. Ash and rubbish receptacles.
Receptacles for ashes shall be boxes, cans or small barrels that can be
handled by one man, of a size not to hold more than 100 pounds of coal
ashes, and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of ashes through the
container. Receptacles for rubbish, other than paper, shall be strong boxes,
baskets or barrels in which it is conveniently possible to place such rubbish.
§ 142-8. Placement of receptacles for collection. [Amended
1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 3189]
All receptacles for garbage, ashes or rubbish and all bundles of wastepaper
shall be set by the occupant on the sidewalk or street line in front of
the premises at the curb, or, if a private arrangement is made between
the occupant and the collector, they may be set at the rear or side of
the building, or the collector may remove them from within the premises
in accordance with such private arrangements between the occupant and
the collector. The garbage receptacles must be placed at curbside the
evening preceding scheduled trash pickup. The garbage receptacles shall
be removed no later than the evening following the trash pickup.
§ 142-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 142-9
1:758
§ 142-9. Condition and identification of receptacles; return by
collector.
The occupant shall keep all receptacles clean and in a proper condition for
safe handling. In buildings in which two or more families reside, each family
shall make its own receptacles with the initials of the respective name, so as
to render the receptacles readily identifiable. Immediately after receptacles
are properly emptied, the collector shall return them to the point from
which he took them.
§ 142-10. Dumping. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
§ 142-11. Handling of refuse before deposit.
All free liquids shall be drained from refuse before it is placed in receptacles
for collection. Garbage shall be wrapped in paper. All cans and bottles which
have contained food shall be thoroughly rinsed and drained before being
deposited for collection.
§ 142-12. Disposal of tree trimmings.
Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, grass clippings and similar material shall
be cut to a length not to exceed four feet and shall be disposed of in neat
tied bundles or in disposable containers, including but not limited to bags
and boxes.
§ 142-13. Refuse from outside Township.
The transporting of refuse into the Township from without the boundaries
of the Township for the purpose of accumulating, burying, burning or
destroying such refuse within the Township or to dump at the landfill is
prohibited.
A. No person shall dump, throw, discard or abandon, or cause the same to
be done, any garbage, rubbish, junk or any other refuse material on any
lands or premises in the Township, except in a sanitary landfill.
B. The accumulation or burying of refuse upon any premises within the
Township, except in a sanitary landfill of the Township, is declared to be
a nuisance and is prohibited.
C. Should the violation be of such a nature as to be evidenced or deemed
to constitute a hazard to public health or safety, the municipality may
elect to contract for the necessary removal of garbage, rubbish, junk or
refuse material. The cost of investigating, administering and removing
of same shall be assessed against the property and shall become a lien
and a tax on said property and be added to and be a part of the taxes to
be levied and assessed thereof and enforced and collected with interest
in the same manner as other taxes. The Township may elect to foreclose
on the properties of repeat violators and the proceeds used to maintain
said property.
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-14
1:759
§ 142-14. Adoption of Solid Waste Code. [Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 3165]
It is the intent of this chapter to adopt as a portion of this chapter
Subchapter 1 and Subchapter 3 of the Solid Waste Code of New Jersey
(1996). Such code is made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein. Should there be any conflict between this chapter and the
Solid Waste Code as adopted here, the provisions of this chapter shall rule.
§ 142-15. Littering. [Amended 11-9-2004 by Ord. No. 3501]
A. No person shall throw, cast, deposit, drop, scatter or leave or cause to
be thrown, cast, laid, deposited, scattered or left in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalks, parking or other public place in the Township or upon
any private property not owned by such person any coal, ash, dirt,
trash, garbage, gravel, sand, sawdust, shavings, hay, straw, leaves,
offal, vegetable matter of any kind, deal animals or putrescible matter
of any kind or building materials of any kind.
B. This section shall not be deemed to apply to the placing of any material
upon a public place or road, etc., for the purpose of achieving traction
in weather conditions of snow and ice.
C. Distribution of commercial advertising and unsolicited newspapers. No
person shall throw, cast, deposit, drop, scatter or leave or cause to be
thrown, cast, laid, deposited, scattered or left any commercial
advertising, unsolicited newspaper or advertising tabloids:
(1) In or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant;
(2) In or upon any vehicle;
(3) In or upon the private premises, which are inhabited, except by
handling or transmitting same directly to the owner, occupant, or
other person then present except as hereinafter, provided that a
person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so,
may place or deposit any such commercial advertising, unsolicited
newspaper, or advertising tabloid in or upon inhabited premises if
the premises are not posted as provided in this section and the
commercial advertising, unsolicited newspaper or advertising
tabloid is placed or deposited as to secure prevention from being
blown or drifted about the premises of sidewalks, streets or other
public places. Mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by
federal postal rules or regulations. This provision of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor
to newspapers.
D. Distribution of commercial matter, unsolicited newspapers or
advertising tabloids where refused or sign posted. No person shall
throw, deposit, distribute or cause to be thrown, deposited and
distributed any commercial advertising, unsolicited newspapers or
§ 142-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 142-15
1:760
advertising tabloid in or upon any premises if requested by anyone in or
upon such premises not to do so or if there is placed on such premises
in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the
words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement"
or any similar notice indicating that the occupants of the premises do
not desire to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such
matter left upon the premises.
§ 142-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:761

ARTICLE II
Collection and Transportation
§ 142-16. Compliance required; supervision; rules and regulations.
The collection and removal of garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be done
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to
the general supervision of the Department of Public Health and the Police
Department and shall be subject to such additional rules and regulations as
the Department of Public Health and the Police Department may from time
to time prescribe not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter.
§ 142-17. (Reserved)133
§ 142-18. Conditions for transport of refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport refuse over the streets of
the Township except in a watertight, covered containers or upon a vehicle
which is covered to prevent the escape of such refuse.
§ 142-19. Animal-drawn vehicles prohibited.
All vehicles used in the removal of garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be of
the motor-driven type, and no such vehicle shall be drawn by any horse or
animal.
§ 142-20. Construction and type of collection vehicles.
All vehicles used for collection or removal of garbage shall be provided with
a watertight box, body or container, closely or entirely covered with suitable
covers, adequate to prevent leakage or dripping or material being blown
from the vehicle. Such vehicles shall be kept closed at all times, except
during the period of emptying or filling and shall be kept clean and shall
be thoroughly washed, inside and outside, between each collection and the
next subsequent collection, and the contractor shall not permit any such
vehicle at any time to become offensive, either through odor, appearance or
for any reason. On all packer-type trucks, all garbage and refuse shall be
within the truck and not in the hopper whenever such truck travels more
than 1/4 mile between stops.
§ 142-21. Equipment required by vehicles; manner of collection.
Every vehicle used by the collector for removal or transportation of
garbage, ashes or rubbish shall carry at least one shovel and one broom
and any other equipment which may be necessary for keeping the vehicle
clean and for cleaning up the area at which such substances are collected.
The collector shall carefully clean the area from which garbage, ashes or
rubbish is collected and no ashes, garbage, rubbish or receptacles shall be
133. Editor's Note: Original § 142-17, Hours of collection, was repealed 4-23-1991 by Ord. No.
1632.
§ 142-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-21
1:763
left by the collector on the sidewalk or the curblines or in any area or space
from the place of collection to the vehicle. If any garbage, ashes, or rubbish
shall fall from a vehicle, either during the collection or transportation, such
articles shall be immediately gathered and replaced in the vehicle and the
place rendered clean.
§ 142-22. Inspection of equipment.
All equipment used by the collector shall be subject to inspection by the
Health Officer or anyone deputized by him for that purpose at any
reasonable time.
§ 142-23. Storage of vehicles.
Collection vehicles which are stored or parked in the Township overnight
shall be stored or parked only indoors and only in a commercial or industrial
zone of the Township. No collection vehicle which contains any garbage,
refuse, rubbish or ashes, as herein defined, shall be stored or parked
overnight, whether indoors or not, in any residential zone of the Township.
§ 142-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 142-23
1:764
ARTICLE III
Sanitary Landfills
§ 142-24. Establishment and discontinuance.
§ 142-25. Deposit of material.
Unless the Township has, by resolution, discontinued the operation of a
sanitary landfill, any person within the Township shall be permitted to
transport refuse produced upon premises owned or occupied by such
person and used exclusively for dwelling purposes to the sanitary landfill of
the Township in covered metal receptacles. Such refuse shall be delivered
to the sanitary landfill only at the times posted at the office of the Township
Clerk and when an attendant is present at the sanitary landfill. Refuse shall
be unloaded at the place or places designated by the attendant. It shall be
unlawful for any person to unload, throw or dump any refuse at the sanitary
landfill except in the presence of and in accordance with the directions of
the attendant. Tree limbs or other large objects shall be deposited at such
special location as the attendant shall designate.
§ 142-26. Use permit for contractors.
Unless the Township has, by resolution, discontinued the operation of a
sanitary landfill, nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the
transporting of building rubble by the contractor producing the same to
the sanitary landfill, provided that the contractor shall first obtain a permit
to do so from the Township Clerk. Such permit shall be valid only for the
duration of the building permit issued to the contractor for the job upon
which the rubble is produced. Contractors shall pay fees for the use of the
sanitary landfill in accordance with § 142-30.
§ 142-27. Commercial and industrial use.
Unless the Township has, by resolution, discontinued the operation of a
sanitary landfill, owners or proprietors of premises used for commercial,
industrial or other than dwelling purposes shall be permitted to transport
refuse produced upon premises personally or by their own employees to
the landfill without a permit. The fees for the use of the landfill shall be
paid by such persons for refuse other than that produced on premises used
exclusively for dwelling purposes in accordance with § 142-30.
A. The Township may establish and operate a sanitary landfill in any place
to be designated from time to time by the Council.
B. The Council may, by resolution, discontinue the operation of such
landfill from time to time, establish a landfill at a different location or
elect to use a privately operated landfill.
§ 142-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-28
1:765
§ 142-28. Refuse to be property of Township.
All refuse and other property deposited at any landfill by the Township shall
become the property of the Township.
§ 142-29. Conditions for entry; scavenging.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the landfill area of any landfill
operated by the Township except when the attendant is present and at
the hours prescribed by the Council. It shall be unlawful for any person
to scavenge or remove any article from a landfill area operated by the
Township.
§ 142-30. Records; fees.
§ 142-31. Clean fill requirements. [Added 2-11-1971 by Ord. No.
503]
Clean fill material of such inert substances as dirt, stones, shale, sand,
broken bricks and other similar ceramic materials, but excluding garbage,
junk, lumber and other large demolition material, may be used to fill in
any lands in the Township, subject to the prior approval of the Township
Engineer on application of the property owner. Such application shall state
the amount and quality of fill, origin of fill material, names of trucker and
contractor, times of dumping and expected final grade elevations of the
property. No fill will be permitted to encroach on any stream or drainage
easement in the Township, nor shall the filling in of any lands constitute any
nuisance to area residents at any time.
A. The attendant on duty at the Township landfill shall keep a daily record
of all refuse deposited by licensed collectors or others from whom fees
are due. At the end of each day, he shall transmit said record to the
Township Clerk, who shall, at least monthly, bill the person from whom
fees are due, as hereinafter set forth.
B. Each contractor transporting rubble and each owner of commercial
property transporting refuse therefrom shall pay to the Township a fee
for the privilege of depositing refuse in the landfill. The Council shall
adopt, by resolution, a schedule of fees and charges for the use of the
landfill. Such schedule may be changed or amended from time to time
by resolution.
§ 142-28 FRANKLIN CODE § 142-31
1:766
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 142-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the
court. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 142-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-32
1:767

ARTICLE V
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 3861]
§ 142-33. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Franklin and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 142-34. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Franklin or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or ground water, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 142-35. Prohibited conduct.
§ 142-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-35
1:769
§ 142-36. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 142-37. Enforcement. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3871]
This article shall be enforced by the proper designated authority of the
Township of Franklin as designated by the Township Manager.
§ 142-38. Violations and penalties.
§ 142-39. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Franklin.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the fines listed below
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: $250.
(3) Third through fifth offense: $500.
(4) Sixth offense and up: $1,000.
B. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 142-35 FRANKLIN CODE § 142-40
1:770
§ 142-40. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 142-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-40
1:771
Chapter 146
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 192.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 340.
Tenant and home buyer protection — See Ch.
359.
§ 146-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
[Amended 8-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1065; 11-26-1991 by Ord. No.
1682]
§ 146-2. Fees. [Amended 3-24-1977 by Ord. No. 844; 4-23-1981 by
Ord. No. 1051; 8-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1065; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478; 11-26-1991 by Ord. No. 1682; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1956;
11-12-1998 by Ord. No. 3018; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 3319; 8-12-2003
by Ord. No. 3392; 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3728; 8-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 3766]
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Franklin a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Division of
Code Enforcement," consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217(1), as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be
held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217(2) and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. A construction permit will be valid for one year from the date of
issuance, and the fee shall be the sum of the subcode and surcharge
fees in Subsection C(1) through (6) and C(8) and (9) hereafter listed and
shall be paid prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
§ 142-40 FRANKLIN CODE § 146-2
1:772
B. At the time of issuance of any construction and/or demolition permit(s),
where the permittee possesses 21 or more cubic yards of construction
and/or demolition waste materials, the Construction Official shall
provide to the permittee written instruction on proper disposal and
recycling of the construction and/or demolition waste materials.
(1) The Construction Official shall also furnish to the permittee a
notification of construction/demolition activity form. The permittee
shall complete and execute the form and transmit it via facsimile to
the Somerset County Department of Health - CEHA Operations
within 48 hours of the issuance of a construction and/or demolition
permit.
(2) Violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalties imposed pursuant to Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
C. Waiver of fees.
(1) Fees are hereby waived for public institutions and volunteer fire
companies. Fees may also be reduced by up to 50% for community
organizations and charitable institutions receiving tax-exempt
status under the Internal Revenue Code; provided, however, that
such waivers as set forth hereinabove for community organizations
and charitable institutions receiving tax-exempt status under the
Internal Revenue Code shall be so waived or reduced only by
resolution of the Township Council of the Township of Franklin.
Fees for work done without benefit of permits or which result in
violation notices being generated will not be eligible for reductions.
(2) Fees are hereby waived for any disabled person or a parent or
sibling of a disabled person for construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to his/her own living unit.
For the purposes of this subsection, "disabled person" shall mean a
person meeting the definition of "disabled person" set forth in
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e of the State Uniform Construction Code.
(3) In situations where the Health Officer declares a general water
emergency, fees associated in this chapter may be waived by
resolution of the Township Council (effective April 28, 2004).
D. Fees.
(1) The building subcode fees shall be as follows:
(a) New construction: Up to 100,000 cubic feet, the fee shall be
computed by volume multiplied by 0.0370.
(b) New construction: Over 100,000 cubic feet, the fee shall be
computed by volume multiplied by 0.037 for the first 100,000
cubic feet and 0.015 for all cubic footage 100,001 and over.
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:773
(c) New construction: commercial farm buildings and structures
on farms, the fee shall be computed by volume multiplied by
0.0008 to a maximum of $1,145.
(d) Alterations, renovations and repairs:
[1] Minimum fee: $50.
[2] All uses, multiplied by estimated cost of construction.
[a] Minimum fee: $50.
[b] Thirty dollars per $1,000 up to $50,000. [Amended
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3901]
[c] Twenty-three dollars per $1,000 for $50,001 to
$100,000. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
3901]
[d] Nineteen dollars per $1,000 over $100,000.
[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3901]
(e) Photovoltaic systems. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No.
3851]
[1] Photovoltaic systems shall be charged a flat fee of $100 for
Use Groups R3, R4 and R5. All other use groups shall be
charged fees based on the designated kilowatt rating of
the solar photovoltaic systems as follows:
[a] One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $250.
[b] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $500.
[c] Greater than 100 kilowatts shall be $750.
[2] Any structural work required to facilitate installation of
the system (i.e., increasing the capacity of load-bearing
components) will be permitted on a fee based upon the
cost of work for alterations as per our current fee
schedule.
(2) Flat fees shall be as follows:
(a) Reroof (R3 and R5), residential: $50.
(b) Re-siding (R3 and R5), residential: $50.
(c) Swimming pools (R3 and R5).
[1] Aboveground: $75.
[2] In-ground: $150.
(d) Sheds: $25.
§ 146-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 146-2
1:774
[1] One hundred square feet to 250 square feet: $75.
[2] Over 250 square feet fee will be computed by volume of
structure.
(e) Fences over six feet high: $25.
(f) Retaining walls, Use Groups R3 and R5 $150. All other uses
based on cost of construction.
(g) Radon: $50 per vent stack.
(h) Underground storage tank (UST) installation (R3 and R5): $35.
(i) Aboveground storage tank (AST) installation (R3 and R5): $35.
(j) Asbestos removal: $100.
(k) Temporary structures, tents, temporary trailers: $90.
(l) Moving structures: $100 plus construction permits for all work
associated with relocating and reconstruction of the structure.
(m) Demolition:
[1] R3 and R5 and farm buildings under 5,000 square feet and
less than 30 feet in height: $75.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(n) Signs: $50.
(3) State surcharge fees shall be as follows: State permit fees shall be
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2, as same may be amended from
time to time.
(4) Expedited plan review fees will be $75 per hour per subcode plus
administration. Work will be done on an overtime basis.
(5) There shall be an additional fee of $60 per hour (minimum one
hour) for review and processing of any amendment or change to a
plan or application that has already been released.
(6) Special inspections: Saturdays, Sundays, evenings or otherwise
outside of normal business hours will be $100 per hour with a twohour
minimum per subcode required.
(7) Plumbing fees shall be as follows:
(a) Fee per fixture, piece of equipment or appliance connected to
the plumbing system and for each appliance connected to the
gas piping or oil piping system, except as indicated in
Subsection D(7)(b) below: $25.
(b) Fee per special device for the following: grease traps, oil
separators, refrigeration units, utility service connections,
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:775
backflow preventers equipped with test ports, steam boilers,
hot water boilers, active solar systems, sewer pumps and
interceptors, gas piping and oil piping: $65.
(c) Fee per residential backflow preventer (required to be
inspected yearly): $50.
(d) Fee per commercial or industrial backflow preventer (required
to be inspected yearly): $100.
(e) Minimum plumbing fee shall be $50.
(8) Mechanical fees shall be as follows:
(a) Water heaters: $45.
(b) Replacement furnaces, boilers and HVAC units: $60 per unit
replaced. Rooftop H.V.A.C.: $120. [Amended 10-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 3901]
(c) Mechanical plan review for R3 and R5 Use Groups: $75.
(d) Installation and removal of aboveground storage tanks under
2,001 gallons:
[1] Use Groups R3 and R5: $60.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(e) Installation of underground storage tanks under 2,001 gallons:
$200.
(f) Removal of underground storage tanks under 2,001 gallons:
[1] Use Groups R3 and R5: $60.
[2] All other use groups: $220.
(g) Heat-producing devices in R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, including
but not limited to fireplaces, solid fuel stoves, furnaces, boilers,
metal chimneys and chimney relinings: $50.
(9) Plan review fees: A nonrefundable fee of 10% of total fees for plan
review and prototype plans.
(10) Occupancy permit fees shall be as follows:
(a) Certificate of occupancy.
[1] R3 and R4 residential: $100.
[2] All other uses: $135.
[3] For apartments within the same building the fee shall be
$135 for the first five units and $135 for each additional
five units or portion thereof
§ 146-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 146-2
1:776
(b) Continued certificate of occupancy.
[1] R3 and R5 residential: $100.
[2] All other use groups: $200.
(c) Change of use: $150.
(d) Certificate of approval: no fee.
(e) Renewal of temporary certificate of occupancy: $50.
(f) Renewal of a lapsed permit that is within the guidelines of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16(f): $50.
(11) Electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
(a) For the purpose of computing these fees, devices, outlets,
fixtures and switches shall include but not be limited to burglar
alarms, intercom panels, smoke detectors, thermostats,
motors, photocells, level probes, temperature sensors and
similar items:
[1] For the first 50 devices: $50.
[2] Each additional 25 devices or fraction thereof: add $25.
(b) For the purpose of computing these fees, the term service,
service panel, subpanels, feeders, switches, switchboards,
motor control centers, alarm panels, signs, disconnects:
[1] Up to 200 amps: $75.
[2] Two hundred one amps up to 1,000 amps: $150.
[3] One thousand amps and above: $600.
(c) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors, including
ranges, ovens, surface units, dryers, air-conditioning units,
water heaters, central heat (oil, gas, electric), baseboard heat
units, generators, transformers or other devices consuming,
generating or altering electricity:
[1] Motors and electrical devices:
[a] Fractional hp, up to 10 hp: $25.
[b] Eleven hp up to 50 hp: $75.
[c] Fifty-one hp up to 100 hp: $150.
[d] One hundred one hp up to 500 hp: $600.
[e] Each increment of 50 hp or part thereof: add $50.
[2] Transformers and generators:
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:777
[a] Fractional kw, up to 10 kw: $25.
[b] Eleven kw up to 50 kw: $75.
[c] Fifty-one kw up to 100 kw: $150.
[d] One hundred one kw up to 500 kw: $600.
[e] Each increment of 50 kw or part thereof, add $50.
(d) Pools, fountains and similar installations (includes bonding,
motor, two outlets and a switch):
[1] Aboveground: $75.
[2] In-ground: $150.
(e) Light standards (each): $25.
(f) Trailers (based on fee scheduled): $75.
(g) Modular office cubicles (each unit): $25.
(h) Branch circuits (all): $35.
(i) Reinspection or reintroduction of service: $35.
(j) Minimum fee: $50.
(k) All other work requiring review and inspections: Fees are to be
based on $23 per $1,000 of estimated cost (i.e., grounding
grids, underground conduits, etc.). For the purpose of
determining estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to the
Division cost data produced by the architect or engineer of
record or by a recognized estimating firm or by the contractor.
(l) Residential alarms shall be charged the minimum fee of $50.
(m) Photovoltaic systems: the fee shall be based on the designated
kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system as follows:
[Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 3851]
[1] One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $100.
[2] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $200.
[3] Greater than 100 kilowatts shall be $400.
(12) Fire subcode fees (fire protection and other hazardous equipment)
shall be as follows:
(a) Sprinkler heads.
§ 146-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 146-2
1:778
Number of Heads Fee
1 to 5 $75
6 to 20 $100
21 to 100 $175
101 to 200 $200
401 to 1,000 $850
Over 1,000 $1,100
(b) Standpipe systems, each riser: $250.
(c) Sprinkler valves.
[1] Alarm valve: $100 each.
[2] Dry pipe valve: $200 each.
[3] Preaction valve: $200.
[4] Each additional riser: $200.
(d) Fire pumps: $250.
(e) Yard hydrants: $100 each.
(f) Freestanding Fire Department connection: $200.
(g) Alarm, supervisory and signaling systems, including but not
limited to waterflow tamper switches, detectors, emergency
lighting: $50 plus a fee per associated device:
[1] R3 and R5: $5 per device.
[2] All other use groups: $10 per device.
(h) Pre-engineered systems, including but not limited to wet
chemical, FM-200, CO2, inergin, foam systems and any other
pre-engineered system not listed: $200 per system.
(i) Smoke control systems: $200.
(j) Heat-producing devices, including but not limited to fireplaces,
solid fuel stoves, furnaces, boilers, metal chimneys and
chimney relinings: $50.
(k) Commercial kitchen exhaust systems and hazardous exhaust
systems: $250.
(l) Emergency generator systems: $100.
(m) Elevator recall: $75.
(n) Fire extinguishers.
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:779
[1] One to 10: $50.
[2] Each additional five: $25.
(o) Underground fire main service shall be 2% of construction
costs of installation.
(p) Minimum review fee for items not specifically covered: $50.
(13) Elevator safety subcode fees shall be as follows: The fee for
elevator plan review and elevator installation shall comply with the
standards listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
(14) Variations shall be as follows:
(a) Class I structures: $450.
(b) Class II structures: $150.
(c) Class III structures: $90.
(d) Reapplication for variation: 25% of original fee.
(15) The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be
charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number
of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility and who
are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be considered
maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual
construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/
fire protection, electrical and plumbing. Fees for annual permits
shall be as follows:
(a) One to 25 workers (including foremen): $667/worker; each
additional worker over 25: $232/worker.
(b) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $ 140 per subcode and a list of not more
than three individuals to be trained per subcode shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Department of Community
Affairs, Bureau of Code Services, Education Unit along with a
copy of the construction permit (Form F170). Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey." The
Department shall register these individuals and notify them of
the courses being offered.
(16) Hourly charges and fees for development-wide inspection of homes
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be in such amount
as may be reasonable and necessary in order to ascertain whether
a violation exists or to verify that any work performed has abated
the violation. The hourly charge shall be the same as the hourly
charge set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(b)4 times the number of
hours spent by the Code Official in determining whether a violation
§ 146-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 146-2
1:780
Chapter 151
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 26.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 210.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
§ 151-1. Adoption of state regulations. [Amended 12-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1612]
The New Jersey State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq. and the
New Jersey Regulations for Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings,
N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.1 et seq. are hereby adopted in their entirety as part of this
chapter.
§ 151-2. Reoccupancy log book. [Amended 12-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1612]
The owner, managing agent, or individual responsible for renting the
individual units of a multiple dwelling shall maintain a reoccupancy log.
§ 151-3. Applicability to rooming houses.
All regulations contained herein applying to hotels and multiple dwellings
should, where applicable, also apply to rooming houses. Such applicability
shall be determined by the Township official charged by the terms of this
chapter for administering and enforcing the same.
exists or verifying that any work performed has abated the
violations.
A. The reoccupancy log shall include the name of the current lessee and
the date on which any changes in rental status occurred.
B. The reoccupancy log shall be accessible to inspectors of the
Department of Public Health during regular business hours. Failure to
produce the reoccupancy log within 24 hours of a request, written or
oral, of the Department of Public Health shall constitute a violation of
this section.134
C. The information required to be kept in the reoccupancy log shall be
maintained and available for inspection for a minimum of two years
from the date of its entry into the log.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-4
1:781
§ 151-4. Designation of Housing Official.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Housing Official designated by the Township Manager or by any
subordinates of such Housing Official.
§ 151-5. Applicability. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
This chapter shall be applicable to all multiple-family dwelling units, hotels,
motels, rooming houses and senior residences in the Township of Franklin.
§ 151-6. Certificates of occupancy; inspections. [Amended
4-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1126; 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1467; 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 1576]
§ 151-7. Fees. [Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1126; 3-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 1467; 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
3165]
A. Each multiple dwelling unit in the Township shall be required to have a
certificate of occupancy issued prior to the renting of such unit or, if
such unit is rented at the time of the effective date of this chapter, then
at the renting of such unit to any new tenant.
B. All multiple dwelling units and common areas shall be subject to
inspection once every fifth year in accordance with N.J.S.A.
55:13a-13(a)-(d) at which time a certificate of occupancy shall be
required for continued occupancy.
(1) All living units in multiple-family dwellings shall be subject to fire
safety inspection by the Fire Prevention Department once every
fifth year in accordance with the provisions of § 132-11B(1)(l)[2],
(2)(c)[2], and (3)(a)[12][b]. [Added 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 3032]
C. Each hotel, motel, rooming house of senior residence in the Township of
Franklin shall be inspected once a year for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and a certificate of occupancy issued upon
such compliance. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
D. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the Township
inspection official from inspecting more often than indicated above, but
such inspection shall be made with no charge for same.
A. The fees for such inspection shall be as follows:
(1) Multiple dwelling units: $75 per dwelling unit and common areas:
$50 per building or floor when building is greater than three floors.
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 3739]
(2) Hotels, motels: $200 plus $10 per room.
(3) Rooming house: $50.
§ 151-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 151-7
1:782
§ 151-8. Inspections; right of entry.
The Housing Official or his subordinate is directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of multidwelling units, hotels, motels and rooming
houses within the Township in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of such units and
of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Housing Official or his subordinate is authorized to enter, examine, inspect
and survey, at any time deemed necessary by him, all such units. The
owner or occupant of all such units or the person in charge thereof shall
give the Housing Inspector or his subordinate or agent free access at
all times for the purpose of making such inspection, examination and/or
survey. Every occupant of such a unit shall give the owner thereof or his
agent or employee access to any such units at all times for the purpose of
making repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or other ordinances in force in the Township or of
statutes pertaining to health of the State of New Jersey.
§ 151-9. Notice of violations; summons, penalties, emergency
orders, penalties. [Amended 6-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1778;
11-27-2002 by Ord. No. 3252; 11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 3252]
(4) Senior residences: $200. [Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
B. In the event a prospective licensee shall receive a conditional or
temporary license or shall be denied a license, all further inspections
necessary in order for the licensee to obtain a permanent annual license
shall be charged for each reinspection as follows:
(1) Multidwelling units: $75 per dwelling unit for which reinspection is
required. [Amended 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 1612; 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. 3739]
(2) Hotels, motels: $10 per room for which reinspection is required.
(3) Rooming house: $50.
A. Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
notice of such alleged violation shall be given to the owner or operator
of the premises, as hereinafter provided. Such notices shall put in
writing the various violations and the section or subsection violated and
allow a reasonable time to abate or correct such violations, not to
exceed 60 days from the date of such notice. Such notice shall be served
personally on the owner, operator or occupant or shall be sent by
regular mail and certified mail to the owner's last known address. In the
event service cannot be effected, the Housing Inspector shall post a
copy on the building where the violations occur, or the notice shall be
served by any other method authorized under the laws of this state.
[Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
§ 151-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-9
1:783
§ 151-10. Required notifications. [Amended 6-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1576; 6-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1778]
§ 151-11. Records.
Accurate and up-to-date records shall be kept by the Housing Official of the
status of inspections and certificates of occupancy issued on all buildings
covered by this chapter.
§ 151-12. Inspection of heating system. [Added 7-12-1988 by Ord.
No. 1411]
All multiple dwelling owners shall cause the furnace, boiler or other central
heating system under their control in such building to be inspected by a
qualified person between May 1 and September 1 of each year. The findings
shall be forwarded to the Township of Franklin Department of Public Health
within 15 days following the inspection.
B. At the expiration of the time given to abate a nuisance or correct a
condition as set forth in the notice of violation, where a reasonable
effort, in the discretion of the Housing Inspector, has not been made by
the owner or operator to abate or correct the violations enumerated,
the Housing Inspector shall summon such persons before the Municipal
Court of the Township or any other court having jurisdiction.
C. Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may without
written notice or hearing, issue a verbal order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Any person to whom such an order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately.
D. Failure to secure a certificate of occupancy prior to the renting of a
multiple dwelling unit shall be a violation of this chapter. An owner and/
or operator violating the requirement to secure a certificate of
occupancy shall be subject to the penalties in § 151-15. [Amended
11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 3252; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. All owners and/or operators of multiple-family dwellings in the
Township of Franklin shall notify the Township Building Inspector and
the Township Department of Public Health within 48 hours of any
vacancy of any unit.
B. The Building Inspector and/or Department of Public Health shall issue a
certificate of occupancy or a written denial setting forth the specific
reasons for such denial within 48 hours of receipt of such notification.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner and/or operator from
providing additional notice to the Building Inspector and/or
Department of Public Health and scheduling a date and time for
inspection convenient to all parties.
§ 151-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 151-12
1:784
§ 151-13. Applicability of more restrictive provisions.
Wherever a provision(s) of this chapter and a provision(s) of any other
ordinance(s) of the Township of Franklin applies to a particular situation,
the more restrictive of such provisions shall be deemed to apply.
§ 151-14. Construction. [Added 6-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1778]
It is the intention of the Township Council of the Township of Franklin that
this chapter be read in pari materia with all other applicable ordinances
within the Township of Franklin and statutes of the State of New Jersey that
are not inconsistent with the provisions contained herein.
§ 151-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-27-2001 by Ord. No.
3252]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the court.
Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 156
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Scrap metal dealers — See Ch. 308.
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing a uniform set of procedures for administering the
issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses issued for the operation of a
junkyard or junk shop.
§ 156-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
A. No fewer than two portable electric heaters per dwelling unit shall be
supplied at no cost to the tenants thereof, provided that the electric
wiring is sufficient.
B. Auxiliary boilers must be connected to the existing heating plant.
§ 151-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-2
1:785
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any substance defined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:26-1.4, 7:26-8.1 and 8:59-1.3 as well as N.J.S.A. 34:5A-l et seq. Also
included are any substances or wastes classified by the New Jersey
Department of Health as a carcinogen (CA), mutagen (MU), teratogen (TE)
or corrosive (CO).
JUNK — Any waste or discarded material, old lumber or materials obtained
from dismantled buildings, old iron or other metal or substance, glass,
paper, machine parts, accessories, discarded machinery or discarded
machines, in whole or in part, registered or unregistered motor vehicles
which are unfit for reconditioning for sale for highway transportation, used
parts of motor vehicles and any material acquired or collected commercially
and commonly known as "junk" in the ordinary meaning of the word.
JUNK DEALER — A junk shop or junkyard keeper who also uses or intends
to use one or more vehicles for the purpose of buying, collection or
otherwise acquiring junk for commercial purposes and placing, collecting
or storing same in his junkyard or junk shop.
JUNK SHOP — Any building within the Township in which junk is placed,
collected, stored or kept.
JUNKYARD — Any lot of land within the Township on which junk is placed,
collected, stored or kept.
§ 156-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate a junkyard
or junk shop or to engage in the business of a junk dealer within the
limits of the Township without first having obtained a license or permit
therefor, annually as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. Any license issued hereunder shall be valid for a one-year
period from the date of issuance and must be renewed each year thereafter.
The issuance of any license hereunder shall not be deemed to relieve the
licensee from the requirement to obtain any other licenses, permits or
approvals required by law.
§ 156-4. Application information. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No.
3162]
A. Any person desiring a license or a renewal of an existing license for a
junkyard or junk shop or as a junk dealer shall file with the Township
Clerk an original application, under oath, in writing, on a form
furnished by the Township Clerk.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, business name and business address.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation
or other entity and, if another entity, a full explanation and
description thereof.
§ 156-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-4
1:786
(3) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address
and date of birth.
(4) If the applicant is a partnership, the full names, residence
addresses, dates of birth of each partner;
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, in the case of a
corporation, the full name, residence addresses, dates of birth of
each major officer and each stockholder, the name and address of
the registered agent and the address of the principal office (the
term "major stockholder" as used herein means and includes any
person owning or having an interest, either legal or equitable, in
10% or more of the stock issued and outstanding of the applicant
corporation); in the case of another entity, the full names, residence
addresses, dates of birth of each person owning or having any
interest, either legal or equitable, aggregating in value 10% or
more of the total capital of the said entity, the name and address of
the registered agent, if any, and the address of the principal office.
(6) Whether the applicant or any partners, officers or stockholders
thereof have ever been convicted of a crime and, if so, the name of
the person convicted, the date of conviction, the crime or charge
involved. The term "officer" as used herein means and includes the
president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of a corporate
applicant.
(7) The location of the business as shown upon a detailed and suitable
map thereof accompanying and attached to the initial application.
The map shall be prepared according to scale and certified by a
land surveyor licensed by the State of New Jersey. The map shall
show the premises sought to be licensed; the existing or proposed
buildings and fences and their location; the size, height and
entrance of all buildings; the type of construction of buildings; the
height, length, width of each storage pile containing combustibles
and description of materials contained in each combustible storage
pile; and a description of all fixtures, crushers and similar
mechanical equipment located on the premises together with all
other information required by this chapter. Any application for
renewal of a license need not be accompanied by the map required
hereinabove provided the applicant certifies there have been no
changes from that depicted on the initial map. If there have been
changes and, if in the opinion of the Township Engineer the
changes are not of a substantial nature, no new map shall be
required.
(8) As to any existing or proposed fences:
(a) The kind and condition of material in the existing or proposed
fence;
(b) The height of the fence, when erected;
§ 156-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-4
1:787
§ 156-5. Fee.
The fee for said license shall be $1,000 per annum for any junkyard or
junk shop located on premises in excess of 1/2 acre and $500 for all other
junkyards or junk shops.
§ 156-6. Standards for approval. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1843]
Upon receipt of an application for a license or renewal thereof, the
Township Clerk shall submit same to the Police Department, Zoning Officer,
Fire Prevention Department, Public Health Department and Engineer for
reports as to compliance or noncompliance of the establishment with
regulations, statutes and ordinances, including all terms of this chapter.
(c) The manner of construction of the fence;
(d) Whether the fence will be constructed around all boundaries of
the property and, if not, the reason therefor.
(9) A description of each type of hazardous waste located or stored on
the premises as well as a detailed description of the manner and
method of handling such waste including, but not limited to, a
detailed description of the manner of storage, removal and disposal
of all such wastes. No hazardous wastes other than hazardous
wastes customarily and normally found in motor vehicles shall be
permitted to be stored or located on the premises at any time.
C. Each application for a junkyard or junk shop license shall contain an
agreement that the applicant accepts the license to be granted upon the
condition that it may be suspended or revoked for cause at any time by
the Council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. In addition to submission of an application containing all the
information required by § 156-4 hereof, the establishment shall comply
with the following requirements:
(1) The junkyard or junk shop shall be maintained so that weeds and
brush do not grow and trash does not accumulate on the licensed
premises.
(2) Effective control measures shall be utilized to minimize and
eliminate the presence of rodents and the breeding of insects and
other vermin in the facilities and yard. Such measures as
preventing the pooling of water and eliminating the availability of
food for the above-mentioned vermin shall be implemented.
(a) The owner or operator shall secure a licensed exterminator or
a person who can apply insecticides or rodenticides in full
compliance with New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection regulations N.J.A.C. 7:30-1. Receipts shall be
maintained to verify that an exterminator or person qualified
§ 156-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-6
1:788
as indicated above has inspected and/or treated the yard area
at least monthly or more frequently if indicated.
(3) Outside storage.
(a) The outside storage of combustibles shall comply with the
following table which sets forth in feet the separations
required between exposed building and storage piles or
between isolated piles:
Exposed
Face
Dimensions
Storage
Pile
Height 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Exposure Separation Distance
25 56 62 67 73 77 82 85
50 75 84 93 100 107 113 118
100 100 116 128 137 146 155 164
150 117 135 149 164 178 189 198
200 130 149 167 183 198 212 226
250 140 162 181 198 216 231 245
(b) In addition to the separation requirements specified herein, all
storage piles shall be segregated with only like materials being
stored in one pile.
(4) The junkyard or junk shop, which junkyard or junk shop is located
on more the 1/2 acre, shall provide thirty-foot wide all-weather
access roadways leading to the site from a public way and shall
provide eighteen-foot wide all-weather access roadways
connecting the access roadway within and along the full interior
perimeter of the storage areas and between storage piles. The
applicant shall submit with the application for license a plan
showing each such road which shall be reviewed and revised if
required by the Director of Fire Prevention and the Township
Engineer.
(5) The storage of junk tires shall comply with Guidelines for Outdoor
Storage of Scrap Tire in Standard 231D, Appendix C, 1989 Edition
of the National Fire Protection Association, which is incorporated
herein and made a part hereof and copies of which are on file with
the Township Clerk. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
(6) The establishment shall provide a lighting system in accordance
with the Township's Design Standards as contained in Article XXVI
of Chapter, Land Development, § 112-202 et seq.
(7) The owner(s) of the establishment shall provide home phone
number(s) and/or pager or answering service such that the
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:789
§ 156-7. Compliance plan.
municipal officers may reach each owner during off-business hours
in the event of any emergency.
(8) In all facilities where hazardous wastes are handled, the owner
shall maintain on site a means of containing effluent from spills,
leaks or system breakdowns. Such spills, leaks or breakdowns shall
be immediately reported to the Department of Public Health, which
shall forthwith inspect the effluent from same. No material so
contained shall be discharged or disposed of until after the
inspection and approval for discharge or disposal is obtained.
(9) The owner shall submit to the Township Clerk copies of all
Workplace Hazardous Substance Lists filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
34:5A-1 et seq., the Worker and Community Right to Know Act.
(10) The owner shall not permit the storage on the premises of more
than 100 pounds of propane, 450 cubic feet of acetylene, and 530
cubic feet of oxygen used for cutting of metal.
A. Prior to the issuance of the initial license for any junkyard or junk shop
existing as of the effective date of this chapter, a compliance plan shall
be submitted for any such junkyard or junk shop not in full compliance
with this chapter. The compliance plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Board within 120 days following the adoption of this chapter.
The compliance plan shall indicate measures which will be taken during
the period for which the permit sought will be effective to progressively
fulfill the provisions of the overall compliance plan, which compliance
shall be fully accomplished within three years of the effective date of
this chapter.
(1) The initial plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board, which
shall conduct a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be recorded.
The Planning Board shall thereafter adopt a resolution containing
findings of fact and conclusions of law and recommending
approval, approval with conditions or disapproval. This resolution
shall be forwarded to the Township Council. The Council shall,
within 45 days after receipt of said resolution, make a final
determination on the compliance plan after a de novo hearing
based upon the transcript before the Planning Board. The Council
shall have the right to supplement the record below by additional
testimony or evidence; and, further, the Council shall have the right
to delete, amend or supplement the findings of fact and/or
conclusions of law set forth by the Planning Board in accordance
with the record before the Council. The initial plan shall detail all
work to be performed in the compliance process, including a
specification as to the year in which the plan shall be completed,
and shall specify a reasonable proportion of the work to be
completed each year such that there shall not be an undue
concentration of work performed in the final years of the plan. Such
§ 156-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-7
1:790
plan may be subject to amendment or revision from time to time
as additional relevant information and circumstances will justify
the same. The compliance plan shall demonstrate the foregoing by
including at least the following information:
(a) A legal description of the premises where the business is
conducted and a map or maps of the premises prepared by a
professional engineer and land surveyor licensed in the State
of New Jersey, which shall depict and show the entire tract
involved, and shall have permanent concrete or metal markers
of sufficient number and location such that the boundaries of
the property and any municipal boundary line traversing the
property or any portion thereof are reasonably ascertainable.
Where the junkyard property abuts a county, municipal and/or
state right-of-way or easily ascertainable and stable natural
terrain feature, no monuments shall be required along the
same. The plan shall also depict all roads or principal buildings
on the tract or within 200 feet thereof; and all proposed allweather
roadways; existing and proposed storage pile heights
including all dimensions thereof with the specific materials
stored currently and to be stored therein under the provisions
of the compliance plan; all wooded areas, brooks, streams,
bodies of water, floodways, flood hazard areas and stream
encroachment boundaries on the tract involved and within 200
feet thereof. The applicant shall be permitted to rely on
municipal records in depicting any improvements off the
licensed premises.
(b) Provisions for compliance with the separation and segregation
of combustible or flammable materials as specified herein.
(c) Provisions for the construction of all-weather roadways to,
within and along the storage areas.
(d) Provisions for the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous
wastes.
(e) Provisions for supplying necessary lighting of the facility which
shall, as a minimum, be in accordance with the Township's
Design Standards as contained in Article XXVI of Chapter 112,
Land Development, § 112-202 et seq.
(f) Provisions for a fence erected around the junkyard area to
assure nonaccess thereto by unauthorized persons. The fence
shall be woven wire of the chain link type or, if adequate tree
and shrub growth exist to ensure a year round dense screen
and is sufficient to insure the health, safety and welfare of
adjacent properties, the Township Engineer may accept same
in lieu of a fence. Fencing plans and details shall be submitted
to the Township Engineer for his review and approval. The
fence shall be accessible around its entire perimeter along the
§ 156-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-7
1:791
interior for purposes of inspection. The fence shall be
maintained in such a manner that it is free from vegetation
such as honeysuckle, multiflora roses and other types of
vegetation indigenous to the area. The fence may be erected
over a period of years not exceeding two years in as nearly
equal increments as reasonably possible, provided that the
owner shall post a performance guaranty in the form of either
cash, certified check or letter of credit in an amount equal
to the uncompleted portion of the fence. Said performance
guaranty shall be posted at the time of the approval of the
initial plan.
(g) Provisions for simultaneous operation of the junkyard and
compliance in accordance with the proposed plan.
(h) An itemized estimate of costs for all compliance work to be
completed in the ensuing year.
(i) Such other information as may be reasonable.
B. Complete applications for license renewals of those licenses for which a
compliance plan has been approved must be filed with the Municipal
Clerk at least 150 days prior to the expiration of any previously existing
permit, and the Township Council shall act within 90 days after filing of
a complete application. Failure to approve or disapprove within said
time shall result in an automatic disapproval of the plan.
C. Upon each application for renewal of any permit after approval of the
compliance plan required herein, the applicant shall be required to
update the compliance plan so as to:
(1) Indicate only those changes or differences which have taken place
or have occurred since its last application.
(2) Set forth those changes in performance or maintenance guarantees
required by actual performance or changed conditions.
(3) Set forth all compliance screening and similar operations which
have been completed during the past year.
(4) Post security, as hereinafter defined, sufficient to cover the cost of
the compliance work required by the initially approved compliance
plan or any amendments thereto to be performed during the
ensuing year and maintenance of compliance improvements during
the said ensuing year.
(5) In the event of a dispute as to the amount of the security or the
compliance work and maintenance required by the approved
compliance plan for the ensuing year, the applicant may resort to
the appeal procedures set out in § 156-8D below.
§ 156-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-8
1:792
§ 156-8. Security deposit.
Prior to the issuance of any license or the renewal of any license of any
junkyard or junk shop required to submit a compliance plan, in addition to
compliance with the provisions of § 157-7 hereof and all other applicable
ordinances, the applicant shall submit to the Municipal Clerk security in
the form of cash, certified check or letter of credit to assure completion
of all compliance activities which are to be undertaken during the period
for which the permit is to be issued, in accordance with the following
standards:
A. The guarantee shall be in an amount equal to the total estimated cost to
the applicant of completing all compliance activities required by the
plan for the period of the license as estimated by the Township
Engineer. The total estimated cost shall be based upon the estimated
costs which would prevail upon expiration of the guaranty period and
shall also include appropriate allowances for contract-related costs
such as engineering, legal, financial and other usual costs. The
performance guaranty shall be approved by the Township Attorney as to
form, sufficiency and execution. If the required improvements as
specified in the compliance plan have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be liable
thereon, at the option of the municipality, for the reasonable costs of the
improvements not completed, and prior to or after receipt of the
proceeds thereof, the Township may install, complete or correct such
improvements.
B. Periodic inspection may be made to evaluate performance of the
applicant with respect to compliance procedures.
C. At the request of the applicant, the amount of the security may be
adjusted, provided that the basis therefor is substantiated by said
applicant and approved by the Township Council after receipt of a
report from the Township Engineer and Township Attorney.
D. In the event of a dispute between the applicant and the Township
Engineer concerning the amount of the required security, appeal may
be had by the applicant to the Township Council. Notice of appeal must
be filed with the Township Clerk within 30 days of receipt by the
applicant of a written statement from the Township Engineer setting
out a required performance guaranty in a specific amount. During the
course of any appeal, the Council shall hear evidence regarding the
costs of the compliance activities to be undertaken during the period
for which the permit is sought and shall make a determination thereon.
The Council's determination shall be appealable, as any other municipal
action is, through a prerogative writ action in the Superior Court of
New Jersey.
E. If cash security is posted pursuant to § 156-8 herein, such cash security
shall be treated as if it were subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1, except that the Township will not retain any of the interest
§ 156-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-8
1:793
§ 156-9. Liability Insurance. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No.
3162]
Prior to the issuance of any license or the renewal of any license, the
applicant shall submit evidence of liability insurance coverage. The liability
policy shall not be less than $1,000,000 and shall provide general coverage.
Such evidence shall be submitted to the Township Clerk in the form of a
certificate of insurance naming the Township of Franklin, in care of the
Township Clerk as certificate holder.
§ 156-10. Investigating and processing fee renewal escrow account.
A fee of $3,500 shall accompany initial application to cover the cost
incurred in investigating and processing the application for junkyards or
junk shops located on more than 1/2 acres and a fee of $1,750 for all other
junkyards or junk shops. Upon the filing of each application for renewal or
renewal of any license which includes a compliance plan, the applicant shall
post the sum of $3,500 for junkyards or junk shops located on more than 1/2
acre or $1,750 for all other junkyards and junk shops, which shall be placed
in an escrow account by the Township. Within 45 days after the decision
by the Council, the Director of Land Use and Chief Financial Officer of the
Township shall cause to be delivered to the applicant a statement itemizing
the costs incurred by the Township in investigating and processing the
application. In the event that the costs so specified shall exceed the sum so
deposited, the applicant shall, within 30 days, remit the deficiency to the
Township. It shall be a condition of any renewal under this section within
said 30 days. Said condition shall further provide that failure to so pay shall
void the license. In the event that the costs so specified shall be less than
the sum so deposited, the Township shall, within 30 days after receipt of
the itemization of expenses provided for herein, remit to the applicant the
balance of such unexpended funds. In those years where compliance plan
filing is no longer required, each application to renew an existing license
shall be accompanied by the fee required by § 156-5 hereof.
§ 156-11. Inspections.
All junkyards and junk shops under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be inspected at least once every six months by the Township Engineer,
Township Health Officer, Township Fire Prevention Officer or their
designees. Access to the premises for the purposes of such inspections shall
be freely given by the permittee after the inspector presents identification.
§ 156-12. General regulations.
accruing on the deposit but rather shall include the administrative
expenses, if any, incurred in receiving and depositing the funds as part
of the application fee provided in § 156-5.
A. No licensee, agent or employee of a licensee shall purchase or have in
his possession any motor vehicle or part of a motor vehicle from which
§ 156-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-12
1:794
the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification
mark has been removed, altered, concealed or destroyed. Any licensee
or agent or employee of a licensee to whom such a motor vehicle or
part is offered shall immediately report that fact to the Township Police
Department.
B. No goods, articles, merchandise, temporary storage container(s) or
motor vehicles shall be placed by the licensee on the sidewalk or any
part thereof, or on or above the fence, or between the fence or any
building and the sidewalk, nor shall the licensee use the street or any
part thereof for the storage, repair or sale of goods, articles,
merchandise or motor vehicles.
C. No license shall be granted or renewed if the applicant is indebted to
the Township for taxes or if there are due any taxes upon the premises
for which the license is sought.
D. Every licensee shall provide and keep a book in which shall be written
at the time of each purchase a description of the articles so purchased
by serial number if such article shall contain such a serial number, the
name and residence of the person or persons, firm or corporation from
whom such purchase was made and the date of such purchase. Said
book shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Chief of
Police or any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that
purpose by him, who shall exhibit such written authority to such
licensee.
E. No licensee shall permit on any portion of the premises the following
prohibited materials: compressed gases (except oxygen/acetylene used
with a New Jersey permit for cutting/welding on site in amounts
permitted herein), explosives, ammunition and blasting agents,
fireworks and hazardous materials. Gasoline, motor fuels, oils or other
materials contained in motor vehicles shall be drained and removed
from any motor vehicle and within 24 hours after it is received on the
premises. The Fire Official shall, based on the size of the premises, the
volume of business and the manner of storage, determine the maximum
amounts of such materials which may be stored on the premises at any
one time.
F. The licensee shall provide to the Chief of Police, and update as
necessary, a listing of emergency personnel along with their respective
home telephone numbers and home addresses. Emergency personnel
are defined as persons knowledgeable of the facility with full access to
all equipment and records at all times. Failure to maintain this listing
with up-to-date information shall be a violation of this chapter.
G. A detailed description of the business to be conducted, including hours
of operation, which hours of operation shall not exceed 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays. The operation shall not be open Sundays. Nothing contained
herein shall be deemed to prohibit office activities such as completion
§ 156-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-12
1:795
§ 156-13. Revocation of License. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1843]
of paperwork or bookkeeping during hours or days when such business
is not permitted to be operated, provided that the facilities are not in
any manner open to the general public. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 3162]
A. Any license issued for the operation of a junkyard by the Township may
be revoked by the Council after notice and a hearing for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in conduct of the licensed activity. This
shall include but not be limited to illegal gambling or conduct
which would violate the laws of the State of New Jersey or the
ordinances of the Township of Franklin.
(3) A violation of any provision of this Code.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
(6) Violation of any law, regulation of any government authority
governing the operation of the facility or conduct therein.
B. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set
forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the
time and place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the
licensee at his last known address by regular mail and certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
C. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard,
to be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own
behalf, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent
record made of the proceedings at his own expense. The Council shall
revoke or suspend the license if they are satisfied by a preponderance
of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of any violations charged
pursuant to § 156-13A hereof.
D. The Mayor and Council may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied if, after hearing, they are satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the
§ 156-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 156-13
1:796
§ 156-14. Farm/agricultural operations excluded.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to commercial operations
where the principal use is farming or agriculture provided, however, that
the maintenance of a junkyard of junk shop shall be subsidiary to and in
support of the farming or agricultural operation.
§ 156-15. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made hereunder shall severally, for each and every
violation and noncompliance, be subject to the penalties as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. The imposition of a penalty for
a violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; such violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time, and
each 10 days that such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
Chapter 161
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
§ 161-1. Statutory authority; findings.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined to mean:
CURFEW HOURS — 11:59 p.m. on any day until 6:00 a.m. of the following
day.[Amended 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1964]
revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose
license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him
directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the
same activity.
A. The New Jersey Legislature recently enacted P.L. 1992, Chapter 132,
which authorizes municipalities to adopt ordinances regulating the
presence of minors in public places between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.; and
B. The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of Franklin concur
with the sentiments of the New Jersey Legislature that limiting a
minor's access to public places during certain hours is in the minor's
and society's best interest;
§ 156-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:797
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN — A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.
HALLOWEEN CURFEW HOURS — 8:00 p.m., until 6:00 a.m. the following
day, from October 28 until November 1 inclusive.[Added 9-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 3069]
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
PARENT — A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent
of another person; or at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
plaza, park, recreation, athletic or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
REMAIN — To linger or stay; or fail to leave premises when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of
the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
§ 161-3. Offenses. [Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3069]
§ 161-4. Defenses.
It is a defense to prosecution under § 161-3 that the minor was:
A. A minor commits an offense if he/she remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the Township during curfew
hours or during Halloween hours.
B. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if the parent
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the Township during curfew hours or during Halloween curfew
hours.
A. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
§ 161-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 161-4
1:798
§ 161-5. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
§ 161-4 is present.
§ 161-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 166
DRUG-FREE ZONES
B. On a errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without
any detour or stop.
C. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
D. Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop.
E. Involved in an emergency.
F. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to
the Police Department about the minor's presence.
G. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the Township of Franklin, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the Township of Franklin, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.
H. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly.
A. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
B. When required by applicable law, the Municipal Court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates § 161-3A of this chapter
and shall refer the minor to Juvenile Court.135
135. Editor's Note: Original § 108-7, Report, was repealed 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3069.
§ 161-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-6
1:799

ARTICLE I
School Zones
[Adopted 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 1831 (Ch. 120 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 166-1. Maps adopted. [Amended 6-27-1995 by Ord. No. 1899;
3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3745; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3817]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988 c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Maps produced as set forth below
are hereby approved and adopted as official findings and records of the
locations and areas within the municipality of property which is used for
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property. A copy of said maps are on file in the Township of
Franklin Municipal Clerk's Office.
Map
Number School Name
Date Map
Produced/
Revised Map Certified By
1 Zarepath Christian
School
04-06-1988/
05-19-2008
Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
2 Conerly Road
School
04-04-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
3 Elizabeth Avenue
School
04-15-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
4 Franklin Middle
School/Hillcrest
School
04-04-1988/
10-17-2008
Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
5 Franklin Park
School
04-04-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
6 Franklin High
School
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
7 Mac Afee School 04-18-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
8 Pine Grove Manor
School
04-04-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
9 Rutgers
Preparatory School
04-06-1988/
10-31-2008
Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
10 Sampson G. Smith
School
04-15-1988 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
11 St. Matthias School 04-06-1088 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
12 Cedar Hill Prep
School
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:801
Map
Number School Name
Date Map
Produced/
Revised Map Certified By
13 Eternal Life
Christian Center
09-26-2007 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
14 Community Baptist
Christian Academy
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
15 Central New Jersey
College Prep
Charter School/
Elite Preparatory
Academy
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
16 Somerset Bible
Baptist Christian
Academy
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
17 Somerset
Presbyterian
Nursery School
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
18 The Nest of
Somerset
10-31-2008 Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
19 High Road/The
Crestwood School
03-21-1994/
10-31-2008
Thomas Zilinek, III,
PE, CME
§ 166-2. Maps to constitute official finding and record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 166-1 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet
of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free
School Zones.
§ 166-3. Notification of change of school properties.
The school board, or chief administrative officer in the case of any private or
parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Attorney of
any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any
property owned or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 166-4. Maps to be kept on file; copies to be provided.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the maps approved and adopted pursuant to this article
§ 166-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 166-4
1:802
and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the maps approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such maps and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Somerset County Prosecutor.
§ 166-5. Purpose of maps.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 166-1 of this article were prepared and are intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state
and that, pursuant state law, such maps shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes;
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted maps, all of the property depicted on the maps approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by, or leased to, a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 441 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et seq.), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of the maps or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 166-1 of this article. The failure of
the maps approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved maps, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board
or that such property is not used for school purposes.
§ 166-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:803
D. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et
seq.) concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free
School Zone Maps have been satisfied.
§ 166-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 166-5
1:804
ARTICLE II
Public Housing, Public Parks and Public Building Zones
[Adopted 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 3077 (Ch. 119 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 166-6. Maps adopted. [Amended 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 3322;
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3921]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997 c. 327(1)
[N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1], the Drug-Free Public Housing, Public Parks and Public
Building Zones Maps produced as set forth below are hereby approved and
adopted as official findings and records of the locations and areas within the
municipality of property which are used for public housing, public parks and
public building zones, and of the areas in or within 500 feet of such public
housing, public parks and public building zones. A copy of said maps are on
file in the Township of Franklin Municipal Clerk's office.
Map
Number
Public Housing,
Park or Building
DateProduced/
Revised Maps Certified By
1 Bascom Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
2 Bunker Hill
Environmental Center
8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
3 Castleton Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
4 Consovoy Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
5 DeLar Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
6 Dunham-Lebed Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
7 Franklin Township
Little League
8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
8 Harvey J. Inman Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
9 Meadows – Van
Wickle House
8-27-1999/
9-30-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
10 Municipal Complex 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
11 Nassau Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
12 Quail Brook Golf
Course
8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
13 Quail Brook Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
§ 166-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-6
1:805
Map
Number
Public Housing,
Park or Building
DateProduced/
Revised Maps Certified By
14 Rockingham Museum
(former location)
8-27-1999/
10-15-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
15 Rutgers Heights Park 8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
16 South Bound Brook
Little League
8-27-1999 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
17 Naaman Williams
Park/Parkside
Housing Authority
8-27-1999/
10-15-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
18-49 Delaware and Raritan
Canal Park
7-31-2002/
*10-15-2010
*Sheet #26, 28
& 42
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
26 East Millstone Park 7-31-2002/
10-15-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
28 Blackwells Mills Canal
House
7-31-2002/
10-15-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
42 Rockingham Historic
Site
7-31-2002/
10-15-2010
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
24,25, 26
and 50-56
Colonial Park/Spooky
Brook Golf Course
7-31-2002/
10-15-2010
*Sheet #26
Only
Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
57 Hawthorne Park 7-31-2002 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
58-72 Six Mile Run
Reservoir Site
9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
60 Meadows – Hageman
House and Farm/
Wyckoff-Garretson
House
9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
64 Meadows – Van Liew-
Suydam House
9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
73 Middlebush Park 9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
74 Meadows – Tulipwood 9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
§ 166-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 166-6
1:806
Map
Number
Public Housing,
Park or Building
DateProduced/
Revised Maps Certified By
75 935 Hamilton Street 9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
76 Franklin Township
Public Library (Route
27 Branch)
9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
77 Former Kingston
School (Township
Park)
9-30-2010 Thomas Zilinek III, PE,
CME
§ 166-7. Maps to constitute official finding and record. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3921]
The Drug-Free Public Housing, Public Parks and Public Building Zones
Maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 166-6 of this article shall
continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and
boundaries of 500 feet of property which is used for Drug-Free Public
Housing, Public Parks and Public Building Zones purposes until such time,
if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of properties and Drug-Free
Public Housing, Public Parks and Public Building Zones.
§ 166-8. Notification of change of public housing, public parks, and
public building properties. [Amended 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 3322;
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3921]
As noted below the following agencies are hereby directed and shall have
the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the
Municipal Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property which is used for Drug-Free Public Housing,
Public Parks and Public Building Zones purposes:
Facility Name Owner Operator
Bascom Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Bunker Hill
Environmental Center
Township of Franklin Board of Education
Castleton Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Consovoy Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
DeLar Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Dunham-Lebed Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Franklin Township
Little League
Township of Franklin Franklin Township Little
League, Inc.
Harvey J. Inman Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Meadows – Van Wickle
House
Township of Franklin The Meadows
Foundation, Inc.
§ 166-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-8
1:807
Facility Name Owner Operator
Municipal Complex Township of Franklin Township of Franklin
Nassau Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Quail Brook Golf
Course
Township of Franklin Somerset County Park
Commission
Quail Brook Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Rockingham Museum
(former location)
State of New Jersey
c/o NJDEP
State of New Jersey c/o
NJDEP
Rutgers Heights Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
South Bound Brook
Little League
Township of Franklin South Bound Brook
Little League, Inc.
Naaman Williams Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Parkside Housing
Authority
U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban
Development
Housing Authority of
Franklin Township
Delaware and Raritan
Canal Park
State of New Jersey Division of Parks and
Forestry
East Millstone Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Blackwells Mills Canal
House
State of New Jersey Blackwells Mills Canal
House Association
Rockingham Historic
Site
State of New Jersey
c/o NJDEP
State of New Jersey c/o
NJDEP
Colonial Park/
Spooky Brook Golf
Course
County of Somerset Somerset County Park
Commission
Hawthorne Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Six Mile Run Reservoir
Site
State of New Jersey Division of Parks and
Forestry
Meadows – Hageman
House and Farm/
Wyckoff-Garretson
House
Township of Franklin The Meadows
Foundation Inc.
Meadows – Van Liew-
Suydam House
Township of Franklin The Meadows
Foundation Inc.
Facility Name Owner Operator
Middlebush Park Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
Meadows – Tulipwood Township of Franklin The Meadows
Foundation Inc.
935 Hamilton Street Township of Franklin Township of Franklin
§ 166-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 166-8
1:808
Facility Name Owner Operator
Franklin Township
Public Library (Route
27 Branch)
Levittown Norse
Association c/o Stop
and Shop
Franklin Township
Library
Former Kingston
School (Township Park)
Township of Franklin Parks and Recreation
§ 166-9. Maps to be kept on file; copies to be provided.
The Township Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original maps approved and adopted pursuant to this
article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the maps approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such maps and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Somerset County Prosecutor.
§ 166-10. Purpose of maps.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 166-6 of this article were prepared and are intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state
and that, pursuant to state law, such maps shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public housing, public parks and public buildings
within the municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is used for public
housing, public parks and public buildings;
(3) That such public housing, public parks and public buildings are and
continue to be used for public housing, public parks and public
building purposes;
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are in or within 500
feet of such public housing, public parks and public buildings.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted maps, all of the property depicted on the maps approved and
adopted herein as public housing, public parks and public buildings was
owned by or leased to the Township of Franklin, County of Somerset,
NJDEP and/or Housing Authority of Franklin Township as of January 1,
1998, that being the effective date of P.L. 1997, c. 327(1) [N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1].
§ 166-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-10
1:809
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c 327(1) [N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 et
seq.], a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon
any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense
defined in the statute, including use of the maps or diagram other than
the one approved and adopted pursuant to § 166-6 of this article. The
failure of the maps approved herein to depict the location and
boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for public housing,
public parks and public buildings purposes, whether the absence of
such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any
changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have not
yet been incorporated into revised approved maps, shall not be deemed
to be an official finding and record that such property is not owned by
or leased for a public housing, public parks and public building or that
such property is not used for public housing, public parks and public
buildings.
D. All the requirements set forth in P.L. 1997, c. 237(1) [N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1
et seq.], concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-
Free Public Housing, Public Parks and Public Building Zone Maps have
been satisfied.
§ 166-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 166-10
1:810
Chapter 167
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Noise disturbances caused by animals — See
Ch. 115.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169
Quarrying and blasting — See Ch. 278.
§ 166-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-10
1:811

ARTICLE I
Noise Control
[Adopted 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 3033 (Ch. 167 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 167-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this article have the same meanings as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — As defined in NFPA 1123, large fireworks devices
that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and
designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation, as set forth in 27 CFR 555, 49 CFR 172, and APA Standard
87-1, Standard for the Construction and Approval for Transportation of
Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics.[Added 3-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 4184-17]
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public service, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
A.
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-1
1:813
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Employee of a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
activities; or a municipality with a department-approved Noise Control
Ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement training and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue summons in
order to be considered a noise control officer.[Amended 5-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 3046]
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing facilities. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine title, specific words, or the artist performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.[Amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 3046]
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
REPORT — An audible sound from a fireworks device or shell.[Added
3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4184-17]
SALUTE — A fireworks device or shell designed to produce an explosive
sound as its primary effect.[Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4184-17]
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
§ 167-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 167-1
1:814
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKEND — Beginning Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the following
Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 167-2. Applicability.
§ 167-3. Declaration of findings and policy.
A. This article applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This article applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Findings. [Amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 3046]
(1) Whereas, excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:815
§ 167-4. Noise control officers.
(2) Whereas, a substantial body of science and technology exists by
which excessive sound may be substantially abated; and
(3) Whereas, the People have a right to, and should be assured of, an
environment free from excessive sound;
(4) Now, therefore, it is the policy of Franklin Township to prevent
excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety
of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.
B. This article shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources
within Franklin Township, Somerset County.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by noise control officers.
A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the person
meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and completes, at a
frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, a noise
certification and recertification course which are offered by the
Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College, Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey or any other noise certification or
recertification course which is offered by an accredited university and
approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2 except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform to the procedures set forth in
§ 167-5B and C of this article and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in
Franklin Township and cooperate with all other public bodies and
agencies to the extent practicable.
(2) Review the actions of Franklin Township and advise of the effect, if
any, of such actions on noise control.
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
article.
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this article for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II,136 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 167-7 below.
136. Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 167-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 167-4
1:816
§ 167-5. Maximum permissible sound levels. [Amended 5-11-1999
by Ord. No. 3046]
§ 167-6. Restricted uses and activities.
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 167-2A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II137 except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling-
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not
equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or
more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound and shall
meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
A. Exemptions.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
article shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
137. Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 167-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-6
1:817
(2) Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in
Subsection B below.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II,138 the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(2) Commercial and industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or industrial
power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment,
excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or industrial
property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized equipment
used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. At all other
times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply to
commercial and industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment. [Amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
3046]
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler. At
all times, the limits set forth in Table I and II do not apply.
138. Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 167-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 167-6
1:818
§ 167-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(5) Electric generators shall be operated at all times with a muffler. At
times when electric power is interrupted for reasons beyond the
control of the property owner/tenant, the limits set forth in Tables 1
and II do not apply. At all other times, electric generators shall not
be operated between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays. [Added 5-22-2012 by Ord. No.
3978139; amended 12-11-2014 by Ord. No. 4092-14]
(6) Sound levels exceeding the limits as set forth in Table I and Table II
shall be prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling-
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
§ 167-5B and C.
A. Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
the Municipal Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $2,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. [Amended
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4243-18]
C. No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, or any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or
from other law.
139. Editor's Note: With this ordinance, former Subsection B(5) was also renumbered as
Subsection B(6).
§ 167-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-7
1:819

ARTICLE II
Burglar Alarms and Sound Amplification Equipment
[Adopted 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 3036 (§ 169-12 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 167-8. Burglar alarms; music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment; fireworks.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated.
B. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
C. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be operated
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
D. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly audible by any
person other than the operator.
E. Fireworks displays. In addition to complying with all of the
requirements of the State of New Jersey Department of Labor and the
New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code,140 all private fireworks displays in
Franklin Township must comply with this chapter regarding the noise
from the display. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4184-17]
(1) Fireworks displays are not permitted to contain any devices or
shells that contain reports.
(2) Fireworks displays are not permitted to have a salute in the display.
(3) Fireworks displays must be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
140. Editor’s Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.
§ 167-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-9
1:821
§ 167-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of § 167-8 above, the following words and terms shall have
the following meanings:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing facilities. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The enforcing officer need
not determine title, specific words, or the artist performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
§ 167-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of § 167-8 shall be enforced by the Department of Police and/
or the Department of Health.
§ 167-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation is
of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an
additional, separate, and distinct offense.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
§ 167-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 167-11
1:822
Chapter 169
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
Recycling — See Ch. 284.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
§ 169-1. Standards adopted by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, requiring the proper heating of apartments,
prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks,
authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing official, providing for
the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses
incurred by the Department of Health in removing or abating such
nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of 1950.141 A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereon herein.
§ 169-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 169-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer and Clerk of the
Township upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for use and examination by the public.
§ 169-4. Modifications and amendments to standards.
Section II, Nuisances defined and prohibited, Section 2.1, of the New Jersey
Public Health Nuisance Code (1953) is hereby amended by the addition of
the following subsection:
141. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 167-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:823
Section 2.1(j) The stockpiling or accumulating of composted sewage sludge
which may cause odor nuisances or air pollution or threaten water
pollution or which may attract flies or rodents or which may be located in
a floodplain or within 200 feet of any well or stream.
§ 169-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — Includes the Health Officer or other official
authorized by the Department of Health to enforce this code and ordinance.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership, and their agents or employees.
§ 169-6. Nuisances defined and prohibited. [Amended 12-9-1997 by
Ord. No. 2049; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 3503]
A. The following matters, things, conditions, or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
(1) Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this municipality in such
manner as to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of
this municipality either in their health, comfort or property.
(2) The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases as
to cause injury, detriment, or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
municipality or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
(3) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land,
lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place.
(4) The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within 20 feet of
any property line.
(5) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
(6) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure, or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
(7) Depositing, accumulating, or maintaining any matter or thing
which serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may
have access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
§ 169-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 169-6
1:824
§ 169-7. Proper heating of apartments.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat
to any building designed to be occupied or is occupied as a residence by
more than two families to fail to supply heat from the first day of October in
each year to the first day of May of the succeeding year in such manner that
the temperature of said building where one or more persons reside shall
always be kept at 68° F. or above between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the temperature must
be maintained at a minimum of 65° F.
§ 169-8. Annual inspection of heating system; frequent breakdowns.
(8) The stockpiling or accumulating of composted sewerage sludge
which may cause odor, nuisances or air pollution or threaten water
pollution or which may attract flies or rodents or which may be
located in a flood plain or within 200 feet of any well or stream.
(9) Any open or unguarded well, cistern, cesspool, excavation in which
there has accumulated any surface or drainage water, or
abandoned excavations situated within the Township. Any such
public nuisance shall be abated without further notice by the owner
of the land on which such public nuisance exists.
(a) For the purposes of the preceding nuisance, an open or
unguarded well, cistern or cesspool is one which is not
securely covered area, or completely enclosed by a permanent
fence at least four feet in height; an unguarded excavation is
one which is not completely enclosed by a fence at least four
feet in height; and an abandoned excavation is one in which
further construction has been permanently discontinued.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisance, as declared and described in this section.
A. It shall be the obligation of the owner of any multiple dwelling to have
the heating system supplying heat to said multiple dwellings inspected
annually and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et
seq. and Chapter 151, Housing Standards. Said inspection shall be for
the following purposes:
(1) To insure that the system is being maintained in accordance with
the standards applicable to the system as of the time of installation;
(2) To locate and remove hazards or conditions that may, if not
corrected, foreseeably develop into health and/or safety hazards or
become violations of these regulations;
(3) To confirm the ability of the system to fulfill the heating
requirements provided hereunder. Annual certifications of the
required inspections shall be made by the owners to the Franklin
Township Health Department by September 15th of each year. In
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-8
1:825
§ 169-9. Emergency effort during heating system failures.
In the event of a failure of a heating system to supply heat to the required
temperatures when the outside temperature remains at or below the
freezing point, and such failure persists for a period of 24 hours, the owner
and/or operator of the units shall make every emergency effort to provide
alternate means of heat supply, at the owner's expense, in order to protect
the occupant's health and well-being, including, but not limited to, the
relocation of the affected occupants to an adequately heated facility.
§ 169-10. (Reserved)142
§ 169-11. Spitting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or
upon any part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public
conveyance.
§ 169-12. (Reserved)143
§ 169-13. Inspection of premises; notice.
addition to the required inspections under N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.,
the Franklin Township Department of Health reserves the right to
make additional inspections of heating equipment.
B. Failure to properly maintain the heating system by regular preventive
maintenance activities, which failure results in frequent breakdowns of
the system, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
"Frequent breakdowns" shall be defined for the purposes herein as the
breakdown of a heating system for a period of 24 hours, such
breakdown occurring more than once in any thirty-day period.
A. All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to
inspection by the Department of Health officials if they have reason to
believe that any section of this code is being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Department of Health officials from having full access to
any place or premises upon which a violation of this code is believed to
exist.
C. Whenever a nuisance as declared by this code is found on any plot of
land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
142. Editor's Note: Section 169-10, Prohibited lease or rental of certain buildings, was deleted
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV). See Ch. 183, Property
Maintenance.
143. Editor's Note: Section 169-12, Burglar alarms and music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment, which was previously included in this chapter, was moved to Ch.
167, Noise, Art. II, Burglar Alarms and Sound Amplification Equipment.
§ 169-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 169-13
1:826
§ 169-14. Enforcement.
The provisions of this code shall be enforced by the Department of Health
and its licensed officials.
§ 169-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the
court. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 177
EXCHANGE ZONE FOR ONLINE TRANSACTIONS
§ 177-1. Establishment.
The Township of Franklin hereby establishes an "online exchange zone"
for conducting in-person private transactions involving a Township resident
that have been facilitated through online marketplaces, to be located in an
area of the Municipal Parking Lot of the Municipal Complex located at 495
DeMott Lane, Somerset, New Jersey, to be designated the "Exchange Zone."
§ 177-2. Video surveillance.
Township officials will not provide police personnel or Township staff to
witness any transaction in person, but the video surveillance by and in
proximity to police personnel is meant to increase the public's peace of
mind when engaging in such transactions with unfamiliar individuals in the
Exchange Zone.
§ 177-3. No guarantees as to items exchanged.
The Township of Franklin makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises
with respect to the condition or authenticity of any items exchanged
between private parties.
within such time as shall be specified therein but not less than 24 hours
from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be left
with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place.
Said twenty-four-hour notice may be waived by the Director of Health
or his official designee where serious disease or safety hazards of an
emergency nature may exist.
D. To the extent applicable, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-59 apply to
inspections performed hereunder. [Added 12-9-1997 by Ord. No.
2049]
§ 169-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:827
§ 177-4. No guarantees as to security.
The Township of Franklin makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises as
to the safety or security of any in-person transactions that may take place
on Township property.
§ 177-5. No guarantees as to zone availability.
The Township of Franklin makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises as
to availability of the Exchange Zone at any particular date or time.
§ 177-6. Safety suggestions.
The Township encourages all persons to engage in such transactions in
daylight hours, only; to bring a cell phone along in case of an emergency:
to notify friends and/or family of the intention to meet to conduct such
a transaction; to never invite strangers to the home or agree to meet at
a stranger's home: and to reconsider any transactions with someone who
refuses to meet at the Municipal Complex.
Chapter 180
FEES
§ 177-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 177-6
1:828
ARTICLE I
Public Records
[Adopted 9-25-1975 by Ord. No. 762 (Ch. 127, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 180-1. Available from Township Clerk [Amended 11-12-1981 by
Ord. No. 1074; 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 1114; 12-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1683]
§ 180-2. Available from Collector of Revenue. [Added 2-16-1989 by
Ord. No. 1455]
A. The Township Clerk of the Township of Franklin shall be authorized to
charge for making available to the public the following documents:
(1) Franklin Township Master Plan: $10. [Amended 4-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 3120; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A144]
(2) Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances: $35. [Amended 11-9-1993
by Ord. No. 1801; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A145]
(3) Ward map: $0.07. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A146]
(4) Street map: $3.
(5) Off-Site Condition Disclosure Act (N.J.S.A. 46:3C-1 et seq.) maps
and reports: $10. [Added 2-11-2003 by Ord. No. 3357;
amended 9-28-2004 by Ord. 3485A]
(6) Retrieval of records stored off site: [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord.
3485A]
(a) Retrieval and delivery charge: $30.
(b) Per box charge: $10.
(7) Franklin Township Municipal Code Book: $100. [Added
2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3592]
(8) Annual subscription of Municipal Code: $25 per year. [Added
2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3592]
A. The Collector of Revenue of the Township of Franklin shall be
authorized to charge for making available to the public duplicate tax
bills as follows: [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1489]
(1) Mortgage lenders: $5.
144. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
145. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
146. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:829
§ 180-3. Available from Township Engineer. [Amended 12-10-1991
by Ord. No. 1683]
The Township Engineer of the Township of Franklin shall be authorized to
charge for making available to the public the following:
§ 180-4. Available from all Township departments. [Added
12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 1683; amended 10-22-2002 by Ord. No.
3330; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 3485A]
(2) Home/property owners: $1. (Note: Home/property owners having
attained the age of 65 years shall be exempt from the payment of
the fee of $1 for duplicate tax bills for property in their ownership.)
B. The Collector of Revenue of the Township of Franklin shall be
authorized to charge for the preparation of a certificate for redemption
of tax sale a fee of $10. [Added 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 1722]
A. Floodplain certification letters: $15.
B. Tax Map, large: $3.
C. Tax Map, small: $2.
D. Site plan copies: $9. [Added 10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3330]
E. Filed maps, size 30 inches by 42 inches or smaller: $3 per sheet.
[Added 10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3330]
F. Filed maps, larger than 30 inches by 42 inches: $9 per sheet. [Added
10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3330]
A. Unless fees are otherwise specified in this chapter or state statute, all
Township departments of the Township of Franklin shall be authorized
to charge for making available to the public copies of all other public
records at the following rate: [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
3506; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A147]
(1) Letter-sized pages or smaller: $0.05 per page.
(2) Legal-sized pages or larger: $0.07 per page.
(3) Audiocassettes: $1.25.
(4) Videocassettes or DVD: $0.35.
(5) Information on diskette or CD: $0.35.
(6) Computer-generated picture (b/w or color): $0.05 per page for
letter-sized pages or smaller; $0.07 per page for legal-sized pages
or larger.
147. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
§ 180-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 180-4
1:830
(7) Film developing: Actual cost of developing the film shall be
charged.
(8) Duplicate photographs: Actual cost of making the photographs
shall be charged.
(9) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
B. Postage costs will be added to all requests for public records required
to be mailed and will be determined at time of request.
C. A special service charge of $45 per hour for supervisory or
programming services and $35 per hour for clerical services shall be
applied for any extensive use of information technology or for the labor
cost of personnel providing the service that is actually incurred by the
Township for the programming, clerical and supervisory assistance
required to provide a Township record in the following circumstances:
(1) Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of
Township record embodied in a form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary business size or involves an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request.
(2) Whenever the material is requested in a medium not routinely used
by the Township, not routinely developed or maintained by the
Township or requires a substantial amount of manipulation or
programming of information technology and the Township must
either convert the record to the medium requested or provide a
copy in some other meaningful medium.
§ 180-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:831

ARTICLE II
Police Department Fees
[Adopted 9-9-1982 by Ord. No. 1100 (Ch. 127, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code); amended 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1542; 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1717; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 3485A]
§ 180-5. Fees enumerated.
A. Photocopies of police reports: [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
3889A148]
(1) When requested:
(a) Letter-sized pages or smaller: $0.05 per page.
(b) Legal-sized pages or larger: $0.07 per page.
(2) Police accident reports not requested in person and not part of
Municipal Court discovery: An additional fee of up to $5 will be
added to cover the administrative costs of the report.
B. Fingerprinting: $5.
C. Auto theft prevention form and decal: $5.
D. Photocopies of photographs (maximum three photographs per page):
[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A149]
(1) When requested to be picked up on the premises:
(a) Letter-sized pages or smaller: $0.05 per page.
(b) Legal-sized pages or larger: $0.07 per page.
148. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
149. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
§ 180-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-5
1:833

ARTICLE III
Vital Statistics Records
[Adopted 9-22-1983 by Ord. No. 1146 (Ch. 127, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 180-6. Fee schedule. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1478;
6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576; 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3418; 4-13-2004
by Ord. No. 3443; 8-10-2004 by Ord. 3480 ; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3533; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3676; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3771]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established for obtaining copies
of the vital statistics records under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Health of the Township. Effective January 1, 2004, standardized safety
paper must be used for certified copies of vital records:
§ 180-7. (Reserved)150
A. Vital records
(1) Birth, marriage, civil union or domestic partnership: $20 per copy.
(2) Death certificates: $20 for the first copy and $5 for each additional
copy.
B. Burial permit: $5. [Amended 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3894]
C. Amendments or corrections to vital records: $20 for each vital record.
150. Editor's Note: Former § 180-7, Authorization of Health Department, was repealed
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A.
§ 180-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:835

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted 3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 1628 (Ch. 127, Art. V, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 180-8. Returned checks.
§ 180-9. Weddings and civil unions by Mayor and Deputy Mayor
[Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2032; amended 4-24-2007 by Ord.
No. 3680; 6-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3883]
Any person that seeks to have the Mayor or Deputy Mayor of Franklin
Township perform a marriage or civil union ceremony shall be required to
tender to the Township Clerk the sum of $150 to be deposited into the
general fund. One-hundred dollars is to be retained in the general fund and
$50 is the fee to be disbursed to the Mayor or Deputy Mayor through the
appropriate budget line item.
A. A service charge of $30 per check or written instrument shall be added
to any account owing to the Township if payment tendered on the
account was by a check or other written instrument which was returned
for insufficient funds. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A151]
B. Whenever such account owing to a municipality is for a tax or special
assessment, the service charge authorized by this section shall be
included on whatever list of delinquent accounts is prepared for the
enforcement of the lien.
C. Such service charge shall be collected in the same manner prescribed
by law for the collection of the account for which the check or other
written instrument was tendered.
D. The Township reserves the right to require future payments tendered
by person or firms having previously issued returned checks or written
instruments to be in cash or certified or cashier's check.
151. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:837

ARTICLE V
Application for Public Defender
[Adopted 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2058 (Ch. 127, Art. VI, of the 1990
Code); amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
§ 180-10. Fee.
An application fee of not less than $50 nor more than $200 shall be charged
for the services of the Township's Public Defender but only in the amount
necessary to pay the costs of Municipal Public Defender services and upon
submission of an application therefor on a form to be provided by the
Municipal Court.
§ 180-11. Waiver.
In accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court, the
Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in whole or in
part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal
Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific period
of time not to exceed four months.
§ 180-12. Deposit of funds.
Funds collected pursuant to § 180-10 of this article shall be deposited
in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the
municipality. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred
in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender including, when
required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
§ 180-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:839

ARTICLE VI
Community Resources Fees
[Adopted 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 3371]
§ 180-13. Summer child care.
The fee schedule for summer child care shall be as follows:
Household Income Payment
Income under $19,999 1 child = $115
2 children = $175
3 children = $230
Each additional child $80
Income $20,000 to $25,999 1 child = $125
2 children = $200
3 children = $270
Each additional child $90
Income $26,000 to $30,999 1 child = $135
2 children = $225
3 children = $285
Each additional child $100
Income $31,000 to $35,999 1 child = $150
2 children = $245
3 children = $340
Each additional child $115
Income $36,000 to $40,999 1 child = $160
2 children = $275
3 children = $385
Each additional child $130
Income $41,000 to $50,999 1 child = $170
2 children = $300
3 children = $410
Each additional child $135
Income $51,000 to $61,999 1 child = $180
2 children = $325
3 children = $445
Each additional child $160
Income $62,000 to $71,000 1 child = $190
2 children = $340
§ 180-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-13
1:841
Household Income Payment
3 children = $485
Each additional child $215
Income $72,000 to $75,000 Each child $215
Income over $75,000 Ineligible for program
§ 180-14. Other fees. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3931]
Field trip fee: $100 per child (required with registration for program).
§ 180-15. Discounts and fee waivers.
Limited fee waivers are available for applicants working full time with
annual incomes under $10,000. Member of the Working Single Parent
Group shall receive a discount of 15% on the above fee schedule, excluding
the field trip fee.
§ 180-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 180-15
1:842
ARTICLE VII
Municipal Court Discovery
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3506]
§ 180-16. Requests for discovery.
All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Franklin Township
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 180-17. Fees payable by requestor. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 3889A152]
The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
Franklin for the discovery provided:
§ 180-18. Discovery obtained from other entities.
Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Township of Franklin, e.g., another Police Department, the actual costs paid
to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
A. Letter-sized pages or smaller photocopied: $0.05 per page.
B. Legal-sized pages or larger photocopied: $0.07 per page.
C. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
D. For the envelope for any discovery sent by mail: actual cost of envelope.
E. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If the
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of making
the photographs shall be charged.
F. Duplication of videotapes: $0.35 per videotape.
G. On any item that cannot be photocopied, the actual cost incurred in
making the copy shall be charged.
152. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 11-9-2010.
§ 180-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-18
1:843

ARTICLE VIII
Body Art Establishment Fees153
[Adopted 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 3551]
§ 180-19. Body art establishment license fees.
The following fees shall be charged for the following in connection with
body art establishment licenses:
A. For required plan reviews of body art establishments: $100.
B. For yearly license (January 1 to December 31): $300.
C. Temporary establishment (performs body art procedures for not more
than 14 calendar days in conjunction with a single event): $200.
[Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4185-17]
153. Editor's Note: The title of this article was revised from "Health Department Fees" to "Body
Art Establishment Fees" 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3889A.
§ 180-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-19
1:845

ARTICLE IX
Fees for Payments Via ACH or Credit Card
[Adopted 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3948]
§ 180-20. ACH or credit card payment fees.
A. A fee of $1 per transaction shall be charged for Internet payments not
involving a credit card transaction.
B. A credit card processing fee of between 2.50% and 4% per transaction
shall be charged by the Township for any payment made to the
Township through the Internet by use of a credit card. The actual fee
charged shall be subject to the cost of processing charged by the credit
card company and administrative charges.
§ 180-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-20
1:847

ARTICLE X
Senior and Community Center Rental Fees
[Adopted 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4135-16]
§ 180-21. Rental fees for rooms and kitchen at Senior and
Community Center.
A. The rental fees for rooms and the kitchen at the Senior and Community
Center per hour shall be as follows:
Franklin
Nonprofit
Organizations
Franklin
Residents
and Out-of-
Town
Nonprofits
Organizations
Franklin
Local
Businesses
Nonresidents
and Out-of-
Town
Businesses
Room 1 $25 $65 $85 $125
Room 2 $25 $50 $75 $100
Room 3 $25 $75 $100 $150
Kitchen $10 $25 $40 $50
B. There will be an adjustment fee of $10 assessed for changes after
permit approval.
§ 180-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-21
1:849
Chapter 183
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Trees — See Ch. 222.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
§ 180-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 180-21
1:850
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 183-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of Franklin," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
§ 183-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter shall be to ensure public health, safety, and
welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and
maintenance of existing structures and premises. Existing structures and
premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or
repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
§ 183-3. Scope; effective date.
§ 183-4. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be independent of all others; therefore, should any portion of
this chapter, for any reason, be found or held to be unconstitutional, void,
or ineffective, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter.
§ 183-5. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential premises and structures; however, unless otherwise
specified, they shall apply to the interiors of owner-occupied, singlefamily
dwellings only in the case of resale. The provisions of this
chapter shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for
said premises and structures, including, equipment and facilities;
occupancy; life safety; prevention of hazardous conditions; protection
from the elements; safe and sanitary maintenance; and the
responsibility of owners, occupants, and operators. The provisions for
the administration of this chapter, including enforcement and penalties,
shall also be set forth herein.
B. With the exception of Article IV, certificate of continued building
compliance, the provisions of this chapter shall be effective
immediately upon adoption by the Township. The requirements of
Article IV, with respect to the issuance of a certificate of continued
building compliance for nonresidential premises and structures, shall
be effective on January 1, 2010. The requirements of Article IV, with
respect to the issuance of a certificate of continued building compliance
for residential premises and structures, shall not be effective until such
time that an ordinance is adopted by the Township which provides such
effective date.
§ 183-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-5
1:851
§ 183-6. Word usage.
A. When, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall prevail. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside the
provisions of any other chapter of the Code of the Township of Franklin.
B. Any matter not addressed by this chapter shall be regulated by
whichever of the following codes is applicable: Uniform Construction
Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70), Regulations for
Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings (N.J.A.C. 5:10), New
Jersey State Housing Code (N.J.A.C. 5:28), and/or the remaining
chapters of the Code of the Township of Franklin. If any of these codes
specify requirements that differ from this chapter, the most restrictive
shall prevail.
C. Additions, alterations, and repairs to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23). Additions, alterations,
repairs, maintenance work, or installations that are caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter shall be performed in a
workmanlike manner, and/or installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions, and shall not be done until all
required permits and/or approvals are in place.
D. Equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by this chapter,
or any other code, shall be maintained in good working order. No owner,
occupant, operator, or contractor shall cause any service, facility,
equipment, or utility that is required under this section to be removed,
shut off, or discontinued from any occupied structure, except for such
temporary interruption that is necessary while repairs or alterations
are in progress.
E. Except as otherwise specified herein, the property owner is ultimately
responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and premises
and ensuring compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
F. The provisions of this chapter shall not be mandatory for existing
buildings or structures officially designated as historic when such
buildings or structures are judged by the Code Enforcement Official to
be safe and do not compromise the health, safety, or welfare of the
public.
G. The Code Enforcement Official shall determine any requirements that
are necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an
existing structure, fixture, or piece of equipment, or for the health,
safety, or welfare of the public, not specifically covered by this chapter.
§ 183-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-6
1:852
§ 183-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases, terms, or
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated or if their use in the text clearly demonstrates another
meaning:
AFFIDAVIT OF GOOD FAITH — An owner-landlord's sworn statement that:
APPROVED — Approved by either the Code Enforcement Official or Code
Enforcement Inspector, depending upon the individual circumstances.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below and partly
above grade, and has at least one-half its ceiling height above grade.
BATHROOM — A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
BEDROOM — Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
CELLAR — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade, and has more than one-half its ceiling height below grade.
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED BUILDING COMPLIANCE — A visual
inspection and certification that the structure in its present condition meets
the minimum health, code and life safety requirements that were in effect
when the structure was originally built. Inspection shall be based upon a
visual inspection only of the premises. No destructive or invasive testing
shall be done nor shall any guarantees or warranties be given or implied.
A. When not inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense
also include the future, words used in the singular also include the
plural, words used in the plural also include the singular, and words
used in the masculine gender also include the feminine and neuter.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is always
permissive.
C. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building,"
structure," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit," or
"story" are stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
The tenant signed a lease or was provided a written copy of the rental
policy in which the number of intended occupants was specified;
A.
The number of allowed occupants was within the standards established
by the applicable code requirements or rental policy; and
B.
Any additional occupants in excess of the number of occupants
specified became residents of the rental unit without the consent of the
owner-landlord.
C.
§ 183-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:853
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Any employee of the Township or
person duly authorized to inspect under and enforce this chapter including,
but not limited to, personnel of the Departments of Community
Development (Construction Code, Housing and Property Maintenance, and
Planning and Zoning), Engineering, Fire Prevention, and Health.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Any administrative level employee
of the Township or person duly authorized to administer and enforce this
chapter including, but not limited to, the Director of Community
Development, the Construction Official, the Fire Official, the Director of the
Health Department, the Township Engineer, or their designees, pursuant to
the authority granted to each official by the State of New Jersey.
COMMON AREA — Any area accessible to, and which may be utilized
by, the occupants of a building, the owner or owner's agent, any person
employed in the maintenance of the building, and/or the general public that
is not part of any specific dwelling unit; or any room or area, including
common appliances therein, of a single-family dwelling unit that are
accessible to, and which may be utilized by, the occupants of such unit
without restriction, including, but not limited to, the kitchen, bathroom,
toilet room, dining room, living room, family room, attic, basement, and
garage.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag, or other vessel to prevent such yard waste from spilling or blowing out
into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
CRAWL SPACE — An unoccupiable area in a building not more than 48
inches in height.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
DORMITORY UNIT — A room or area of a building used as group living
quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use to
a college, university, boarding school, convent, monastery, or similar
institutional use, that does not include either individual kitchen facilities or
private bathroom facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. (See "housekeeping unit.")
EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above
said lot or lots.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
§ 183-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-7
1:854
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
GUARD — A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that
minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
GUEST ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit that is occupied by any person
on a temporary or transient basis.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A group of people, regardless of familial
relationship, whose members have equal and unlimited access rights to all
common areas and common appliances of a dwelling unit, and constitute
a single, economic entity, characterized by stability, permanence, and
functionality, by maintaining a single-family dwelling unit in common. Any
individual occupying either a room or an area that contains a private
refrigerator, microwave oven, hot plate, or other similar appliance shall not
be deemed a member of the housekeeping unit.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic waste, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater,
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township, unless such discharge is
authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal
Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852).
Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows,
or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition that could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307 (a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. Subsection 1317 (a), (b), or (c)].
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests
within, or contiguous to, a structure or premises.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle or vessel which cannot be
operated upon public streets, waterways, or other thoroughfares for
reasons including but not limited to being unregistered, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its
own power.
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the preparation
of food.
LABELED — Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has
been affixed a label, seal, symbol, or other identifying mark of a nationally
§ 183-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:855
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide, or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise, or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement, or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle or vessel made to operate under its own
power upon public streets, waterways, or other thoroughfares including,
but not limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles, vans, motor homes,
recreational vehicles, and powerboats.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, part thereof,
and land appurtenant thereto that contains three or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains that is owned or operated by Franklin Township or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purposes of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat), or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides,
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window, skylight, or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OVERCROWDING — Occupancy in excess of the standards governing the
use and occupancy of space and floor area adopted by the Department of
Community Affairs pursuant to the State Housing Code, P.L.1971, c.224
(N.J.S.A. 2A:42-85 et seq.), or the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L.1967, c.76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
§ 183-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-7
1:856
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, political subdivision of this state, or any other group acting as
a unit and subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PREMISES — A lot, plot, or parcel of land, easement, or public way
including any structures thereon.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
RENT — A fee charged by a landlord and paid by a tenant to occupy a
building or portion thereof for a specified period of time. Such fee must be
charged on a per dwelling unit basis and may not be charged per person
occupying said dwelling unit.
RENTAL POLICY — Any documents including, but not limited to, a lease
agreement, rental application, rules and regulations, or rules of conduct
established by the owner-landlord that creates maximum occupancy limits
for a rental unit.
RENTAL UNIT — A single, independent unit, either residential or
nonresidential, for which a fee to occupy and/or use is charged by a landlord
and paid by a tenant.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building containing one or more rooming units,
arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, whether or not
some type of compensation or remuneration is remitted to either the owner
or the owner's agent.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit either occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but
not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard waste, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust, and other similar materials.
SEASONAL RENTAL UNIT — Use or rental for a term of not more than 125
consecutive days for residential purposes by a person having a permanent
§ 183-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:857
place of residence elsewhere. Seasonal rental unit does not mean use or
rental of living quarters for seasonal, temporary, or migrant farm workers
in connection with any work or place where work is being performed. The
owner-landlord shall have the burden of proving that the use or rental of the
residential property is seasonal.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A unit that shall only be occupied
and used by a single housekeeping unit, as defined in this section. Any
other occupancy or use of a single-family dwelling unit shall be considered
a violation of this chapter.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other or other sewerage or drainage
facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, drive, parkway, road, street, viaduct,
or other way that is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway and
includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street line.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE — An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act that was
prohibited, or failed to do an act that the defendant was legally required to
do.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
STRUCTURE UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY — A structure is unfit
for human occupancy whenever the Code Enforcement Official finds that
such structure is unsafe; unlawful; or, because of the degree to which the
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or ratinfested,
contains filth or contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
chapter; or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership, or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM — A room containing a water closet or urinal, but not a
bathtub or shower.
TRANSIENT — Occupancy for not more than ninety days by a person having
a principal residence elsewhere.
UNLAWFUL EQUIPMENT — Any equipment on the premises or within the
structure that was constructed, installed, altered, or operated contrary to
law.
UNLAWFUL STRUCTURE — A structure found in whole or in part to
be occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was
erected, altered, or occupied contrary to law.
§ 183-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-7
1:858
UNSAFE EQUIPMENT — Any equipment on the premises or within the
structure that is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, safety, or property of the occupants of the premises or
structure or the public.
UNSAFE STRUCTURE — A structure that is found to be dangerous to the
life, health, safety, or property of the occupants of the structure or the
public by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants
in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment,
or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is
possible.
UNSANITARY — Conditions which are not sanitary or healthful, including,
but not limited to, the absence of running potable water and/or a sewer or
septic system that is not fully operational.
USE — That portion of a building or tenancy which is devoted to a single
group or special use or occupancy as defined in the building subcode or
as established by the provisions of any other subcode for the purpose of
specifying special requirements applicable to that portion of a building or
tenancy.
USE GROUPS — As defined as per N.J.A.C. 5:23 in the adopted version of
the International Building Code New Jersey Edition, Chapter 3.
VENTILATION — The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WEEDS — All grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs, but not including cultivated flowers and gardens and all areas in a
natural state.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 183-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:859

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 183-8. Authority and enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, as defined in § 183-7, shall have the
authority to interpret, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter
and, with the approval of the Township Manager, to adopt and promulgate
rules and procedures or designate special requirements applicable because
of climatic or other specific conditions.
§ 183-9. Records retention.
The Code Enforcement Official and Code Enforcement Inspector shall keep
official records of all business and activities relating to the administration
and enforcement of this chapter. Such records shall be retained as long as
the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence,
unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
§ 183-10. Inspections.
§ 183-11. Special provisions.
A. The Code Enforcement Inspector shall perform all required inspections
and maintain written reports of the same; however, he may accept
properly certified reports of inspection by approved individuals or
agencies. He is also authorized to engage such expert opinion as
deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
B. The Code Enforcement Inspector shall always carry proper Township
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of his duties under this chapter.
C. Subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and
seizures, the Code Enforcement Inspector is authorized to enter a
structure or premises at reasonable times to carry out an inspection,
except in case of an emergency situation when he is authorized to enter
and inspect on a twenty-four-hour basis. He is further authorized to
inspect common areas of multiple-family dwellings on a twenty-fourhour
basis. If entry is refused or not obtained, he is authorized to
pursue recourse as provided by law.
D. Whenever more than one Code Enforcement Inspector is involved in the
enforcement of this chapter or another code or ordinance, it shall be the
duty of said Code Enforcement Inspectors to coordinate their
inspections so that the owners and/or occupants shall not be subjected
to multiple visits by numerous inspectors. Whenever an inspector from
any department observes an apparent or actual violation of some
provision of some law, ordinance, or code not within his authority to
enforce, he shall report his findings to the department having
jurisdiction.
§ 183-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-11
1:861
§ 183-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Inspector shall, with
the approval of the Construction Official, the Fire Official, and the
Director of the Health Department, or their designees, have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided he
determines that the special individual reason makes adherence to the
strict letter of this chapter impractical, that the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that such
modification does not lessen health, life, and firesafety requirements.
The details of the action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered into the files of the relevant department(s).
B. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction
not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such
alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of
construction shall be considered approved where the Construction
Official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with
the intent of the provisions of this chapter, and that the material,
method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
C. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does
not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code
Enforcement Official shall have the authority to require tests to be
made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the Township. Test
methods shall be either as specified in this chapter or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted
test methods, the Code Enforcement Official shall be permitted to
approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved
agency. Test reports shall be retained in the files of the relevant
department(s).
D. Materials, equipment, and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested
when necessary, in proper working condition, and approved.
A. Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, or other entity found to be in violation of or in conflict with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions
and penalties set forth in this chapter; Part 1, Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-3
of the Code of the Township of Franklin; and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29(b).
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Official determines or has grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of this chapter, that a structure
or piece of equipment is unsafe, or that an unsafe structure must be
§ 183-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-12
1:862
demolished, he shall issue a notice of violation and/or order to correct
and/or a notice and order of penalty to the owner or the owner's agent,
except as otherwise set forth herein.
(1) The form of such notice shall be in accordance with all of the
following:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include the block, lot, address, and any other description of the
property sufficient for identification;
(c) Include a statement of the violation or violations;
(d) Include a correction order that states a specific time frame to
perform the work required to bring the dwelling unit,
structure, or premises into compliance with the provisions of
this chapter; and
(e) Include the amount of the penalty to be imposed either
immediately and/or for noncompliance.
(2) Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof
is delivered personally, sent by first-class mail to the last known
address of the owner or owner's agent, and/or posted in a
conspicuous place on or about the subject structure or premises.
(3) As prescribed by N.J.A.C. 5:11-2.3(c): "In cases where a landlord is
to be cited for a violation pursuant to an illegal occupancy which
could potentially result in a (g)3 eviction, the following shall be
included as an insert sent with the violation notice:
IF, IN SEEKING TO CORRECT THE ILLEGAL OCCUPANCY FOR
WHICH YOU HAVE BEEN CITED, IT IS NECESSARY FOR YOU
TO EVICT ONE OR MORE TENANTS TO COMPLY, YOU MUST
NOTIFY THOSE TENANTS OF THEIR POTENTIAL ELIGIBILITY
FOR RELOCATION ASSISTANCE. FURTHER INFORMATION
REGARDING YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES AS OWNER PURSUANT
TO REGULATIONS CONCERNING EVICTION AND RELOCATION
MAY BE OBTAINED BY CONTACTING THE FOLLOWING:
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
DIVISION OF CODES AND STANDARDS
OFFICE OF LANDLORD-TENANT INFORMATION
PO BOX 805
TRENTON, NEW JERSEY 08625-0805
TELEPHONE: 609-633-6606"
C. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 183-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-12
1:863
D. The Code Enforcement Official may levy fines of up to $2,000 per day,
per offense for violations of this chapter and/or for noncompliance with
orders or notices
E. In addition to the fines prescribed in Subsection D above, in the case of
either a resident who attends a public school of the Township while
illegally occupying a dwelling unit or a nonresident who uses a dwelling
unit within the Township to illegally attend a public school of the
Township, the owner-landlord of such dwelling unit shall be charged a
fine equal to the annual tuition costs determined in a manner
prescribed for nonresident pupils pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:38-19, which
fine shall be recovered in civil action by a summary proceeding in the
name of the Township pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. The Municipal Court and the Superior
Court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of the
penalty provided by this subsection. Payment of the fine shall be
remitted to the Franklin Township Board of Education.
F. In addition to the fines prescribed in Subsection D above, specific
procedures and fines imposed for violations of Article V that constitute
illegal occupancy resulting in overcrowding are set forth in § 183-26.
G. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit, structure, or
premises, who has received a notice of violation and/or order to correct
and/or notice and order of penalty, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit, structure or premises to
another until he has come into compliance and/or paid any and all fines.
H. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation and/or order to
correct and/or notice and order of penalty served in accordance with
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation
shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation or
order is not complied with, the Code Enforcement Official shall institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action
taken by the Township on such premises shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.
(1) In the event that any violation of this chapter shall result in the
removal of a tenant, all costs, additional fines, and/or other
expenses shall be imposed against the owner/landlord or tenant in
accordance with applicable state law.
I. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business, or
utilization of a building, structure, or premises.
§ 183-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-13
1:864
§ 183-13. Unsafe, unfit, or unlawful structures or equipment.
When the Code Enforcement Inspector finds a structure or equipment to
be unsafe or unlawful or when he finds a structure to be unfit for human
occupancy, he shall report such condition to the Code Enforcement Official,
who shall then declare such structure or equipment unsafe pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Official has declared a structure or
equipment unsafe, unfit for human habitation, or unlawful under the
provisions of this section, he shall serve notice on the owner and/or
person responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with
§ 183-12B, except as otherwise set forth herein.
B. In conjunction with serving notice, the Code Enforcement Official shall
post on the premises or equipment a placard bearing the word "Unsafe"
and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises,
operating the equipment, or removing the placard. The placard shall
remain in place until such time as all the conditions that prompted its
having been posted have been corrected. Any person who defaces or
removes such a placard without the approval of the Code Enforcement
Official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter.
C. Any occupied structure declared as unsafe and placarded shall be
vacated as ordered by the Code Enforcement Official. Additionally, any
equipment declared unsafe and placarded shall not be operated as
ordered by the Code Enforcement Official. Any person who shall occupy
a placarded structure or premises or shall operate placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for said premises
who shall let anyone occupy a placarded structure or premises or
operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this chapter.
D. If a structure has been vacant and/or is unfit for human habitation and
occupancy for 60 days, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the
Code Enforcement Official is authorized to post a placard of unsafe
structure on the premises and order the structure to be closed and
secured so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the
owner to close and secure the premises within the time specified in the
order, the Code Enforcement Official shall cause the premises to be
closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract
or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other
legal resource. All such structures must be closed and secured in
accordance with the standards set forth by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
§ 183-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-14
1:865
§ 183-14. Order to demolish.
When, in the judgment of the Construction Official, any structure is so
old, dilapidated, or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or
otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy to such an extent that it
is unreasonable to repair the structure, or where there has been a cessation
of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years,
he shall order the owner of the premises upon which such structure is
located to demolish and remove such structure within a reasonable time.
§ 183-15. Emergency measures.
A. All demolition notices and orders shall be issued in compliance with
§ 183-12B.
B. Any structure ordered to be demolished shall be placarded as described
in § 183-13B.
C. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the Construction Official shall cause the structure
to be demolished and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
D. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
Township Council or any designated Township official under said
contractor arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
A. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, when, in the opinion
of the Code Enforcement Official, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building, or where there is a structure which endangers
life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity
of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes, or vapors, or
the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or when defective or
dangerous equipment is in operation, or when a structure or part
thereof does not have potable water available and/or operable sanitary
sewer or septic services, or when a similar condition exists by which the
health, safety, or welfare of the public is at risk, he is hereby authorized
and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the
premises forthwith. The Code Enforcement Official shall cause to be
§ 183-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-15
1:866
posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows:
"THIS STRUCTURE IS DECLARED UNSAFE AND/OR UNSANITARY.
NO INDIVIDUAL IS TO OCCUPY THIS STRUCTURE UNTIL IT IS
RENDERED SAFE, SANITARY, AND SECURE." It shall be unlawful for
any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing
the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition, or demolishing said structure.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Official, there is imminent danger due
to an unsafe and/or unsanitary condition, he shall order the necessary
work to be done to render such structure temporarily safe and/or
sanitary whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as he deems
necessary to meet such emergency.
C. For the purposes of this section, the Code Enforcement Official, with
the approval of the Township Manager, is authorized and empowered to
employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work
as expeditiously as possible.
D. Any and all costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall
be paid by the Township. The Township Attorney shall institute
appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
§ 183-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-15
1:867

ARTICLE III
Registration and Inspection of Rental Units
§ 183-16. Registration of rental units.
A. All rental units, whether residential or nonresidential, shall be
registered with the Township, using an official form provided by the
Township, before any tenant shall occupy such units. The fee for such
registration shall be $10 per rental unit. Existing rental units that are
already occupied at the time this chapter is adopted shall be registered
within three months of the effective date of this chapter. Any change in
ownership, occupancy, or any other information required by this section
shall be reported to the Township on a new official registration form
within 20 days of such change.
B. In addition to the identifying information about the building and/or
dwelling unit (block, lot, address, unit number, etc.), information
provided to the Township on the official registration form shall include
the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner of record or owners of the
premises and the owner of record or owners of the rental business
if not the same persons. In the case of a partnership the names of
all general partners shall be provided;
(2) If the owner of record is a corporation, the name and address of the
registered agent and corporate officers of said corporation;
(3) If the owner of record cannot respond to an emergency or to act on
a violation within a reasonable amount of time, provide the address
of an agent authorized to accept notices and act on behalf of the
owner;
(4) The name and address of the managing agent of the premises, if
any;
(5) The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment, or
room number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian, or other
individual employed by the owner of record or managing agent to
provide regular maintenance service, if any;
(6) The name, address, and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner of record or managing agent who may
be reached or contacted at any time in the event of an emergency
affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling space therein,
including such emergencies as the failure of any essential service
or system, and who has the authority to make emergency decisions
concerning the building and any repair thereto or expenditure in
connection therewith and shall, at all times, have access to a
current list of building tenants that shall be made available to
emergency personnel as required in the event of an emergency;
§ 183-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-16
1:869
§ 183-17. Recurring inspection of one- and two-family dwelling
rental units.
Subsequent to the successful completion of an initial inspection to be
scheduled by the Code Enforcement Inspector after the adoption of this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Inspector shall conduct recurring
inspections of the interiors, exteriors, and exterior premises of all
residential rental units every five years.
(7) The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on
the premises;
(8) If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the
heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer
servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil used;
(9) The name of the tenant or occupant of the rental unit;
(10) The maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit, as determined by
this chapter and the Code Enforcement Official.
A. The Code Enforcement Inspector shall inform the owner or owner's
agent of the date of a pending inspection at least 20 business days in
advance.
B. The owner or owner's agent shall inform any current tenant of the date
of a pending inspection at least 10 business days in advance.
C. Fees for these inspections shall be paid at least 10 business days before
the scheduled inspection, and shall be as follows:
(1) Initial inspection and first reinspection (if required) - $100 per unit.
(2) Each additional reinspection (if required) - $50 per unit.
D. Inspection results and follow-up procedures:
(1) If the dwelling unit passes inspection, the Code Enforcement
Official shall issue an approval certificate within five business days.
(2) If the dwelling unit fails inspection, the Code Enforcement
Inspector shall provide a list of all violations to the owner or the
owner's agent within five business days.
(a) The owner or owner's agent shall have 30 days to correct all
violations. When all violations have been corrected, the owner
or owner's agent shall schedule a reinspection.
(b) If the Code Enforcement Official determines that the violations
are such that the dwelling unit must be vacated, the owner or
owner's agent shall provide alternate housing for any current
tenant without any additional charge to such tenant, until such
time as the dwelling unit passes inspection.
§ 183-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-17
1:870
§ 183-18. Inspection of multiple-family dwelling rental units.
While regular, recurring inspections of multiple-family dwellings will not
be conducted under this chapter since they are already done by state
inspections, multiple-family dwellings are subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and inspections will be done in response to complaints received
by the Township about any issues or conditions at multiple-family dwellings
that are covered under the provisions of this chapter.
E. Re-occupancy Inspection Log Book (rentals).
(1) The person responsible for renting dwelling units shall maintain a
Re-occupancy Inspection Log Book. This log shall be accessible to
the Code Enforcement Inspector at all reasonable times and shall
be produced within one business day of either an oral or written
request by him.
(2) This log shall be kept beginning on the first day that this chapter is
in effect. Thereafter, it shall be kept current and indicate any
change in rental status or tenants.
(3) Records shall be kept for no less than two years.
§ 183-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-18
1:871

ARTICLE IV
Certificate of Continued Building Compliance
§ 183-19. Certificate of continued building compliance; exceptions.
A. No owner, agent, realtor or broker, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, or any other person shall sell, rent, re-rent, transfer, lease,
let, mortgage with right of occupancy, allow re-occupancy, or otherwise
dispose of ownership, any structure or dwelling unit until either a
certificate of continued building compliance or a temporary certificate
of continued building compliance has been issued by the Township; and
until the Township Water Department has been notified of such change
and/or a new water meter has been set.
(1) Changes of occupancy in multifamily dwellings shall be exempt
from this requirement, as they are subject to Chapter 151 of the
Code of Franklin Township.
(2) In the event of a resale of a structure in an "as is" condition, a
certificate of noncompliance shall be issued to allow the transfer of
title with full disclosure to all parties. No occupancy shall be
allowed until a structure meets the life safety requirements in
effect at the time the structure was built, as well as any code or
retrofit requirements that may affect the particular structure.
B. The owner or the owner's agent shall schedule an inspection for
certificate of continued building compliance no later than 10 business
days prior to the date of the closing or change of tenant.
(1) If a cyclical inspection under § 183-17 was conducted and passed
on the unit within one calendar year before the date of the closing
or change of tenant, such inspection may, at the request of the
property owner, be used to satisfy the certificate of continued
building occupancy inspection that is required under this section.
C. Inspection fees shall be as follows:
(1) Initial inspection and first reinspection (if required):
(a) If scheduled 10 or more business days in advance: $100 per
unit.
(b) If scheduled less than 10 business days in advance: $150 per
unit.
(2) Each additional reinspection (if required):
(a) If scheduled 10 or more business days in advance: $50 per
unit.
(b) If scheduled less than 10 business days in advance: $100 per
unit.
§ 183-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-19
1:873
D. Inspection results and follow-up procedures:
(1) If the unit passes inspection, the Code Enforcement Inspector shall
issue a certificate of continued building compliance within five
business days. Such certificate shall be valid for 90 days from the
date of issue.
(2) If the unit fails inspection the Code Enforcement Inspector shall
provide the owner or the owner's agent with a list of all violations.
The owner or owner's agent shall have 30 days to correct all
violations. When all violations have been corrected, the owner or
the owner's agent shall schedule a reinspection. If the Code
Enforcement Inspector determines that the violations do not pose a
significant threat to the health and/or safety of potential occupants,
he shall issue a temporary certificate of continued building
compliance. Such certificate shall be valid for 30 days. If any and all
violations have not been corrected by the end of 30 days, the unit
shall be vacated and shall remain so until all violations have been
corrected and approved.
(a) In the case of a Use Group R-3, R-4, or R-5 structure, if the unit
does not meet the requirements for smoke detectors and
carbon monoxide detectors specified by the Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:70) a Temporary certificate of continued building
compliance shall not be issued until such compliance is
achieved. (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3(a)1).
(b) If the correction of any violation requires the issuance of a
construction permit, such work shall not commence until such
permit has been issued. All permitted work shall be inspected
and a certificate of approval or occupancy issued by the
Construction Official before a reinspection for the certificate of
continued building compliance may be scheduled.
(3) Inspection report forms shall be in triplicate and shall be
distributed as follows:
(a) The original is to be retained by the owner, the owner's agent,
or, in the case of a change in tenancy, the person responsible
for renting dwelling units;
(b) One copy is to be retained by the Code Enforcement Inspector;
and
(c) In the case of a resale, the current owner or the owner's agent
shall give the second copy to the new owner; and, in the case of
a change in tenancy, the person responsible for renting
dwelling units shall give the second copy to the tenant.
§ 183-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-19
1:874
ARTICLE V
Occupancy Limitations
§ 183-20. Privacy.
Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units, and
dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and shall be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
§ 183-21. Minimum room; area dimensions.
§ 183-22. Floor area and occupant load.
In all dwelling units there shall be a minimum usable floor area for the
initial occupant of 150 square feet and 100 square feet of additional space
for each additional occupant, provided, however, that children under the
age of two shall not be considered additional occupants.
A. Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not
be less than seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a
clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and
appliances or counter fronts and walls.
B. Minimum ceiling heights: Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms, and habitable basement areas
shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet; with the
following exceptions:
(1) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches
below the required ceiling height.
(2) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study, or recreation purposes, that have a
ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less
than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders,
ducts, and similar obstructions.
(3) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study, or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least seven feet over not less than one-third of
the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of
such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling
height of five feet or more shall be included.
A. Kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms, and other uninhabitable spaces shall
not be included in calculating minimum usable floor area for occupant
load.
B. If there are more than eight occupants in any dwelling unit, there shall
be a second bathroom in the dwelling unit.
§ 183-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-22
1:875
§ 183-23. Bedroom requirements.
§ 183-24. Prohibited sleeping areas.
Kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms, and other uninhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
§ 183-25. Efficiency unit.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting
the following requirements:
C. For every two adults occupying a dwelling unit, there shall be one offstreet
parking space.
A. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied or intended to be occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum usable
floor area of 70 square feet and every room occupied or intended to be
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall have a
usable floor area of at least 50 square feet for each such occupant,
provided, however, that children under the age of two shall not be
considered to be additional occupants.
B. The maximum number of occupants in any bedroom shall be four.
C. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other
bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces, unless the unit contains only one
bedroom.
D. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one
lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory
located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
E. Bedrooms shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
F. All bedrooms shall have a secondary means of egress as required by the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:70).
A. The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
B. A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor
area of not less than 220 square feet. A unit occupied by three
occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet.
These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by
Subsections C and D.
C. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and
refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
§ 183-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-25
1:876
§ 183-26. Illegal occupancy resulting in overcrowding.
In accordance with the following provisions, summonses shall be issued
to the owner-landlord and/or the tenants of a residential rental unit in a
building containing four or fewer residential rental units for violations of
this article that constitute illegal occupancy resulting in overcrowding:
than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this chapter
shall be provided.
D. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water
closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.
A. Upon the discovery of an illegal occupancy resulting in overcrowding, a
notice of violation shall be issued in accordance with § 183-12B. In the
event the violation is not abated within the period of time provided in
the notice, a summons against the owner-landlord or the tenants, or
both shall be issued.
(1) If an owner-landlord has issued a notice to cease to eliminate
overcrowding or unauthorized occupancy of a residential unit that
is the subject of a notice of violation, and the owner-landlord files a
copy of the notice to cease and an affidavit of good faith with the
Township, no summons shall be issued against an owner-landlord
for six months from the date of service of the notice to cease. At the
end of that six-month period, if the overcrowding or unauthorized
occupancy of the residential unit has not been eliminated, and no
eviction proceeding is pending, then a summons may be issued
against the owner-landlord.
B. Upon a determination of illegal occupancy resulting in overcrowding, in
addition to any other fine provided by law, fines shall be imposed as
follows: up to $2,500 per day for a first violation, up to $5,000 per day
for a second violation, and up to $10,000 per day for each subsequent
violation. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1) "Second violation" or "subsequent violation" for illegal occupancy
resulting in overcrowding shall be limited to those violations that
are issued within five years of a prior violation, are new and are a
result of distinct and separate code enforcement activities, and
shall not include any continuing violations for which citations are
issued by the Code Enforcement Inspector during the time period
required for summary dispossession proceedings to conclude if the
owner has initiated eviction proceedings in a court of proper
jurisdiction.
C. A fine shall not be imposed upon an owner-landlord or a tenant unless
the parties have been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a
court of competent jurisdiction, allowing for independent
§ 183-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-26
1:877
determinations of the existence of overcrowding and the responsibility
for the overcrowding.
(1) In order for it to be determined that a tenant is responsible for the
overcrowding, it must be established that:
(a) The tenant signed a lease or was provided a written copy of the
rental policy in which the number of allowed occupants was
specified;
(b) The number of allowed occupants was within the standards
established by the applicable code requirements, or rental
policy if a number was specified in the lease; and
(c) Any additional occupants in excess of the number of occupants
specified became residents of the rental unit without the
expressed consent of the owner-landlord.
(2) The Municipal Court and the Superior Court shall have jurisdiction
of proceedings for the enforcement of the fines provided by this
section.
D. Fines authorized pursuant to Subsection B of this section may be
imposed upon the owner-landlord, or the tenants, or both, dependent
upon whether the conduct of the owner-landlord, or the tenants, or
both, was the primary cause for the illegal occupancy resulting in
overcrowding, provided the provisions of Subsection C of this section
have been met. In order for the conduct of the tenants to be deemed the
primary cause for the illegal occupancy, it must be established that:
(1) The tenant signed a lease or was provided a written copy of the
rental policy in which the number of allowed occupants was
specified;
(2) The number of allowed occupants was within the standards
established by the applicable code requirements, or rental policy if
a number was specified in the lease; and
(3) Any additional occupants in excess of the number of occupants
specified became residents of the rental unit without the expressed
consent of the owner-landlord.
E. Owner-occupied property shall be exempt from the fines authorized
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, except where the ownerlandlord
of the owner-occupied dwelling is renting rooms or apartments
in violation of local ordinances or state law.
F. The service of a notice to cease to eliminate overcrowding or
unauthorized occupancy no more than six months prior to the service of
a summons or notice of violation under this section, whether or not the
owner-landlord prevails, shall serve as a defense by the owner-landlord
to any summons, notice, violation, action, or proceeding under this
§ 183-26 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-26
1:878
section against the owner-landlord before any court or administrative
agency.
G. This section shall not apply to a seasonal rental unit.
H. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICABLE CODE REQUIREMENTS — Standards governing the
occupancy of space adopted by the Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to the State Housing Code, P.L.1966, c.168 (N.J.S.A. 2A:42-74
et seq.), or the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L.1967, c.76
(N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
OWNER-LANDLORD — Shall not include a mortgagee in possession
through foreclosure.
§ 183-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-26
1:879

ARTICLE VI
Minimum Standards and Requirements for Property and Structures
§ 183-27. Vacant land and structures.
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition as provided
herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public
health or safety. Preservation areas and property areas maintained in their
natural state are exempt from these regulations.
§ 183-28. Exterior property areas.
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and
sanitary condition. The owner of the property shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the property. Occupants
shall keep that part of the exterior property that they occupy or control
in a clean and sanitary condition. Preservation areas and property areas
maintained in their natural state are exempt from these regulations.
A. Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate, or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on
any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving,
or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove
and/or repair the damage caused by any such marking, carving, or
graffiti.
B. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Approved
retention areas and reservoirs are exceptions. Drainage of roofs and
paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises
shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
C. Illicit Connections. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
through an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Township any domestic sewage, noncontact
cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
D. Combustible and flammable materials. Combustible and flammable
materials, including, but not limited to, mulch, shall be located no
closer than 18 inches to any structure used for human habitation.
Owner-occupied, single-family dwellings shall be exempt from this
requirement.
E. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited.
F. Rodent harborage. All exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where found, rodents shall be exterminated
§ 183-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-28
1:881
§ 183-29. Exterior of structures.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
promptly by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
G. Walkways and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces, and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
H. Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other
gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.
I. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including, but not
limited to, detached garages, sheds, decks, fences, and walls, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
J. Swimming pools.
(1) Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and in good repair.
(2) Requirements for barriers for swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas
that are 24 inches or more in depth, have a surface area of 250
square feet or more, and/or include a filter shall conform to the
regulations of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
K. Motor vehicles. No inoperable or unregistered motor vehicle shall be
parked, kept, or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any
time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of
being stripped or dismantled unless it is stored inside a permanent
structure.
(1) A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for
such purposes.
(2) Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.
L. Parking. Motor vehicles and trailers designed to carry motorized or
nonmotorized vehicles shall be parked only on driveways or designated
parking areas made of blacktop, concrete, or stone that appear on an
approved survey or site plan of the property. Areas of soil, grass, or
other vegetation shall not be used for parking.
§ 183-28 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-29
1:882
A. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
B. Protective treatment of surfaces. All exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in good condition and be properly weatherproofed to
prevent deterioration. All wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant
woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights, shall be maintained
weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from
exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are
exempt from this requirement.
C. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb, free
from open cracks and breaks, and kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
D. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be maintained free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and shall be maintained
weatherproof and properly surface coated, where required, to prevent
deterioration.
E. Roofs and drainage. Roof areas and flashing shall be sound, tight, and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
F. Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited
to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
and exhaust ducts shall be properly anchored and maintained in good
repair and be so as to be safe and sound.
G. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, and
in good repair.
H. Stairs, decks, porches, and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch, and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
properly anchored, structurally safe and sound, capable of supporting
the imposed loads, and maintained in good repair.
I. Guards and handrails. All exterior guards and handrails shall be
required and constructed in conformance with the regulations of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23); and shall be firmly fastened,
§ 183-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-29
1:883
§ 183-30. Building security.
Doors, windows, or basement hatchways for dwelling units, room units, or
housekeeping units that are rented, leased, or let shall be provided with
devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
capable of supporting normally imposed loads, and maintained in good
condition.
J. Doors, windows, and skylights. Every door, window, skylight, and frame
thereof shall be maintained in sound condition, good repair, and
weathertight.
(1) All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware shall be
maintained in good working condition. Locks at all entrances to
dwelling units, rooming units, and guestrooms shall tightly secure
the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be readily able to be
opened from the side from which egress is to be made without the
need for keys, special knowledge, or effort.
(2) All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and
holes.
(3) Every openable window shall operate easily and have the capability
of being held in position by window hardware.
(4) Every door, window, and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms shall be supplied with approved,
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch; and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
(5) Every openable basement window shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows, or other approved protection against the
entry of rodents.
(6) Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water.
K. Decorative elements. All belt courses, corbels, cornices, terra cotta
trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be properly
anchored and maintained in good repair and a safe condition.
L. Premises identification. Each structure to which a street number has
been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily
observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall
be in Arabic numerals at least four inches high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch.
A. Doors. All doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt lock shall have a lock throw of not less
than 1 inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be
§ 183-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-30
1:884
§ 183-31. Interior of structures.
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained
structurally sound, in good repair, and in a sanitary condition. The owner
of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel,
a dormitory, two or more dwelling units, or two or more nonresidential
occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or
public areas of the structure. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure
that they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition.
considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to manufacturer's specifications and maintained in
good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall
be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable from
inside the dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit without the
use of a key, tool, combination thereof, or any other special knowledge
or effort.
B. Windows. All operable windows that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be
equipped with window sash locking devices.
C. Basement hatchways. All basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased,
or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from
unauthorized entry.
A. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
B. Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded paint shall
be repaired, removed, or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed
wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
C. Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch,
deck, or other walking surface shall be maintained in a safe and sound
condition and in good repair.
D. Handrails and guards. All interior guards and handrails shall be
required and constructed in conformance with the regulations of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23); and shall be firmly fastened,
capable of supporting normally imposed loads, and maintained in good
condition.
E. Interior doors.
(1) Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and
shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers, or tracks as intended by the
manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
§ 183-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:885
§ 183-32. Rubbish and garbage.
All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall
be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
§ 183-33. Infestation and extermination.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible to ensure that such
structure shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
(2) Keyed locks, when installed to use a room or area of a dwelling unit
as a rooming unit and/or to convert such dwelling unit into a
rooming house, are prohibited.
F. Additional Kitchens. The installation or construction of an additional
kitchen in any dwelling unit for the purpose of converting such unit into
a rooming house or creating another dwelling unit without approval of
the Township is strictly forbidden.
A. Disposal of rubbish.
(1) The owner or occupant of every occupied premises shall supply a
sufficient quantity of approved covered containers for rubbish and
shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
(2) Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
(3) Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall have
their doors removed and shall be discarded.
(4) No person shall sweep, rake, blow, or otherwise place yard waste
that is not containerized into any street. Should uncontainerized
yard waste be placed in a street, the party responsible for doing so
shall be required to remove such yard waste.
B. Disposal of garbage.
(1) The owner of every property producing garbage shall supply, and at
all times cause to be utilized, approved, durable, leak-proof, outside
garbage containers with tight-fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal, in a
sufficient quantity for the number of occupants thereof.
(2) Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in approved garbage
containers as described in Subsection B(1) above.
§ 183-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-33
1:886
ARTICLE VII
Light and Ventilation Requirements
§ 183-34. Light requirements.
§ 183-35. Ventilation requirements.
A. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size
facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed
area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of such
room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of
any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from
the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to
a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area for the room. However, where natural light
for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through
an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room
shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or space, but
not less than 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based on
the total floor area being illuminated.
B. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than
in one- and two- family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at
least a sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square
feet of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing
between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. In other than
residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of
egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space
served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one
footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings, and treads.
C. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light
sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, the safe
occupancy of the space, and utilization of the appliances, equipment,
and fixtures.
D. In lieu of the means for natural light herein prescribed, artificial light
complying with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23) shall be permitted.
A. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The
total openable area of such window in any and every room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in
§ 183-34A. However, where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed
opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of
the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on the total floor
area being ventilated.
§ 183-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-35
1:887
B. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by § 183-35A, except
that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a
mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
C. Cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit,
nor shall a cooking facility or appliance be permitted to be present in a
rooming unit or dormitory unit, unless an approved ventilation system
is installed and in operation.
D. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems
and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and/or the provisions of the New Jersey Edition of the
International Mechanical Code.
E. In lieu of the means for natural ventilation herein prescribed,
mechanical ventilation complying with the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) shall be permitted.
§ 183-35 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-35
1:888
ARTICLE VIII
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
§ 183-36. Required facilities.
§ 183-37. Toilet rooms.
§ 183-38. Plumbing systems and fixtures.
A. Every occupied structure shall be provided with plumbing facilities,
fixtures, and systems that are compliant with the plumbing regulations
that were in effect when the structure was built, altered, or repaired,
and that shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary, and good operating
condition.
B. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory,
water closet, and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary
and safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same
room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door
leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A
kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
C. At least one water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for each four rooming units.
D. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory, and one drinking facility
shall be available to employees.
A. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not
constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door equipped with an interior locking device shall be
provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a
multiple dwelling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving rooming units, dormitory units or
housekeeping units shall have access from a common hall or
passageway and by traversing not more than one flight of stairs.
C. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained
to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed, maintained in working
order, kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects, capable of
performing the functions for which they are designed, and maintained
in a safe and sanitary condition.
B. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and
cleaning.
C. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate
§ 183-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-38
1:889
§ 183-39. Water systems.
§ 183-40. Sanitary drainage systems.
service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage,
improper installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons,
the defects shall be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet,
or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public
water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs, and showers shall be supplied
with hot or tempered and cold running water.
B. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level
rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and
other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place
shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or
an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
C. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained and to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices, and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
D. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained, and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility at a
temperature of not less than 120°F. An approved combination
temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe
shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
A. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public
sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste, and sewer line shall function
properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects.
§ 183-38 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-40
1:890
ARTICLE IX
Mechanical Requirements
§ 183-41. Heating facilities.
§ 183-42. Mechanical equipment.
A. Every occupied structure shall be provided with heating and
mechanical facilities, fixtures, and systems that are compliant with the
mechanical regulations that were in effect when the structure was built,
altered, or repaired, and that shall be maintained in a safe and good
operating condition.
B. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
and 65° F. from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to
provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
C. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one
or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories, or guestrooms on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
D. The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet above
the floor near the center of the room and two feet inward from the
center of each exterior wall.
A. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid-fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances, and water heating appliances shall be properly
installed, maintained in a safe working condition, and capable of
performing the functions for which they are intended.
B. Unless labeled for unvented operation, all fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
C. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained at
all times.
D. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
E. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of
the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for
all fuel-burning equipment.
F. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuelburning
appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet
or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such
purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
§ 183-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-43
1:891
§ 183-43. Duct systems.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
§ 183-44. Elevators, escalators, and dumbwaiters.
A. Elevators, escalators, and dumbwaiters shall be maintained to sustain
safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from
physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection
shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the
escalator or dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator.
B. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator
shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied. However, buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
§ 183-43 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-44
1:892
ARTICLE X
Electrical Requirements
§ 183-45. Electrical facilities.
§ 183-46. Electrical equipment.
A. Every occupied structure shall be provided with electrical facilities,
fixtures, and systems that are compliant with the electrical regulations
that were in effect when the structure was built, altered, or repaired,
and that shall be maintained in a safe and good operating condition.
B. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis
for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23). Dwelling
units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240-volt, single-phase
electrical service having an ampere rating that is adequate for the
intended load, as determined by the Code Enforcement Official.
C. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate
service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar
reasons, the defects shall be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall be properly
installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
B. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate
and remote receptacle outlets. Every bathroom shall contain at least
one receptacle outlet.
C. In the event of a change of occupancy, any kitchen receptacle outlet
that serves countertop surfaces, any bathroom receptacle outlet, and/or
any receptacle outlet in a laundry area that is within six feet of the edge
of a sink that does not currently provide ground-fault circuit interrupter
protection shall be upgraded to provide such protection. Any new
kitchen receptacle outlet that serves countertop surfaces, any new
bathroom receptacle, and/or any new receptacle outlet in a laundry
area that is within six feet of the edge of a sink outlet shall provide
ground-fault circuit interrupter protection.
D. Every public hall, interior stairway, kitchen, toilet room, bathroom,
laundry room, boiler room, and furnace room shall contain at least one
electric lighting fixture.
§ 183-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-46
1:893

ARTICLE XI
Firesafety Requirements
§ 183-47. Means of egress.
§ 183-48. Fire-resistance ratings.
§ 183-49. Fire-protection systems.
A. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided
from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with the provisions of both the Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:70) and the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23). The
required width of aisles in accordance with said Code shall be
unobstructed.
B. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from
which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge, or effort.
C. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be maintained
in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction and
shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys
or tools. Bars, grilles, grates, or similar devices are permitted to be
placed over emergency escape and rescue openings, provided the
minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in
effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or
removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool, or force
greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
A. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire
stops, shaft enclosures, partitions, and floors shall be maintained.
B. All required opening protectives and fire- and smoke-stop doors shall be
equipped with UL listed door closures and shall be maintained in an
operative condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be
blocked, obstructed, or otherwise made inoperable.
A. All systems, devices, and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm,
suppress or control a fire, or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times and be in accordance
with the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70).
B. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all "R" Use
Groups and in all other use groups where they are required by either
the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) or the Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.S.A. 5:70), in accordance with the requirements that were in effect
at the time the current certificate of occupancy was issued, and shall be
maintained in an operative condition at all times.
§ 183-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-49
1:895

ARTICLE XII
Vacant and Abandoned Residential Properties in Foreclosure
[Added 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 4116-15]
§ 183-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDITOR — A state-chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed
under the provisions of the New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act, P.L.
2009, c.53 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended from
time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the
debt obligation, including, but not limited to, servicers.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Consistent with
section 1 of P.L. 2010, c.70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real estate, where
a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to § 183-54A and Subsection
b. of Section 1 of P.L.2014, c.35 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s). Residential property
shall further be deemed "vacant and abandoned" where a mortgaged
property is not occupied by a mortgagor or tenant and at least two of the
following conditions exist:
A. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
B.
C. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
D.
E. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
F. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
G. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery persons,
or government employees indicating that the residence is vacant and
abandoned;
H.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
I.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
J.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
K.
§ 183-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-50
1:897
§ 183-51. Registration of vacant and abandoned properties
required.
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
L.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
M.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
N.
O. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
vacant and abandoned property, or a creditor who has previously filed a
summons and complaint to foreclose on a residential property which
subsequently becomes vacant and abandoned, shall within 30 calendar
days after the building becomes vacant and abandoned or within 30
calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant and abandoned
property, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of
notice from the Township, and annually thereafter, file a registration
statement for such vacant and abandoned property with the Municipal
Clerk on forms provided by the Township for such purposes. Any failure
to receive notice from the Township shall not constitute grounds for
failing to register the vacant and abandoned property.
B. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and lot
number as designated in the official tax maps of the Township shall be
registered separately.
C. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the creditor as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such creditor in connection with the enforcement of any applicable
code.
D. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the
actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for
maintaining the abandoned and vacant property. The individual or
representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the abandoned
and vacant property shall be available by telephone or in person on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities
§ 183-50 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-51
1:898
§ 183-52. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each vacant and abandoned property under
the provisions of this article shall be $500. The fee for the first annual
renewal shall be $1,500, and the fee for the second annual renewal shall
be $3,000. The fee for any subsequent annual renewal beyond the second
renewal shall be $5,000.
§ 183-53. Creditor responsibility.
§ 183-54. Maintenance of property; notice of violation.
may be the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the
statement must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside
within the State of New Jersey.
E. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall be valid
through December 31 of the year in which it was filed. The creditor
shall be required to renew the registration annually as long as the
building remains vacant and abandoned and shall pay a registration or
renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 183-52 for each vacant and
abandoned property registered.
F. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
G. The creditor shall notify the Municipal Clerk within 30 calendar days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Municipal Clerk for
such purpose.
H. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
creditor.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
residential property within the Township shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, after the property becomes vacant and
abandoned as defined in this article.
B. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act on
the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
§ 183-53A. Notice of said representative or agent shall be provided to
the Municipal Clerk pursuant to § 183-51C to D and pursuant to
Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L.2008, c.127 (N.J.S.A.
46:10B-51).
§ 183-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-54
1:899
§ 183-55. Enforcement officers.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article is
conferred upon the Municipal Clerk, Construction Official, Zoning Officer,
Housing Officer, Health Officer, Township police, and any other duly
appointed representatives.
§ 183-56. Violations and penalties.
A. The enforcement officers designated in this article shall be authorized
to issue a notice to a creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in
an action to foreclose on a residential property within the Township, if
the enforcement officer determines that the creditor has violated this
article by failing to provide for the care, maintenance, security, and
upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and abandoned property. Where a
creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the notice shall be issued to the
representative or agent that has been identified by the creditor
pursuant to § 183-53B and Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17
of P.L.2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
B. The notice referenced in § 183-54A shall require the creditor to correct
the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days
of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to
public health and safety.
C. The issuance of a notice pursuant to § 183-54A shall constitute proof
that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes of
this article.
A. A creditor subject to this article that is found by the Municipal Court of
the Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
the receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent
risk to public health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence
11 days following receipt of the notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article that is found by the
Municipal Court of the Township, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine
of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor
for the failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall
commence on the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (1)
of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L.2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51) for
providing notice to the Municipal Clerk that a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
§ 183-54 FRANKLIN CODE § 183-56
1:900
C. A creditor subject to this article that is found by the Municipal Court of
the Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to register a vacant and abandoned
property pursuant to § 183-51 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$2,000. Any fines imposed on a creditor under this subsection shall
commence 11 days following receipt of notice from the Township
pursuant to § 183-51A.
D. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Township pursuant to
this article shall be utilized by the Township for municipal code
enforcement purposes.
§ 183-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-56
1:901
Chapter 185
FILMING
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film or videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional uses. The
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include filming of news
stories or public and private events within the Township of Franklin.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Any film which is financed and/or distributed
by a major motion picture studio, including, but not limited to the following:
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the Township
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Township of Franklin.
§ 185-2. Permit required.
A. Universal Pictures.
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema,
Village Road Show and Bel-Aire.
B.
C. Paramount, including MTV Films and Nickelodeon Movie.
D. 20th Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight.
E. Sony/Columbia.
F. Disney/Miramax.
G. MGM — United Artists.
H. Dreamworks.
I. Any film for which the budget is at least $10,000,000.
J. Recurrent weekly television series programming.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public or
private land within the Township of Franklin without first having
obtained a permit from the office of the Municipal Clerk, which permit
shall set forth the approved location of such filming and the approved
duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates. Said
permit must be readily available for inspection by Township officials at
all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the
Municipal Clerk during normal business hours. Applications for such
§ 183-56 FRANKLIN CODE § 185-2
1:902
§ 185-3. Issuance of permits.
permits shall be in a form approved by the Municipal Clerk and be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by this chapter
in § 185-12 herein.
C. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Municipal
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permits will be issued by the Municipal Clerk unless applied for
prior to five days before the requested shooting date; provided,
however, that the Township Manager may waive the five-day period if,
in his judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and
adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Township with satisfactory proof of the
following;
(1) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000.
(b) For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $300,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Township of Franklin from any
and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use
of public lands.
(3) The posting of cash of $500 or a maintenance bond of $500 running
in favor of the Township and protecting and insuring that the
location utilized will be left after filming, in a satisfactory condition,
free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and that due observance of
all Township ordinances, laws and regulations will be followed.
Within seven days of the completion of the filming, the Township
will return the bond if there has been no damage to public property
or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Franklin Township police officer for the
times indicated on the permit shall be required if necessary for
traffic and public safety reasons upon the discretion of the Police
Chief.
C. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:903
§ 185-4. Interference with pubic activity; notice of filming.
§ 185-5. Filming in residential zones.
Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that all requests for
the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. are subject to the provisions of
§ 185-8. The setup, production and breakdown required by all filming shall
be included in the hours as set forth herein.
§ 185-6. Refusal to issue permit; employment of patrolmen and
electrician.
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Franklin
Township Police Department with respect thereto.
A. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets.
B. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled
activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible, any
interference with normal public activity on such public lands. Where
the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or otherwise,
will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants or
residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Municipal Clerk, said objections to
form a part of applicant's application and be considered in the review of
the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall be
submitted to the Municipal Clerk within two days of the requested
shooting date.
A. The Township Manager may refuse to issue a permit whenever he
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of an
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
Township agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or
welfare.
B. Further, the Township reserves the right to require one or more on-site
patrolmen in situations where the proposed production may impede the
proper flow of traffic, the cost of said patrolman to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines
are to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may
§ 185-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 185-6
1:904
§ 185-7. Appeals.
§ 185-8. Waiver of requirements of chapter by Township Manager.
The Township Manager may authorize filming during the hours between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. In determining whether to allow an extension of
hours under this section, the Township Manager shall consider the following
factors:
be similarly required if the production company does not have a
licensed electrician on staff.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Manager denying
or revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to § 185-8
may appeal to the Township Council. A written notice of appeal setting
forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Township
Manager.
B. An appeal from the decision of the Township Manager shall be filed
within 10 days of the Township Manager's decision is made known to
the applicant. The Township Council shall set the matter down for a
hearing within 30 days of the day on which the notice of appeal was
filed. The decision of the Township Council shall be in the form of a
resolution supporting the decision of the Township Manager at a public
meeting of the Township after the hearing on the appeal, unless the
appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision. If such
resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision of the
Township Manager shall be deemed to be reversed, and a permit shall
be issued in conformity with the application or relief pursuant to
§ 185-8 shall be deemed denied.
A. Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked on the
public street.
B. Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public streets.
C. When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming.
D. Nature of the film shoot itself: e.g., indoors or outdoors; day or night; on
public or private lands.
E. Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Township, if
any.
F. Consultation with the Council-Ward representative wherein the filming
is to take place.
G. Limited noise and artificial light are used during the hours between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:905
§ 185-9. Copies of permit; inspections.
Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or other
Township inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be used.
The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by the Fire
Prevention Bureau or other Township inspectors.
§ 185-10. Reimbursement of certain costs.
In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Township for any lost revenue, such as repairs
to public property or other revenues that the Township was prevented from
earning because of filming.
§ 185-11. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
§ 185-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 187
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms in parks — See Ch. 260, § 260-6F.
§ 187-1. Possession and discharge restrictions.
A. Basic filming permit: $75. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provisions of § 185-3A, requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit shall be $125.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $50 per
day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture: $500 per day.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants for educational purposes (no
daily rate required): $25.
§ 185-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 187-1
1:906
A. No person shall discharge any firearm, gun, pistol, or knocked bow
upon or across any state, county, or municipal road or highway, and no
person, except the owner or lessee of the property or a person acting as
the agent of the owner or lessee, which designation shall be in writing,
shall have in his possession a loaded gun, pistol, firearm, or knocked
bow while within 450 feet of any school, playground, or occupied
building in the Township. [Amended 2-9-1984 by Ord. No. 1157;
2-28-1995 by Ord. No. 1880]
B. The discharge of any gun, pistol or firearm or the possession of a loaded
gun, pistol or firearm shall be and hereby is prohibited within the
following described area of the Township (except upon a licensed
patrol, rifle or firearm range and under the supervision of the Police
Department and except on property by an owner and resident thereon
or a lessee of property who is a resident or member of the immediate
family of such owner or lessee residing thereon): [Amended
12-14-1972 by Ord. No. 601; 2-8-1973 by Ord. No. 607]
(1) Area 1, consisting of the area bounded by the following: Beginning
at the intersection of the center line of the Raritan River in the
northwesterly direction and the boundary line between the
Borough of South Bound Brook and the township; thence
(a) Southeasterly along the boundary line between the Borough of
South Bound Brook and the township to where it intersects
with the center line of the Raritan River; thence
(b) Southeasterly for an approximate distance of fifty feet to a
point of intersection of the projection of the easterly boundary
line of Davidson Avenue and the center line of the Raritan
River; thence
(c) Southwesterly along the projection of the easterly boundary
line and along the easterly boundary line of Davidson Avenue
projected to a point of intersection with the southerly boundary
line of New Brunswick Road; thence
(d) Northwesterly along the southerly boundary line of New
Brunswick Road to its intersection with the easterly boundary
line of Elizabeth Avenue; thence
(e) Southwesterly along the easterly boundary line of Elizabeth
Avenue to its intersection with the projection of the westerly
boundary line of Schoolhouse Road; thence
(f) Northwesterly along the southerly boundary line of
Schoolhouse Road to its intersection with the projections of the
westerly boundary line of Randolph Road; thence
(g) Northwesterly along the westerly boundary line of Randolph
Road and its projection to its intersection with the center line
of the Raritan River; thence
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-1
1:907
(h) Northeasterly along the center line of the Raritan River to its
intersection with the boundary line between the Borough of
South Bound Brook and the township, which is the point and
place of beginning.
(2) Area II, consisting of the area bounded by the following: Beginning
at a point of intersection of the projection of the westerly line of
Cedar Grove Lane and the center line of the Raritan River; thence
(a) Southeasterly along the center line of the Raritan River to the
point of intersection of the projection of the easterly boundary
line of Demott Lane and center line of the Raritan River;
thence
(b) Southeasterly along the projection of the easterly boundary
line of Demott Lane and along the easterly boundary line of
Demott Lane to approximately twenty feet southerly of the
southerly boundary line of Fairfield Road; thence
(c) Northwesterly along the projection of the westerly boundary
line of Lot 57, Block 424; thence
(d) Northwesterly to the westerly block boundary line between
Blocks 424 and 425; thence
(e) Northwesterly along the westerly block boundary line of
Blocks 424 and 425 and along its projection to a point on the
westerly boundary line of Cedar Grove Lane; thence
(f) Northeasterly along westerly boundary line of Cedar Grove
Lane and its projection to intersect the center line of the
Raritan River at the point and place of beginning.
(3) Area III, consisting of the area bounded by the following: Beginning
at a point on the easterly boundary line of Elizabeth Avenue, eight
hundred fifty feet southerly of the intersection of the southerly
boundary line of Weston Road; thence
(a) Southwesterly along the easterly boundary line of Elizabeth
Avenue to a point four hundred fifty feet northerly from the
northerly boundary line of the United New Jersey Railroad and
Canal Company boundary line; thence
(b) Southeasterly along an imaginary line parallel to and four
hundred fifty feet northerly from the northerly boundary line of
the United New Jersey Railroad and Canal Company to its
intersection with the easterly boundary line of Amwell Road;
thence
(c) Southwesterly along the easterly boundary line of Amwell
Road and westerly along the southerly boundary line of Amwell
Road to a point of its intersection with the center line of the
Millstone River; thence
§ 187-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 187-1
1:908
(d) Northerly along the center line of the Millstone River seven
thousand six hundred feet to a point; thence
(e) Southeasterly along a straight line intersecting the westerly
boundary line of Mettlers Road at a distance of one thousand
eight hundred forty feet from the southerly boundary line of
Weston Road and projected further to intersect the easterly
boundary line of Elizabeth Avenue at a point which is the point
and place of beginning.
(4) Area IV, consisting of the area bounded by the following: Beginning
at the point of intersection of the projection of the northerly
boundary line of Amwell Road and the westerly boundary line of
Cedar Grove Lane; thence
(a) Southeasterly along the northerly boundary line of Amwell
Road to its intersection with the westerly boundary line of
Wilson Road; thence
(b) Northeasterly along the westerly boundary line of Wilson Road
to the projection of the northerly boundary line of Lynch
Street; thence
(c) Southeasterly along the northerly boundary line of Lynch
Street and projected to a point on the westerly boundary line of
Demott Lane, said point being northerly two thousand one
hundred thirty feet from the intersection of the northerly
boundary line of Amwell Road and westerly boundary line of
Demott Lane; thence
(d) Southwesterly along the westerly boundary line of Demott
Lane projected to a point of intersection on the southerly
boundary line of Amwell Road; thence
(e) Southeasterly along the southerly boundary line of Amwell
Road to its intersection with the westerly boundary line of
Dahmer Road; thence
(f) Southwesterly along the westerly boundary line of Dahmer
Road projected to its intersection with the southerly boundary
line of Bennetts Lane; thence
(g) Northwesterly along the southerly boundary line of Bennetts
Lane projected to a point on the westerly boundary line of
South Middlebush Road; thence
(h) Northeasterly along the westerly boundary line of South
Middlebush Road to its intersection with the southerly
boundary line of the United New Jersey Railroad and Canal
Company; thence
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-1
1:909
(i) Northwesterly along the southerly boundary line of the United
New Jersey Railroad and Canal Company to its intersection
with the easterly boundary line of Amwell Road; thence
(j) Northeasterly along the easterly boundary line of Amwell Road
to a point four hundred fifty feet northerly from the northerly
boundary line of the United New Jersey Railroad and Canal
Company, projected at right angles to intersect the westerly
boundary line of Amwell Road; thence
(k) Northeasterly along the westerly boundary line of Amwell
Road to the intersection of the westerly boundary line of Cedar
Grove Lane and the projection of the northerly boundary line of
Amwell Road, which is the point and place of beginning.
(5) Area V, consisting of the area bounded by the following: Beginning
at a point of intersection of the projection of the easterly boundary
line of Demott Lane and the center line of the Raritan River; thence
(a) Easterly along the center line of the Raritan River to the center
line of the Mile Run Brook; thence
(b) Southerly along the center line of the Mile Run Brook,
boundary line of the city of New Brunswick, to the center line
of Somerset Street; thence
(c) Westerly along the center line of Somerset Street, boundary
line of the City of New Brunswick, to the projection of the
southerly boundary line of the United New Jersey Railroad and
Canal Company; thence
(d) Westerly along the southerly boundary line of the United New
Jersey Railroad and Canal Company projected to the westerly
boundary line of Dahmer Road; thence
(e) Northerly along the westerly boundary line of Dahmer Road to
the southerly boundary line of Amwell Road; thence
(f) Westerly along the southerly boundary line of Amwell Road to
the projection of the westerly boundary line of Demott Lane;
thence
(g) Northerly along the westerly boundary line of Demott Lane to
the southerly boundary line of Lot 57 Block 424; thence
(h) Easterly along the projection of the southerly boundary line of
Lot 57, Block 424 to the easterly boundary line of Demott Lane
point being approximately twenty feet southerly of the
southerly line of Fairfield Road; thence
(i) Northerly along the easterly boundary line of Demott Lane and
projected to the center line of the Raritan River which is the
point and place of beginning.
§ 187-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 187-2
1:910
§ 187-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the members of the
Township Police Department nor to any other duly appointed governmental
law enforcing officers while acting in the line of duty.
§ 187-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 188
FIREWOOD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 132.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
§ 188-1. Firewood stack requirements.
A. The firewood shall be cut and stored in neat, secured stacks.
B. The firewood shall not be stacked closer than three feet to any lot line
unless it is beside a fence which blocks it from view.
C. The firewood stack shall not be higher than five feet.
D. The firewood shall be stored a minimum of six inches off the ground and
on a well-supported, nonrotting base.
E. All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
properly disposed of within 10 days.
F. Firewood stacks that contain diseased wood capable of transmitting
disease to healthy trees and wood stacks that harbor or are infested by
rats or other vermin are public nuisances and shall be abated pursuant
to the provisions of this Code.
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-1
1:911
Chapter 192
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control
Commission — See Ch. 13, Art. XXIII
Natural resources trust funds — See Ch. 74,
Art. II.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Junkyards — See Ch. 156.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Soil removal and deposit — See Ch. 206.
Quarrying and blasting — See Ch. 278.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 330.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
§ 188-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 188-1
1:912
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 192-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of the Township of Franklin
of Somerset County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 192-2. Findings of fact.
§ 192-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Franklin are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-3
1:913
§ 192-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 192-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-4
1:914
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 192-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Zoning Officer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:915
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
A nonbasement building.
Built, in the case of a building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard,
to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the base flood
elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and
(1)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
A.
In an Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
B.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 192-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-5
1:916
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:917
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — (For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
§ 192-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-5
1:918
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:919

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 192-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey.
§ 192-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 192-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, re-located to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Franklin,
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 192-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Franklin,
Community No. 340434, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Somerset County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated November
4, 2016.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Somerset County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel(s) 34035C0162E,
34035C0164F, 34035C0166E, 34035C0167E, 34035C0168E,
34035C0169E, 34035C0186E, 34035C0188E, 34035C0189E,
34035C0242F, 34035C0244F, 34035C0252F, 34035C0253F,
34035C0254F, 34035C0260E, 34035C0261F, 34035C0263F,
34035C0265E, 34035C0270E, 34035C0276E, 34035C0277E,
34035C0278E, 34035C0301F, whose effective date is November 4,
2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 475 DeMott Lane, Somerset, New Jersey 08873.
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-9
1:921
and other chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
§ 192-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 192-11. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Franklin, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 192-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-11
1:922
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 192-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 192-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Township Zoning Officer
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 192-13. Designation of the local administrator. [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 4237-18]
The Township Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 192-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
[Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 4237-18]
Duties of the Township Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 192-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 192-18A are met.
§ 192-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-14
1:923
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 192-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Township
Zoning Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal state or other
source, in order to administer §§ 192-17A Specific standards,
residential construction, and 192-17B, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 192-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. With the assistance of the Township
Engineer:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review. With the assistance of the Township
Engineer:
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
§ 192-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-14
1:924
§ 192-15. Variance procedure.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
Sections 192-17A Specific standards, residential construction, and
192-17B Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. With the assistance of the Township
Engineer: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location
of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in § 192-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Board of Adjustment as established by the Township Council
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Zoning Officer in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, Law
Division, as provided in P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-17h).
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 192-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-15
1:925
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 192-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Township Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in § 192-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ 192-15 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-15
1:926
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 192-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 192-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-15
1:927

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 192-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 192-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-16
1:929
§ 192-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 192-7, Basis for establishing areas of
special flood hazard or in Section 192-14B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation,
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1,
whichever is more restrictive;
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's FIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
§ 192-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-17
1:930
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified); and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities either:
(1) Elevation.
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM
to elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one
foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified); and require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Floodproofing.
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 192-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 192-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 192-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-17
1:931
§ 192-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 192-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 192-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths of a foot
at any point.
§ 192-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 192-18
1:932
Chapter 196
FUEL OIL DELIVERY, EMERGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 151. Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
§ 196-1. Health Officer to serve fuel oil for tenants.
The Health Officer shall, whenever necessary to protect the health and
safety of residential tenants, act as an agent for a landlord in engaging a
fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable price per gallon and to refire
the burner to restore the proper heating of any residential property rented
by said landlord; provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed if
the outside air temperature is between 33° F. and 55° F., inclusive, or at
least four hours have elapsed if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or
less, since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or
agency, prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made by the
tenant or his representative to notify the landlord of the lack of heat, and
the landlord has failed to take the appropriate action. Lack of heat means
maintaining less heat than required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
§ 196-2. Payment for fuel oil and services.
Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance
with § 196-1 of this chapter may bill the landlord directly, or the
municipality in which the rental property is located may issue a voucher to
the fuel oil dealer who delivered the fuel oil for the money amount due on
the fuel oil delivered and the service charge for refiring the burner, if any.
§ 196-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action pursuant to § 196-1 of this chapter shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the
residential property. Such penalty shall be recoverable by the Township in
a civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law
of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. Any action to collect or enforce any such
penalty shall be brought in the Superior Court, County District Court or
Municipal Court. The amount of such penalty shall be paid to the Township
to be used for general municipal purposes.
§ 196-4. Responsibility for costs.
In any penalty enforcement proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter,
the court shall also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse the
Township for the actual costs incurred for any fuel oil delivered and the
§ 192-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-4
1:933
service charge for refiring the burner, if any, and for reasonable attorney's
fees and costs. The court shall further be empowered to issue any
appropriate injunctive orders and to authorize immediate collection of
reimbursable costs due the Township out of the goods and chattels of the
landlord, including all sums due or which may come due as present or
future rents. Any landlord who prevails in such an action shall be entitled to
reimbursement by the Township for all reasonable costs and expenses. Such
landlord, however, shall still remain responsible for the cost of any fuel oil
delivered and any charge for refiring the burner incurred by the Township.
§ 196-5. Disclaimer of liability.
The municipality or its employees shall not be liable for any damages to any
person or property in enforcing this chapter, except for the gross negligence
or maleficence of any municipal official officer or employee, and under no
circumstances shall the municipality be held liable for damages from the
lack of heat in the residential property.
§ 196-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or fewer.
Chapter 201
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 70.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183
Stormwater management — See Ch. 330.
Water — See Ch. 384.
§ 196-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 196-6
1:934
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-25-1968 by Ord. No. 403 (Ch. 201, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 201-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-24-1976 by Ord. No. 803]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes, either temporary or
permanent, or for other use or occupancy by persons.
CONNECTION DATE — When used with respect to a building constructed
prior to the date of initial operation as part of any sanitary sewage disposal
system in the Township owned or operated by the Township or the Township
of Franklin Sewerage Authority or under agreement with the Township or
the Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority, of a sewer available to serve
such building, the 90th day next ensuing after the date of initial operation;
and when used with respect to a building constructed on or after the date
of initial operation as a part of any sanitary sewage disposal system owned
or operated by the Township or such Authority, of a sewer available to serve
such building, the 60th day after the date of completion of construction or
the day of initial occupancy of such building, whichever of such dates shall
be earlier in point of time.
SETBACK LINE — A line within any lot, parallel to any street or property
line, between which line and the street or property line no building or
portion thereof may be erected. Where a building has been erected in a
lot, the "setback line" shall be a line running from the exterior face of a
structure fronting on any street parallel to said street and measured from
said street to said line.
SEWER — Any publicly owned sewer or main designed or used for collection
or disposal of sanitary sewage and located in the Township.
§ 201-2. Toilets and connections to sewer. [Amended 6-24-1976 by
Ord. No. 803]
Upon written notice by the Township Manager, Township Health Officer
or Director of the Franklin Sewerage Authority, the owner of any building
located on property anywhere in the Township, which property abuts a
street in which a sewer is now constructed or shall be hereafter constructed
or which building is located on property anywhere in the Township in which
a sewer is now constructed or shall hereafter be constructed and such
sewer abuts such property or runs through any part thereof, shall, prior to
the connection date with respect to such building, install a toilet in said
building, unless a toilet is then installed therein and connect such building
and every toilet therein with such sewer; provided, however, that where
the building setback line is greater than 150 feet, then in such event, the
owner of said property, upon approval of the Health Officer, shall have no
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:935
obligation to connect such building and every toilet therein with such sewer
unless the Township Health Officer, based on considerations of public health
and welfare, shall so require such connection, in which event the property
owner shall be required to so connect with such sewer.
§ 201-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-24-1976 by Ord. No.
803; amended 11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 3252]
Noncompliance with the provisions of § 201-2 shall constitute a violation of
this article, and, upon conviction thereof, the owner or his agent shall be
liable to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 201-4. Manner of connection. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1596]
Every connection required by this article shall be made in accordance with
and in a manner conforming in all respects to any rule or regulation or other
action heretofore or hereafter lawfully made or taken and in effect at the
time such connection is made, with respect to any such connection, by the
Council or by any board, body, agency or instrumentality of the Township
or the state which is authorized by law to make such rule or regulation
or to take such action, with the exception that any bona fide owner and
occupant of a building who is required to connect such building with a
sanitary sewer under the terms of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Township or any board, body, agency or instrumentality thereof may have
such connection made himself, or by his representative, provided that all
work to be performed in the making of such connection shall only be from
the inside of the property line to the building, and provided further that all
such work must be approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 201-5. Connection by Township; collection of costs.
If the owner of any property in the Township shall fail to make any
connection or installation required by this article within the time herein
required, the Township may proceed to make such connection or installation
or cause the same to be made and charge and assess the cost thereof
against such property, pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A:1 et
seq.
§ 201-6. Permit fees. [Amended 6-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1176;
12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1313; 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576;
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
A. For the issuance of a permit for the repair or alteration of an existing
septic system: $100.
B. For issuance of a permit for a new septic system: $200.
C. For the witnessing of permeability tests (minimum one per lot) and soil
logs (minimum two per lot) for the repair or alteration of an existing
septic system: $300.
§ 201-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-6
1:936
§ 201-7. Disposition of fees. [Added 7-13-1972 by Ord. No. 586]
All fees, penalties and money collected under any provision of this article
or the code established hereunder shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
municipality.
D. For the witnessing of permeability tests (minimum one per lot) and soil
logs (minimum two per lot) for a new septic system: $500.
§ 201-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-7
1:937

ARTICLE II
Cleaning of Septic Tanks
[Adopted 4-25-1968 by Ord. No. 403 (Ch. 201, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 201-8. License required; term; conditions; revocation.
No person shall engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any other place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement without a license to engage in such business issued
by the Department of Public Health. Such licenses shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by the
Department of Public Health from year to year. Such license may be revoked
for failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this article or any
other municipal regulation or ordinance dealing with the subject of public
health. No license will be issued to any septic tank or cesspool cleaner
until the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority certifies that satisfactory
arrangements have been made by the applicant for the license in regard to
charges or rental fees payable to the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority
for use of sewer facilities.
§ 201-9. License fee.
For the issuance or renewal of a license to an applicant engaged in the
business of cleaning or emptying receptacles used for the storage and/or
reception of human excrement or other putrescible matter, there shall be a
charge of $20 for each vehicle or conveyance so used.
§ 201-10. Limitation on number of licenses.
The Council may limit the number of licenses issued if, in its opinion, the
needs of the Township are being met with the existing septic tank cleaners.
§ 201-11. Equipment standards.
A. Only equipment inspected and approved by the Department of Public
Health shall be used in cleaning septic tanks or other places used for
the reception or storage of human excrement.
B. Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks and shall be
watertight and provided with a leakproof cover. All such trucks, tanks
and equipment used in the aforesaid business shall be free of
putrescible matter at all times except when in actual operation with
respect to emptying septic tanks or cesspools, etc.
C. Mobile tanks shall be provided with a vent constructed in a manner that
will permit the escape of gas but not the liquid contained therein.
D. All pumps shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent leakage of
sewage.
§ 201-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-11
1:939
§ 201-12. Disposal of contents.
§ 201-13. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
E. Only suction or pressure hoses in good repair shall be used.
F. The operation of cleaning or emptying septic tanks or other places used
for the reception or storage of human excrement shall be so conducted
that no liquid or excremental material will be deposited on the ground
adjacent to the structure being cleaned. If any spillage occurs, the solid
portion shall be immediately removed and disposed of in a sanitary
manner and the area covered with earth or a chlorine-bearing
compound.
A. The contents of septic tanks, cesspools, privies or other places used for
the reception or storage of human excrement shall be discharged into a
trunk sewer or other receiving stations as designated by the Franklin
Township Sewerage Authority. Disposal of human excrement or other
putrescible wastes is expressly prohibited by this article.
B. No effluent or other such matter which has been received from without
the Township may be dumped within the Township.
§ 201-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-13
1:940
ARTICLE III
Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 5-9-1985 by Ord. No. 1225 (Ch. 201, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 201-14. Adoption of standards. [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No.
1999; 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 3085; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3748]
There is hereby adopted in full and incorporated herein by reference all
of the provisions of P.L. 1954, c. 199, entitled the "Realty Improvement
Sewerage and Facilities Act" (N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.), as well as
"Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems."
§ 201-15. Availability of documents.
Ten copies of said P.L. 1954, c. 199, as well as 10 copies of the aforesaid
standards for the construction of individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems, shall be placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and
in the office of the Public Health Department and shall be available for
examination by the public during normal business hours.
§ 201-16. Amendments. [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1999]
A. Section 7:9A-6.4(f)1. If any of the percolation rates are slower than 40
minutes per inch or faster than three minutes per inch, the application
shall not be approved.
B. Section 7:9A-6.4(f)2. When the result of the test(s) is an average
percolation rate slower than 40 minutes per inch, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered hydraulically restrictive.
C. Section 7:9A-12.8. When it is necessary to abandon a system or
components of a system in place for any reason, all septic tanks, dosing
tanks, seepage pits, dry wells and cesspools which are to be abandoned
shall be emptied of wastes and removed or filled completely with
gravel, stones, or soil material in a manner which is acceptable to the
administrative authority. In cases where the individual subsurface
sewage disposal system, or components thereof, is being abandoned
due to the connection of a facility to a sanitary sewer line, the
Township's Health Department and the local Plumbing Inspector shall
ensure the system is abandoned in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
D. Section 7:9A-10.1(f)4. When fill material is utilized within the zone of
treatment, the fill material shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Coarse fragment content less than 15% by volume or less than 25%
by weight;
(2) Textural analysis (composition, by weight, of size fraction passing
the 2 mm sieve): from 85% to 95% fine to coarse sand, from 5% to
§ 201-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-16
1:941
§ 201-17. Percolation tests and escrow for major subdivision
applicants. [Added 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1314]
§ 201-18. Time of approval. [Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576]
The Health Department shall have a period of 20 working days from the
date of the submission of complete plans in order to issue an approval,
conditional approval or denial thereof.
§ 201-19. Validity of permits. [Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576;
amended 12-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1614]
15% very fine sand plus silt and clay, minimum 5% to 15% silt plus
clay, minimum 2% clay; and
(3) Permeability from six to 20 inches per hour, or percolation rate
from three to 15 minutes per inch.
E. Section 7:9A-10.4(f). Fill material used in soil replacement disposal
field installations shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The fill material used below the disposal field shall meet the
requirements for texture and permeability which are prescribed in
7:9A-10.1(f); and
(2) A minimum of two percolation tests shall be conducted at the level
of infiltration after the fill material has been installed.
A. The Township of Franklin shall have the option, with respect to any
percolation test(s) performed on any premises which shall be the
subject of any application for development and classified as a major
subdivision or, if no such application for development is yet pending,
which shall require the performance of four or more percolation tests
within a one-year period, to require the applicant therefor to post an
escrow with the Township in the amount of $300 for each percolation
test to be so performed.
B. Upon the posting of such escrow, the Township may designate an
authorized agent to supervise the performance of such tests, who shall
be a licensed health officer, professional engineer or sanitary inspector
or Plumbing Subcode Official and who shall be retained in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq. Any sums not so expended shall be refunded within 60 days after
completion of such tests. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1596]
A. Any permit issued for the installation or alteration of an individual
sewage disposal system shall be valid for a period of one year after the
date of issuance.
B. All approvals for the design of an individual sewage disposal system
shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of such approval.
§ 201-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-19
1:942
§ 201-20. Fees. [Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576; amended
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
§ 201-21. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
C. Results of permeability tests of soils for subsurface sewage disposal
systems shall be valid for two years after the date of completion of tests.
A. For the review of a plan for a new residential septic system prior to
permit issuance: $100.
B. For the review of a plan for a new commercial/industrial septic system
prior to permit issuance: $200.
C. For the review of a plan for the alteration or repair of a residential,
commercial or industrial septic system: $50.
D. For a permit to abandon a septic system: $20.
§ 201-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-21
1:943

ARTICLE IV
Disconnection of Sump Pumps
[Adopted 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3484 (Ch. 212 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 201-22. Findings.
The Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority, in operating in its respective
sanitary sewer systems with the Township of Franklin, must contend with
the impact of heavy rainfall and its potential for creating surcharge
conditions upon its systems. The condition is exacerbated by the gallonage
added to the sewer system by sump pumps, floor drains, roof drains, related
apparatus, and the infiltration of other than normal sanitary sewage
improperly connected to its sewerage systems. It is in the best interest of
the Township, through its Sewerage Authority, to establish an approach to
encourage and require that such improper connections be dismantled. The
excess infiltration of water has the potential of overloading the carrying
capacity of the sanitary sewer systems, which may result in the discharge
of raw sewage to the surface and ground waters of the Township, causing a
serious public health hazard.
§ 201-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article, generally, is to promote compliance with the
rules and regulations of the Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority, and,
specifically, to require that all such improper connections into its systems be
removed. It is the further purpose of this article to insure that infiltration of
nonsanitary sewage be minimized to all sewage disposal systems operating
within the Township of Franklin.
§ 201-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Refers to the "Rules and Regulations
Governing the Operations of the Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority,"
and as same may be lawfully amended.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carrying household and toilet
waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial and
industrial establishments, including those set forth in Section 1 of the Rules
and Regulations.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities and appurtenances connected with the
collection system, trunk system, and laterals, including those set forth in
Section 1 of the Rules and Regulations.
§ 201-25. General requirements.
A. Violation of Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority Rules and
Regulations. No person shall violate the Rules and Regulations of the
Township of Franklin Sewerage Authority when applicable.
§ 201-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-25
1:945
§ 201-26. Amnesty period.
Any person currently in violation of this article shall not be prosecuted
pursuant to § 201-26 for a ninety-day period of time which shall commence
upon the date of the adoption of this article.
§ 201-27. Inspection and enforcement.
B. Sump pumps, floor drains, roof drains and related apparatus. No person
shall connect any sump pump, floor drain, roof drain, and/or any related
apparatus to any sanitary sewer line. The record title owner responsible
under this section and shall be presumed to have caused such
connection.
C. Infiltration into sanitary sewer system. No person shall permit, allow or
suffer or cause the infiltration of water or any other substance which is
not normal sanitary sewerage as defined hereinabove into the Township
of Franklin Sewerage Authority system, or any other system operated
within the Township. The record title owner shall be responsible under
this section and shall be presumed to have caused such infiltration.
A. Reasonable basis to inspect. Before any inspection is made of the
suspected premises, the Franklin Township Sewerage Authority shall
have a reasonable basis to suspect that a violation of the article has
occurred. Such reasonable basis shall exist whenever it has been
supported by reasonable facts or whenever the Sanitary Inspector or
any other person duly authorized by the Sewerage Authority to enforce
the terms and conditions of this article so determines, based on
reasonable facts in that official's possession.
B. Property owner consent. Upon satisfaction of Subsection A
hereinabove, the Sanitary Inspector or other duly authorized
representative shall visit the premises in question and request
permission to inspect the premises for a violation of this article. If such
permission is granted, entry shall not be made until the property owner
has signed a written consent form to be supplied by the Township of
Franklin Sewerage Authority. Once written permission is obtained, the
Authority representative shall inspect the premises to determine if such
violations do exist. The premises shall be made available and accessible
for such inspection by the property owner between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; provided, however, that the
inspections may be made at other times, with the property owner's
consent, if one of the following conditions exist:
(1) The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection.
(2) There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be fully determined and proved by
inspection during other than prescribed hours.
§ 201-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-27
1:946
§ 201-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
(3) There is reason to believe that a violation exists of the character
which is an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring
inspection without delay.
(4) Emergency inspections may be authorized if the Sanitary Inspector
or any other duly authorized person has reason to believe that a
condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or
safety.
C. Search or access warrants. In the event written consent cannot be
obtained, the Sanitary Inspector or any other duly authorized person
may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the
Township of Franklin for a search warrant, setting forth factually the
actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a violation of this article may exist on the premises. If the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Franklin is satisfied as
to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to an inspection of that part of the
premises on which the suspected violation of this article may exist.
D. Issuance of a warrant. If the inspection reveals infiltration of other than
normal sanitary sewage (for example, stormwater improperly
connected to the sanitary sewerage system), a warning and notice of
abatement shall be provided to the property owner. A disconnect shall
be effected by the property owner within 14 days of issuance of the
warning.
E. Reinspection. If, upon reinspection of the premises with written consent
or via a search warrant, the article violation has not been abated, the
Sanitary Inspector or any other duly authorized person shall issue a
summons for violation of this article.
A. For the purposes of assessing penalties, the continuation of a violation
for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
violation.
B. The imposition of a penalty as provided hereinabove shall be in addition
to any injunctive or remedial relief which is authorized under the laws
of the State of New Jersey with the same force and effect as though
provided herein.
§ 201-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-28
1:947

ARTICLE V
Illicit Connections To Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3632]
§ 201-29. Purpose.
An article to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated operated by the Township of Franklin, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 201-30. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words or their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic waste, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater,
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of Franklin, unless that
discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A
municipal stormwater general permit (NJPDES Permit No. NJ0141852).
Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows,
or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307 (a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. Subsection 1317 (a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage system, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Franklin or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting or conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purposes of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 201-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-30
1:949
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides,
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 201-31. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal sewage separate storm sewer system operated
by the Township of Franklin any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
§ 201-32. Enforcement.
The Franklin Township Police Department, Engineering Department and
Zoning Department shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 201-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. Every day that a violation
continues after the due notice has been served shall be deemed to be a
separate violation.
§ 201-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-33
1:950
ARTICLE VI
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 3862]
§ 201-34. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Franklin so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 201-35. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Franklin or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or ground water, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 201-36. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 201-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-36
1:951
§ 201-37. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 201-36 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 201-37C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 201-37 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 201-36 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-37
1:952
§ 201-38. Enforcement. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3872
This article shall be enforced by the proper designated authority of the
Township of Franklin as designated by the Township Manager.
§ 201-39. Violations and penalties.
§ 201-40. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 201-41. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the fines listed below for each storm drain
inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: $250.
(3) Third through fifth offense: $500.
(4) Sixth offense and up: $1,000.
B. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 201-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-41
1:953

ARTICLE VII
Sump Pumps and Pipe Drain Discharge Control
[Adopted 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 4244-18]
§ 201-42. Discharge control required.
In order to protect against the adverse consequences of uncontrolled sump
pump and pipe drain discharges, no person shall construct, install, improve,
maintain or permit to be operated on the person's owned or occupied
property any device which allows any point discharge of water by either
forced pumping, such as a sump pump, or gravity, such as a pipe drain, onto
a street, sidewalk or public right-of-way except as provided for below.
§ 201-43. New sump pump and pipe drain installations.
Sump pumps and pipe drains installed on or after October 1, 2018, shall
comply with the following conditions:
A. The sump pump or pipe drain discharge shall preferably be directed
onto an absorbent surface as grass, mulch, rock or soil so that the
discharge will be dissipated and not immediately drain to the Township
right-of-way or adjacent properties. The discharge location shall be as
approved by the Public Works Manager or his/her designee. In the
event that it is not feasible to direct discharge on to an absorbent
surface, the discharge may be directed to a storm sewer, swale, ditch,
detention basin, drainage basin or other drainage facility or location as
approved by the Public Works Manager or his/her designee. If a
connection to the storm sewer is approved, a permit will be required
from the Public Works Manager prior to installation.
B. The discharge location shall not create a public nuisance which is
anything, condition or act which is or may become injurious or
hazardous to the public.
C. The discharge shall not create a build-up of icing, standing water or
algae growth on the street, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
D. The discharge shall not be directed to adjacent property in such a
manner as to cause damage to the adjacent property or create a
nuisance.
E. No person shall connect, or cause or permit to be connected, any sump
pump, pipe drain, floor drain, surface drain, subsoil drain or leader pipe
with the house sanitary sewer, or to use the sanitary sewer connection
or any pipe or drain connected therewith for the purpose of receiving
and discharging drainage of any kind other than from plumbing
fixtures.
F. Sump pump and pipe drain discharges may not be directed into a
Township street or right-of-way unless permission is granted by the
Public Works Manager or his/her designee.
§ 201-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-44
1:955
§ 201-44. Existing sump pump and pipe drain installations.
Sump pumps and pipe drains installed prior to October 1, 2018, shall
comply with the following conditions:
§ 201-45. Violations and penalties.
The requirements of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Public Works
Manager or his/her designee. Whenever there is a violation of this
ordinance, the Public Works Manager or his/her designee shall provide
written notice to the property owner and the property owner shall have 45
days to make the necessary corrections. The failure of an owner of property
to comply with the provisions of the written notification shall subject the
owner to a fine. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, General
Penalty. Each violation and each day of each violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation thereof. The payment of a fine shall be in
addition to performing the remedial action ordered to be undertaken by the
Public Works Manager or his/her designee.
A. An existing sump pump or pipe drain discharge may continue at the
location where the discharge was made on October 1, 2018, as long as
such discharge does not:
(1) Create a public nuisance which is anything, condition or act which
is or may become injurious or hazardous to the public, and
(2) Create a build-up of icing, standing water, algae growth or cause
erosion on the street, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
B. An existing sump pump or pipe drain discharge that is causing a public
nuisance or is creating a build-up of icing, standing water, algae growth
or cause erosion on the street, sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be
corrected by the owner to bring the sump pump or pipe drain discharge
into compliance with the requirements with Section 1 - (A1), (A2), (A3),
(A4) and (A5).
C. The Public Works Manager or his/her designee may require the
following:
(1) That the sump pump or pipe drain have a point of discharge that is
located a minimum of ten feet or greater, as directed by the Public
Works Manager or his/her designee, from any property line or
Township right-of-way.
(2) That the discharge be directed within the limits of the owner's
property onto an absorbent surface as grass, mulch, rock or soil so
that the discharge will be dissipated and not immediately drain to
the Township right-of-way or adjacent properties.
§ 201-44 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-46
1:956
§ 201-46. Enforcement officers.
The Public Works Manager or his/her designee is hereby designated as the
officer charged with enforcement of this article.
§ 201-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-46
1:957
Chapter 206
SOIL REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 192.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 201.
Trees — See Ch. 222.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 330.
§ 201-46 FRANKLIN CODE § 201-46
1:958
ARTICLE I
Soil Removal
[Adopted 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 1266 (Ch. 206, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 206-1. Findings.
The Council, in order to promote, develop and maintain a harmonious
balance between man and the natural processes and to effectuate the
general purpose of municipal planning, with an intent towards the
promotion of sensitive land development, the guiding of inevitable land
development and the opposition to unnecessary or detrimental land
development and the deterioration of property values, through the
consideration of aesthetics, good landscaping and sound engineering
practice, hereby finds and determines that the unregulated and
uncontrolled relocation, excavation and removal of soil on a large scale
has or will result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and
general welfare and to the development of the Township.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person requesting a soil removal permit as provided for
in this chapter.
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person engaged in the moving, removal or excavation
of soil from, in or upon any land in the Township.
LOT — A parcel or plot of land occupied or designed to be occupied by a
building and its accessory building or by a dwelling group and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are arranged and designed to
be used in connection with such building.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, fill, grade, replace, level or
otherwise alter or change the location or contour of land; to plow, spade,
cultivate, harrow or disc the soil; or any other operation usually and
ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot, subdivision or
premises or having any interest or estate therein which would permit
effective possession thereof or dominion therefor.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous lots in single ownership.
REDISTRIBUTION — Any change or alteration in the grade of any land.
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-2
1:959
SOIL — Earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without regard
to the presence or absence of organic matter.
SUBSOIL — All soil except topsoil.
TOPSOIL — The top layer of soil (usually eight to 10 inches deep) in which
most of the organic matter occurs and where leaching of the suspended and
dissolved solids is the greatest.[Amended 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1330]
§ 206-3. Permit required; disposal of soil.
§ 206-4. Conditions for permit requirement and approval.
Should the Township Engineer find and determine that the excavation,
grading or removal of the amount and type of soil applied for is necessary
and essential to the development or improvement of the premises and
that the applicant has complied with the provisions hereof and all other
applicable ordinances, then the appropriate soil removal permit may be
issued. If the lot is part of an approved subdivision or site plan presently
under construction, then a permit shall be required only if the soil is to be
removed from the subdivision premises or premises within the site plan.
§ 206-5. Application for permit.
Applications shall contain the following information in a form and to a
degree to be determined by the Township Engineer:
A. No owner, developer, excavator or other person shall move or cause,
allow, permit or suffer to be moved or removed any topsoil or subsoil in
the Township for use other than on the lot from which it shall be taken,
except as otherwise defined or provided for in this chapter, unless and
until after application to the Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer shall first determine that the excavation,
grading or removal of the amount of soil applied for is necessary and
essential to the development or the improvement of the premises.
Removal of soil from the Township shall only be permitted after the
Township Engineer determines that there exists no alternative location
for said topsoil within the Township. In determining whether there
exists no alternative location, the Township Engineer shall ascertain
from the Departments of Public Works and Recreation, Community
Celebrations and Park Administration whether the Township has need
to purchase a quantity of topsoil or, in the absence of such need,
whether any other person or entity within the Township has, in writing,
expressed a willingness to purchase a quantity of topsoil.
A. The names and addresses of the applicant, the owner, the developer and
the excavator.
B. The lot and block numbers of the land from which soil is to be removed,
as shown on the current Tax Map of the Township.
§ 206-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-5
1:960
§ 206-6. Consideration of applications.
C. The location to which soil is to be removed.
D. The route to be taken during the removal operation.
E. The reason for removing soil.
F. The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of the soil
removal, not to exceed three months for any single application.
G. A map of the lot showing the present contour lines and the proposed
future contour lines resulting from the intended excavation or
redistribution of soil and the location of streams, watercourses or other
environmentally sensitive areas, if different from any such information
appearing on an approved site plan or subdivision.
H. The amount of soil and/or topsoil to be removed from the site and the
amount of soil and/or topsoil to remain on the site.
I. Such other pertinent data as the Township Engineer may deem
necessary.
A. In considering the application, the Township Engineer shall be guided
by the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Inadequate and improper surface water drainage.
(3) Impairment of soil fertility.
(4) Removal of lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Creation of dangerous depressions and declivities.
(6) The statements and findings in § 206-5 of this chapter.
(7) Availability of alternative sites within the Township, as defined
herein.
(8) Such other factors as the Township Engineer may deem necessary
or appropriate in light of the particular application.
B. If, after considering the above factors, the Township Engineer
determines that the proposed excavating, grading or removal or
redistribution of soil will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the Township or its inhabitants and complies with the terms
hereof, he shall issue the necessary permit. Otherwise, he shall deny
the application and shall notify the applicant. The Township Engineer
shall have 30 days after the application is filed within which to notify
the applicant whether the application has been granted or denied.
§ 206-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-7
1:961
§ 206-7. Appeals.
If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the
Township Engineer by filing a written notice of appeal with the Council
within 10 days after receiving the notice of denial of the application.
§ 206-8. Fees.
A fee of $250 shall accompany each application to cover the cost incurred
in investigating and processing the application and will be retained by the
Township whether the permit is issued or denied.
§ 206-9. Bond required.
Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the Township
Engineer cash, certified check, letter of credit or a bond executed by the
applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the
State of New Jersey as surety unless the applicant, owner or developer
has previously posted such security covering the work to be performed
hereunder in connection with an approved subdivision or site plan. The
amount of the bond shall be determined by the Township Engineer but in no
event shall be less than $1,000 and shall be conditioned as follows:
§ 206-10. Regulations for soil removal or redistribution.
A. That the applicant will complete the work authorized by the permit in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
chapter on or before the date of completion set forth in the application.
B. That the applicant will repair any public street, structure or land which
may be damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
A. Soil removal or redistribution conducted under a permit issued under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions.
(2) Lands shall be graded so as to conform to the approved contour
lines and grades and shall be cleared of debris.
(3) A minimum of six inches of topsoil shall remain over the entire lot
from which soil was removed, except for those portions of the lot
occupied by a building or structure or pavement, in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications for the development
thereof, upon completion of the intended construction.
(4) All of the work described in this chapter shall be performed
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. Where possible, work should be performed during
regular business hours of the Department of Land Use so that
appropriate inspections may be accomplished.
§ 206-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-10
1:962
§ 206-11. Sand banks, pits and quarries. [Added 4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1330]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any licensed sand bank,
pit or quarry, except to the extent that the operator of any such sand bank,
pit or quarry seeks to remove topsoil, in which case this chapter shall be
fully applicable.
§ 206-12. Injunctive proceedings.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the Township from
taking injunctive proceedings to restrain removal of soil as described in this
chapter.
§ 206-13. Inspections.
Any officials from the Township and their agents shall have the right at all
times to inspect any property where a permit has been issued under this
chapter.
§ 206-14. Storage of topsoil.
Topsoil which is to remain for future use shall be stored and maintained
at designated locations within the permit area, in accordance with an
ordinance to regulate and control the destruction and removal of trees, the
movement of topsoil, erosion of soil and sedimentation within the Township
of Franklin.
§ 206-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3289]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article shall pay the required fees in connection with the permit as
(5) Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and
sedimentation of soil upon surrounding lands, streets, municipal
facilities, bodies of water or waterways, in accordance with the
provisions of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. No
soil shall be removed during periods of rain or other precipitation
or within 48 hours thereafter.
(6) The Department of Land Use shall be notified at least 48 hours
before the removal of soil begins.
B. An accounting of the soil removed shall consist of inspection by the
Township Engineer of the receipts given the applicant by the excavator
for the soil removed. The receipts shall record the type and amount of
soil taken, the date it was removed and the capacity of the truck. A final
written estimate of the amount removed shall be submitted by the
applicant. The Township Engineer must be satisfied that the inspected
receipts account for all of the amounts indicated in final estimate.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-15
1:963
outlined herein, plus a cost of $5 for each and every cubic yard of material
that has been removed from the site, as determined by the Township
Engineer. Such person, firm or corporation shall also be liable to the
penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Every day
in which such violation continues after due notice has been served shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.
§ 206-16. (Reserved)
§ 206-17. (Reserved)
§ 206-18. (Reserved)
§ 206-19. (Reserved)
§ 206-15 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-19
1:964
ARTICLE II
Soil Importation
[Adopted 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1540; amended in its entirety
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 3016 (Ch. 206, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 206-20. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
ACCEPTABLE SOIL MATERIAL — Earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus,
rock or dirt, and may include subsoil or topsoil. No construction debris is
permitted.
APPLICANT — The person requesting a soil importation permit as provided
for in this article.
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by another person or persons.
GARBAGE — Meat and vegetable waste solids resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods "Garbage" is considered
to originate primarily in kitchens, stores, markets, restaurants, hotels and
other places where food is stored, cooked and consumed.
LOT — A parcel or plot of land occupied or designed to be occupied by a
building and its accessory building or by a dwelling group and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are arranged and designed to
be used in connection with such building.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot, subdivision or
premises or having any interest or estate therein which would permit
effective possession thereof or dominion therefor.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society or
partnership, and their agents or employees.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous lots in single ownership.
REFUSE — Includes all miscellaneous matters such as, but not limited
to, bottles, construction debris, rags, mattresses, worn-out furniture, old
clothes, old shoes, broken glass, leather, carpets, crockery, rubber,
newspaper cartons, tin cans, metals, abandoned automobiles or parts
thereof.
§ 206-21. Depositing garbage or refuse prohibited.
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of Franklin shall deposit thereon or
permit the depositing thereon of any animal or vegetable substance or
garbage or refuse or dirt gathered in cleaning sewers, or waste of mills or
factories, or any materials which are offensive to health or tend to decay, to
become putrid or to render the atmosphere impure or unwholesome.
§ 206-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-22
1:965
§ 206-22. Permit required for deposit of acceptable soil material.
[Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3289]
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of Franklin shall deposit thereon
or permit the depositing thereon of any acceptable soil material unless
a permit is issued by the Engineering Department. Exempt from the
provisions of this section shall be the following:
§ 206-23. Deposit of acceptable soil material in connection with
development approval.
Unless otherwise exempt under the terms of this article, no permit to
deposit approved soil material upon or used to fill up or raise the surface or
level of any lot, grounds, street, road, or alley in the Township of Franklin
shall be issued unless such fill operation is performed in connection with:
§ 206-24. Proof of compliance with soil cleanup criteria; exemption
from testing. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3289]
A. Select fill for septic installation and/or repair certified to be such by a
New Jersey licensed engineer; or
B. Routine landscaping activities that do not require in excess of 10 cubic
yards of approved soil material conducted in connection with
residential use not subject to any other permitting requirements set
forth in the ordinances of the Township of Franklin. Any materials used
in activities permitted herein shall nevertheless conform with all
applicable local, state and federal regulations.
A. A building permit issued by the Division of Code Enforcement; or
B. Site plan or subdivision approval granted by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Unless otherwise exempt under the terms of this article, no permit to
deposit acceptable soil material upon or used to fill up or raise the
surface of any lot, grounds, street, road, or alley in the Township of
Franklin shall be issued unless the applicant submits proof that the
acceptable soil material has been tested in conformance with § 206-27
of this article and that it complies with the Soil Ranking Criteria found
in N.J.A.C. 7:26D, Appendix 1, Table 1A. [Amended 9-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 3989]
B. Proof shall be a letter from a laboratory certified by the state to perform
soil analysis, stating that results meet or exceed the present Ranking
Criteria for Residential Direct Contact as contained above, along with
the actual test results.
C. Soil material obtained from a quarry shall be exempt from the testing
criteria. A receipt from the quarry with the material amount shall serve
as proof. [Added 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3989]
§ 206-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-25
1:966
§ 206-25. Fees. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3289]
The fee for issuance of a permit under this article shall be $200. No
permit shall be issued unless the applicant furnishes to the Engineering
Department an approved plot plan, site plan or subdivision plan, as the case
may be, for the proposed filling project, the permit fee, and a performance
guarantee if not covered elsewhere. Such guarantee shall be a certified
check in the sum of $200 made payable to the Township of Franklin to
guarantee performance by the applicant of the terms and conditions of
this article, such funds to be released upon inspection of the fill project
and approval thereof by the Engineering Department as having met the
provisions of §§ 206-24 and 206-27. The Engineering Department shall have
a period of 30 days from receipt of the complete application within which to
issue or deny the permit application.
§ 206-26. Supplemental specifications for fill operations with
acceptable soil material. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3289]
§ 206-27. Acceptable soil material quality.
Any approved soil material to be brought into the Township must be tested
at the source for compliance with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in N.J.A.C.
7:26F, Appendix C, Table 1, in accordance with § 206-24 of this article, and
evaluated by a state certified laboratory. Further:
A. Any acceptable soil material that will be deposited within Franklin
Township, which is to be brought into the Township from outside
sources, or from sources within the Township, must be tested at the
source for compliance with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in N.J.A.C.
7:26F, Appendix C, Table 1-A, in accordance with § 206-24 of this
article, and evaluated by a state certified laboratory.
B. Further:
(1) All expenses connected with such testing are to be borne by the
recipient of the fill;
(2) The Township Engineer and Health Department shall have the
authority to order additional reports or inspections as it may deem
necessary and appropriate;
(3) Acceptance or rejection of any approved soil material is to be made
by the Township Engineer or Health Department according to this
article and any additional rules or regulations it may from time to
time enact; and
(4) A minimum of two samples are to be extracted from the source for
laboratory analysis for each 500 cubic yard lot, or fraction thereof.
Samples are to be extracted, tested and evaluated by a state
certified laboratory. Samples must be biased to the location of the
highest suspected contaminated concentrations, as determined by
the laboratory professional or his duly assigned representative.
§ 206-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-27
1:967
§ 206-28. Source testing; responsibility for expenses. [Amended
9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3989]
§ 206-29. Duration of permit.
Each permit issued under the terms of this article shall be valid only for the
location(s) described in the permit and for a period of six months from the
date of issuance, subject to renewal.
A. All expenses connected with such testing are to be borne by the
recipient of the fill;
B. The Township Health Department shall have the authority to order
additional reports or inspections as it may deem necessary and
appropriate; and
C. Acceptance or rejection of any approved soil material is to be made by
the Township Health Department according to this article and any
additional rules or regulations it may from time to time enact.
A. Any acceptable soil material that will be deposited within Franklin
Township, which is to be brought into the Township from outside
sources, or from sources within the Township, must be tested at the
source for compliance with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in N.J.A.C.
7:26D, Appendix 1, Table 1A, in accordance with § 206-24 of this article,
and evaluated by a state-certified laboratory.
B. Further:
(1) All expenses connected with such testing are to be borne by the
recipient of the fill;
(2) The Township Engineer and Health Department shall have the
authority to order additional reports or inspections as it may deem
necessary and appropriate;
(3) Acceptance or rejection of any approved soil material is to be made
by the Township Engineer or Health Department according to this
article and any additional rules or regulations it may from time to
time enact; and
(4) A minimum of two samples are to be extracted from the source for
laboratory analysis for each one-thousand-cubic-yard lot, or
fraction thereof. Samples are to be extracted, tested and evaluated
by a state certified laboratory. Samples must be biased to the
location of the highest suspected contaminated concentrations, as
determined by the laboratory professional or his duly assigned
representative.
§ 206-27 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-30
1:968
§ 206-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3289]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article shall pay the required fees in connection with the permit
as outlined herein, plus all costs associated in having the material tested,
plus a cost of $5 for each and every cubic yard of material that has been
imported to the site, as determined by the Township Engineer. Such person,
firm or corporation shall also be liable to a fine of not more than $5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine
or imprisonment, at the direction of the Court. Every day in which such
violation continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a
separate violation or offense.
§ 206-31. (Reserved)
§ 206-32. (Reserved)
§ 206-33. (Reserved)
§ 206-34. (Reserved)
§ 206-35. (Reserved)
§ 206-36. (Reserved)
§ 206-37. (Reserved)
§ 206-38. (Reserved)
§ 206-39. (Reserved)
§ 206-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-39
1:969

ARTICLE III
Soil Disturbances
[Adopted 8-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1592 (Ch. 206, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 206-40. Purpose.
This article shall apply throughout the entire area of Franklin Township,
so as to preserve trees and woodlands from unjustifiable destruction; to
preserve soil from erosion and sedimentation; and to protect the use and
transfer of topsoil, all for the general well-being of the residents of Franklin
Township and neighboring downstream areas.
§ 206-41. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, association, organization,
company, firm corporation, industry, public agency, legal entity, or other
party requesting authorization to remove trees or to engage in landdisturbing
activity.
APPOINTED OFFICER — The person designated by the Township
Council to act upon applications for permits under this article to
enforce this article.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil, rock, or other mineral
or organic matter by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FARM — A tract of land being used for the production of agricultural or
horticultural produce, as food, fiber, nursery stock, livestock, poultry, or
dairy products, or that has been so used and has not since been put to
other use including use as woodland as defined herewith.
FARMER — A person who operates a farm.
LAND/SOIL DISTURBANCE — Any activity by people, including but
not limited to clearing of vegetative cover, removal of topsoil, grading,
trenching, cutting or filling to change the land surface, that would or
could result in loss of topsoil, erosion, and sedimentation.
MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for the management of timbered land,
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Forestry, or similar state or federal agency or Township
Forester if the Township names one.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other material to the
land surface suitable to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A license to remove or destroy trees or to engage in a
land-disturbing activity, issued by the officer designated to enforce this
article.
§ 206-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-41
1:971
§ 206-42. Permit required.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no land in Franklin Township in
excess of 5,000 square feet shall be cleared and left barren of vegetative
protection, whether that protection consists of trees as defined herein,
saplings, shrubs or grasses; and no such area shall otherwise be disturbed
in the soil by bulldozing, earth moving, filling, leveling or other grading,
laying of pipe or cable, or otherwise by any person, association, corporation,
or public agency without a land disturbance permit first having been
obtained as provided in this article.
§ 206-43. Exemptions.
SEDIMENT — Soil, rock or other mineral or organic material moved
from a place of origin by water, wind, ice, or gravity and deposited
elsewhere.
SOIL — The fine earth material, and any included coarser fragments
of rock and incorporated organic matter, comprising the surface layers
of the earth, in which plants grow and over which people and animals
normally move about.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The governmental body organized
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-7 et seq.154 and designated in the New Jersey
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, Chapter 251, P.L. 1975, for
certification of plans for control of erosion and sedimentation.
TOPSOIL — The uppermost layer of natural soil, usually six to 10
inches thick and generally more friable than the underlying subsoil and
partly or wholly darker in color because of incorporated organic matter.
On floodplains where these distinctions might not exist, the upper 10
inches of soil. (This definition is written for Franklin Township. It would
not apply to all soils.)
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The person appointed to that position or one
acting for him under his authority.
TREE; TREES — Any and all single- and multi-trunked plants having
diameters of four inches or more at heights of three feet above the base
of the trunk or of one or more multi-trunks, except flowering dogwood
(Cornus florida) which is to be considered a tree if the diameter is two
inches or more at three feet above the base of the trunk.
B. The term "shall" in this article always is mandatory and not
discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.
A. Exempted from the provisions of § 206-42 of this article shall be the
following:
(1) Gardening for home consumption.
154. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1977, c. 264.
§ 206-41 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-43
1:972
§ 206-44. Applications for permit where other approvals required.
An application for approval of a site plan, subdivision or for a building
permit, that adequately shows the land disturbance that would result and
plans for prevention or erosion and sedimentation and for disposal of
topsoil, shall be considered to constitute also an application for a land
disturbance permit, and no additional application for such a permit shall
be required. Applications for subdivision, site plan approval or a building
permit that under state law would fall within the purview of the Somerset-
Union Soil Conservation District shall be referred to that agency for
certification of satisfactory plans for control of soil erosion and
sedimentation and for inspection to see that those plans are carried out.
The land disturbance permit and the building permit shall not be issued
until certification of the erosion and sedimentation plans has been received
from the Soil Conservation District. Those applications that fall within the
purview of the Soil Conservation District shall be reviewed also by the
Township for assurance that control of erosion is included and for all other
measures that could relate to the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Township, including preservation of trees and the use and
disposition of topsoil.
§ 206-45. Applications for permit not involving other approvals.
An application for a land disturbance permit shall be required where site
plan and/or subdivision approval or a building permit is not involved. All
applications for land disturbance permits not involving site plan and/or
subdivision approval or a building permit shall be ruled upon by the
appointed officer in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such
permits shall be required for, but not limited to, the following: applications
for land clearing, grading, or filling, cutting out new streets or roads or
widening established thoroughfares that are under the jurisdiction of the
(2) Agricultural use of land under a farm program approved by the
Somerset Union Soil Conservation District or otherwise likely not
to result in excessive erosion and sedimentation.
(3) Construction of a single-family dwelling with accessory structures
approved under Chapter 112, Land Development, not causing land
disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet, provided the same is
not part of a subdivision in the process of being developed or in
which building lots are being sold by a developer, except that such
a dwelling would not be exempt if located on a slope of 10% or
more or within 50 feet of a stream, flood hazard area, or standing
body of water or swamp.
B. Any of these exemptions, however, may be voided wherever and
whenever the appointed officer deems that the activity does or likely
would cause soil erosion and sedimentation contrary to the purpose of
this article, in which case the appointed officer shall require the
submission of plans to correct for said erosion and sedimentation.
§ 206-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-45
1:973
municipality, establishing surface drainage systems, and laying sewer line,
water lines, or underground utility lines through open space, fields, and
woods where there is no pavement or managed lawn to be readily restored.
§ 206-46. Contents of application.
All applications for land disturbance permits, other than those submitted
in connection with subdivision or site plan approval, shall include the
following:
A. The name of the applicant, the locations of the property on which the
land would be disturbed, including the sheet, block, and lot numbers on
the Tax Map, and the purpose for the disturbance.
B. The location and description of existing natural and man-made features
of the site and of adjacent areas. Natural features to be described shall
include trees and other vegetation, topography, soils, geology, and
drainage. Representation of topography shall include a contour
drawing with intervals of one foot or 10 decimeters where slopes are
3% or less; two feet or 20 decimeters where slopes are more than 3%
but less than 15%; and five feet or two meters where slopes exceed
15%. Soil information shall include a print or transcript from the Soil
Survey of Somerset County, obtainable from the Somerset-Union Soil
Conservation District. Besides marshes, ponds, streams, and flood
areas, as well as related soil information, drainage data shall include
where, if anywhere, surface water comes onto the property from
adjacent lands and where, if anywhere, it flows from the property to
which the application applies onto adjacent property. Drainage data
shall include also man-made surface drains, such as ditches and
culverts with information on their dimensions or capacities, and it shall
likewise show systems of man-made underground drainage.
C. Location and description of proposed changes in the site, including
changes, if any, in the form and percent of slope and in drainage.
D. Plans for control of soil erosion and sedimentation.
E. A schedule of the sequence of installation or application of planned
measures for control of soil erosion and sedimentation, as related to the
progress of the project, including the starting and completion dates.
F. Separate erosion and sedimentation control plans for each proposed
final section of the tentative plans.
G. All proposed revisions of required data submitted to the appointed
officer for approval with copies provided for the Township Engineer and
the Environmental Commission.
H. The use to be made of the topsoil.
§ 206-45 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-47
1:974
§ 206-47. Approval or disapproval of application.
In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a
land disturbance permit, the appointed officer shall consider the following
factors:
§ 206-48. Review and approval of permit.
A. Retention of natural vegetation wherever practicable.
B. Disturbance over areas no larger than are reasonably necessary.
C. Exposure of land to erosion for as little time as appears reasonable.
D. Treatment and use to be made of topsoil.
E. Seeding, sodding, mulching, or use of other stabilizing measures to
protect exposed areas during construction and at other time of land
disturbance. Seeding and other vegetative measures shall be evaluated
according to specified varieties of seed, fertilization, and other
treatments.
F. Use of temporary measures when permanent measures will not be
completed in a short period of time, as within 30 days.
G. Diversion, vegetative buffers, mulching, sodding, or other measures to
check or to divert runoff and to gather sediment from runoff by
interrupting slopes, by blanketing waterways, or by checking in some
other way the flow of water and the movement of soil.
H. Retention of rainfall on site, to the extent practicable, for recharge of
groundwater and lessening the risk of flooding.
I. Control of increased runoff resulting from modified soil and surface
conditions from the construction, according to Chapter 112, Land
Development.
J. Retention of sediment on site to the maximum extent feasible.
K. Installation of diversions, sediment basins, and other control measures
prior to any on-site disturbances except the disturbance that is
necessary for the construction of said measures.
L. Control of erosion and sedimentation over all aspects of a project and
during all stages from beginning through completion.
M. Assurance of lasting stabilization of the soil after construction.
A. Applications for tree removal and land disturbance permits involving
the issuance of subdivision, site plan and/or a building permit shall be
processed during and by the regular procedures for review of said
subdivision, site plan and/or building permit applications. When all
requirements under this article have been met, permits for the activity
shall be issued. If a building permit is denied, the tree removal and land
§ 206-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-48
1:975
§ 206-49. Performance guarantee.
The appointed officer may require performance bonds according to size and
nature of projects to be administered by the Township according to this
article for preservation of trees, control of erosion and sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil.
§ 206-50. Inspections.
disturbance permits pertaining thereto shall be denied. No building
permit shall be issued without the issuance of any permits required
under this article.
B. Applications for tree removal and land disturbance permits not
involving the issuance of subdivision, site plan approval and/or building
permits shall be reviewed by the Environmental Commission.
Recommendations from the Environmental Commission which shall not
be binding shall be forwarded to the appointed officer within 15 days of
the receipt of the application by the Commission. In the absence of said
recommendations the appointed officer shall grant or deny said
application in accordance with this article.
C. All approved tree removal and land disturbance permits not issued in
conjunction with subdivision, site plan approval and/or building permit
shall expire at the end of six months from the date of issuance unless
extended on application for an additional six-month period.
D. An environmental impact assessment pursuant to Chapter 112, Land
Development, may be required on any application for tree removal or
land disturbance, with or without a building permit.
A. The Township shall provide for inspection of projects involving
preservation of trees and control of soil erosion, sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil. To this end, the Township may enter into working
agreements with the Soil Conservation District for sharing in the
inspections of projects certified by the District. All other projects for
which conservation permits are required according to this article shall
be made subject to inspections by the Township at any time. The
inspector shall certify that installation and practices are or are not in
compliance with performance principles and standards prescribed by
this article and with any specific requirements that have been stated as
conditions of approval of the application. With projects for which
performance guarantees have been posted, the applicant shall be
required to have a certified plan and permit on site during construction
or other operations and to show the same to any agency or agent of the
Township or the Soil Conservation District whenever requested to do
so.
B. The appointed officer may issue a stop-operations order if a project is
not being executed in accordance with the certified plan, whether that
plan is one certified and administered by the Soil Conservation District
§ 206-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-50
1:976
§ 206-51. Fees.
§ 206-52. Appeals.
Whenever any application for a permit shall be denied by the appointed
officer, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Franklin Township
Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the Township Clerk within
10 days after receiving written notice of the denial of such application.
The Township Council shall thereafter hold a public hearing on the matter
in accordance with rules or procedures to be established by the Township
Council and may modify, affirm or reverse the decision of the appointed
officer.
or one administered wholly by the Township. This provision is in
accordance with Section 9 in the State Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, Chapter 251, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-47).
C. As stated in Section 11 of the State Soil Erosion and Sediment Act
(N.J.S.A. 4:24-49), no certificate of occupancy for a building shall be
issued by the Township unless there has been compliance with the
provisions of a certified plan for permanent measures to control soil
erosion and sedimentation in accordance with this article. A formal
report of such compliance must be filed with the municipal agent
authorized to issue certificates of occupancy, and a copy of the report
shall be sent to the Soil Conservation District.
D. The Township may, within 30 days after date of a report of such
compliance, release in whole or in part any performance bond it is
holding, depending upon the Township's assessment of need to
withhold all or a portion of the bond to assure full compliance with
requirements and adequate maintenance of the facilities.
A. With a building permit, subdivision or site plan approval:
(1) For all applications to be certified by the Soil Conservation District:
(a) The fee required by the District shall be paid, which fee shall
be paid directly to the District unless, by a special working
agreement between the District and the Township, the
Township would receive said fee on behalf of the District.
(b) Also an additional Township fee may be required for Township
participation with the District in enforcing this article, the
amount of said fee to be determined.
(2) With a building permit but not for certification by the Soil
Conservation District: $10.
B. Without a building permit, subdivision or site plan approval: $50 for one
acre; $10 for every acre over one and up to and including 20 acres; $5
for every acre and fraction thereof over 20 acres.
§ 206-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-53
1:977
§ 206-53. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3289]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article shall pay the required fees in connection with the permit as
outlined herein, plus a cost of $5 for each and every cubic yard of material
that has been distributed on the site, as determined by the Township
Engineer. Such person, firm or corporation shall also be liable to the
penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Every day
in which such violation continues after due notice has been served shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.
§ 206-54. Authorization of entry.
Each application for tree removal or land disturbance permit shall be
deemed to be authorization by the applicant for the appointed officer,
the Township Engineer, the Environmental Commission, the Department of
Land Use, the Soil Conservation District, and the Bureau of Forestry of the
state, or a representative of any one of them, to enter upon the land referred
to in the application for inspections contemplated by this article, for both
consideration of approval and review of operations if approval is granted. If
the applicant is not the owner of the land, said applicant shall furnish with
the application a sworn authorization from the owner for such entry.
§ 206-53 FRANKLIN CODE § 206-54
1:978
Chapter 207
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
Graffiti means any drawing, painting or making of any mark or inscription
on public or private real or personal property without the prior written
permission of the owner of the property.
§ 207-2. Violations.
§ 207-3. Notification of order to remove graffiti to property owner.
§ 207-4. Response to order to remove graffiti from property owner.
A property owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to
the Township by personal delivery or certified mail:
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly vandalize, deface or otherwise
damage the real or personal property of another by drawing, painting
or otherwise inscribing, in any fashion, graffiti.
B. The act of graffiti shall constitute the willful, malicious or unlawful
injury or destruction to real or personal property.
A. In the event graffiti is found, the Township shall provide the owner of
record written notice of an order to remove said graffiti by certified
mail and regular mail, which order shall afford the owner the
opportunity to remove the graffiti within 90 days of the date that the
notice is sent; however, the State Department of Transportation shall be
afforded 120 days from the date that the notice is sent to remove graffiti
from property owned by the Department.
B. The Township's order to remove shall contain a form to be utilized by a
property owner to inform the Township that the graffiti has been
removed and shall contain a certification stating that, by affixing a
signature to the form indicating that the graffiti has been removed, the
owner is certifying that the facts set forth therein are true and that the
certification shall be considered as if made under oath and subject to
the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
A. Any objection to the order within 30 days of the date of the order;
§ 206-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-4
1:979
§ 207-5. Objection to order to remove graffiti.
A property owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an
action challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within
60 days of the date of the order.
§ 207-6. Failure to comply with order to remove graffiti.
Chapter 208
HANDWASHING
§ 208-1. Purpose.
All restrooms made accessible to the public must be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times and must be provided with conveniently
located hot and cold running water, hand soap and paper towels or sanitary
drying devices.
§ 208-2. Inspection of premises.
All places and premises in this municipality accessible to the public shall
be subject to inspection by the Department of Health officials if they have
reason to believe that any section of this chapter is being violated.
§ 208-3. Notification of violation.
Whenever a violation of this chapter is found, notice in writing shall be
given to the owner thereof to abate the same in such time as shall be
specified therein but not less than 24 hours from the date of service thereof.
B. Notice that the graffiti has been removed within 90 days of the date of
the order, or in the case of the State Department of Transportation,
within 120 days of the date of the order.
A. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an
action challenging the order to remove graffiti is still pending, the
Township may remove the graffiti from that property and present the
property owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the
Township by certified mail and regular mail for reimbursement from the
property owner.
B. Whenever the Township undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure or other exposed surface, the Township Council, in
addition to assessing the cost of removal as a municipal lien against the
premises, may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with
interest, as a debt of the owner of the property and may authorize the
institution of an action at law for the collection thereof. The Superior
Court shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
§ 207-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 208-3
1:980
Said twenty-four-hour notice may be waived by the Director of Health or
his official designee where serious disease or safety hazards exist or if a
pandemic or public health emergency has been declared by state or federal
officials.
§ 208-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department of
Health and its licensed officials.
§ 208-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 for the first violation and for any subsequent violations not more than
$500. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 210
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 23.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Rent control — See Ch. 294.
§ 210-1. Purpose.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
A. The Township Council hereby declares it to be the public policy of the
Township to eliminate and prevent discrimination and involuntary
segregation based on race, religion, creed or ethnic origin and to
safeguard the right of every person to sell, purchase, lease, rent or
obtain financing for the purchase or lease of housing accommodation
without regard to race, religion, creed or ethnic origin.
B. It is not the intention of this chapter to foster complaints which are
inspired by malice but only to protect persons in the acquiring of
housing accommodations, and any persons filing complaints under this
chapter shall be fully responsible under the laws of the state governing
malicious prosecution.
§ 208-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:981
BLOCKBUSTING — The practice of inducing owners of property to sell
because of the actual or rumored advent into the neighborhood of a member
of a racial, religious or ethnic group.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any real property permitted for human
habitation within the Township.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships, corporations,
associations or other legal entities.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Includes those unlawful practices and
acts specified herein.
§ 210-3. Unlawful acts; applicability.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell, lease, assign or sublease any housing
accommodation to any person because of race, religion or ethnic
origin.
(2) Falsely represent that any housing accommodation is not available
for inspection, sale or rent or withhold information about any
housing accommodation which is available for sale or rental.
(3) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental, lease assignment or sublease of any
housing accommodation.
(4) Directly or indirectly advertise that the purchase or rental by
persons of any particular race, religion or ethnic origin in
unwelcome, objectionable, unacceptable or not solicited.
(5) Use any form of application for purchase, lease or financing of any
housing accommodation which inquires into the race, religion or
ethnic origin of any person.
(6) Engage in the practice of blockbusting, including but not limited
to:
(a) Inducing or attempting to induce the sale of housing
accommodations by representing that an adverse change has
occurred or may occur because of the racial, religious or ethnic
composition of the neighborhood.
(b) Misrepresenting by listing property for sale for the purpose of
inducing the sale of other property.
(c) Representing to a prospective purchaser that a neighborhood
might undergo an adverse change due to racial, religious or
ethnic composition of the neighborhood.
(d) Advertising for sale or rent nonexistent property which is not
actually for sale or rent.
§ 210-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 210-3
1:982
§ 210-4. Complaint procedure.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair practice
may, within 60 days of the last act complained of, personally or by his
attorney at law, either file a complaint with the Municipal Court and/
or file a verified complaint with the Human Rights Commission of the
Township, setting forth the name and address of the person(s) charged with
the offense, the particulars thereof and such other information as may be
required. It shall be a condition precedent that in order to avail oneself
of the complaint procedure herein set forth, such complaint must be filed
within 60 days of the last act forming the basis for the complaint. In the
event that a complaint is filed with the Human Rights Commission, then:
(e) Committing acts of any nature which might coerce or create
fear with the purpose of inducing the sale of property.
(f) Engaging in any form of reprisal against any person who has
filed a complaint or testified or participated in any
investigation, proceeding or conference conducted under the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No person, bank or lending institution shall discriminate against any
applicant because of race, religion and ethnic background of such
applicant or the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodation in the granting, extending or renewing of the rates,
terms or conditions of any such loan.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) The rental of a single apartment in a dwelling of four families or
fewer, one unit of which, at the time, is occupied by the owner as
his residence or the household of his family.
(2) The rental of a room or rooms to another person by the owners or
occupant of a one-family dwelling occupied by him at the time as
his residence or the household of his family.
(3) Any religious institution or organization or any organization
operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization, in the sale, lease or rent of real property, for limiting
admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or
denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by
such organization to promote the religious principles for which it is
established or maintained.
A. The Human Rights Commission shall cause a prompt investigation to be
made of the charges.
B. If the Human Rights Commission shall determine that no probable
cause exists, it shall, within 10 days thereafter, give written notice of its
determination to the principals involved.
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:983
§ 210-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 210-6. Redress under statutes.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from instituting
proceedings before any commission or state agency to seek other redress
under the applicable existing laws of the state.
Chapter 214
INSURANCE
C. If the Human Rights Commission determines that probable cause does
exist, it shall endeavor to eliminate the unlawful discrimination by
conference or conciliation or advise the complainant to file a complaint
with the Municipal Court. Such complaint must be filed forthwith and
under no circumstances later than seven days after the Human Rights
Commission advises the filing of such complaint.
A. Upon conviction, a violator shall make available to the complainant the
premises involved. His refusal to do so, if the premises are available,
shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, after
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty, for each violation.
C. Any person who aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures
another to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as a principal.
§ 210-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 210-6
1:984
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 6-12-1980 by Ord. No. 997 (Ch. 153, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 214-1. Payment of liens.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1978. c. 184 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.),
no insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in this
state shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within Franklin Township for fire damages pursuant to any fire insurance
policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this article and the filing
thereof with the State Commissioner of Insurance until such time as all
taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and
payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid
either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance company
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1978, c. 184, or the Township of Franklin
submits to insurance company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to
Section 4 of P.L. 1978. c. 184 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-11).
§ 214-2. Certificate concerning demolition. [Added 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 1478]
An official certificate on a form prescribed and certified by the Township
of Franklin stating that demolition is not required or that the cost of
demolition has been paid prior to the payment of said claims shall be
required.
§ 214-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-2
1:985
Chapter 219
LIBRARY
§ 219-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIBRARY — Any library or collection supported in whole or in part by public
funds of the township and any free public library created pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin.
§ 219-2. Return of materials required.
No person shall retain or fail to return any books or articles borrowed from
any library in the township contrary to the rules and regulations of such
library.
§ 219-3. Notification.
If any person retains or fails to return any book or article, he shall be first
notified in person or in writing of the failure to return said book or article as
per rules and regulations of the library before any complaint shall be made
for violation of this chapter.
§ 219-4. Damage to books or property.
No person shall damage or destroy or permit to be damaged or destroyed
any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by or is in the
custody of the library.
§ 219-5. Use of library cards.
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address or use any card
other than the one issued to said person for the purpose of borrowing any
book or other article from the library.
§ 219-6. Violations and penalties.155
Every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement or amendment thereto shall be liable to a penalty or fine of not
more than $50 for the first offense and a penalty or fine of not more than
$200 for the second and each succeeding offense. Any such fine or penalty
will be in addition to the cost of replacement of any materials not returned
or damaged beyond repair.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 214-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 219-6
1:986
Chapter 222
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 13, Art.
XX.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:987

ARTICLE I
Tree Removal
§ 222-1. Purpose.
This article shall apply throughout the entire area of Franklin Township,
so as to preserve trees and woodlands from unjustifiable destruction; to
preserve soil from erosion and sedimentation; and to protect the use and
transfer of topsoil, all for the general well-being of the residents of Franklin
Township and neighboring downstream areas.
§ 222-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, association, organization,
company, firm, corporation, industry, public agency, legal entity, or
other party requesting authorization to remove trees or to engage in
land-disturbing activities.
APPOINTED OFFICER — The Township Engineer or his/her designee.
CROWN OF A TREE — The upper part of a tree, including the branches
and foliage.
FARM — A tract of land being used for the production of agricultural or
horticultural produce, as food, fiber, nursery stock, livestock, poultry, or
dairy products, or that has been so used and has not since been put to
other use, including use as woodland as defined herewith.
FARMER — A person who operates a farm.
MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for the management of timbered land,
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Forestry, or similar state or federal agency or the Township
Forester if the Township names one.
NURSERY, GARDEN CENTER, ORCHARD or CHRISTMAS TREE
PLANTATION — Only such land within the municipality actually being
used and managed for horticultural purposes under controlled
agricultural practices.
PERMIT — A license to remove or destroy trees or to engage in a
land-disturbing activity, issued by the officer designated to enforce this
article.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The person appointed to that position or one
acting for him and under his authority.
TREE SPECIALIST — A professional who understands trees and good
cultural practices in their care and management, such as a landscape
architect, ornamental horticulturist, forester, arboriculturist, or other.
TREE; TREES — Any and all single- and multi-trunked plants having
diameters of four inches or more at heights of three feet above the base
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-2
1:989
§ 222-3. Regulations.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no tree shall be damaged, removed,
or destroyed by cutting, girdling, bulldozing, grading of land, or otherwise
by any person, association, corporation, or public agency without a tree
removal permit first having been obtained as provided in this article.
§ 222-4. Exemptions.
Exempted from the provisions of § 222-3 shall be the following:
§ 222-5. Application for tree removal permit where subdivision and/
or site plan approval or building permit is required.
of the trunk or of one or multiple trunks, except flowering dogwood
(Cornus florida), which is to be considered a tree if the diameter is two
inches or more at three feet above the base of the trunk.
WOODED AREA/WOODS — Any area that is 10% or more covered by
crowns of trees as trees are defined herein.
B. The term "shall" in this article always is mandatory and not
discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.
A. The clear-cutting of any area of trees in an area of 2,500 square feet or
less located on a tract of land on which an existing single-family or twofamily
dwelling has been erected and constitutes the primary use.
B. Any tree located on a tract of land already in use by a church, nonprofit
camp, or other public or quasi-public organization, when the removal of
said tree will be for a purpose in landscaping or to facilitate the
program of said church, camp, or organization.
C. Any tree growing on land actually used and managed as a nursery,
garden center, Christmas tree plantation or orchard.
D. Any tree to be cut for personal use by the owner as firewood or for
observance of a holiday and any tree to be cut from a farm woodlot by
the farmer for farm use as firewood, posts, fencing or other farm needs.
E. Any tree cut or removed in accordance with a management plan
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Forestry, or other professional forester, and filed with the
appointed officer. Such a management plan could include cutting of
trees for sale as firewood or timber.
F. Any tree growing on land being used or to be used with Township
approval for quarrying or similar operations.
G. Any dead, diseased, or other tree with which there is risk to life or
property.
§ 222-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-5
1:990
A. All applications for development shall be accompanied by a tree
conservation plan as required by this section. The tree conservation
plan shall be reviewed and approved by the approving boards as part of
the development application. That portion of the tree conservation plan
dealing with trees located upon Township property or rights-of-way or
upon land to be transferred or dedicated to the Township shall further
be reviewed and approved by the Shade Tree Commission in
accordance with guidelines and best management practices established
by the Shade Tree Commission as provided by this article.
B. For the removal of trees in conjunction with an application for
development of property as either a minor or major subdivision or site
plan, or in any other form of development where the approval of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment will be required, the
applicant shall submit to the Board simultaneously with the application
for approval of such development, in a form and manner which complies
with Chapter 112, Land Development, a tree conservation and
replacement plan consisting of a map having a scale of one inch equals
50 feet or less showing the location of existing wooded areas and
clearly marked boundaries of the sample plot(s) used to determine the
average wooded acre for the site. The map shall be prepared by a
professional licensed in the State of New Jersey and authorized
pursuant to state law to submit such plans. The map or site plan shall
also show:
(1) Location of streams and watercourses;
(2) Location of slopes greater than 10% where any tree removal is
proposed;
(3) Total acreage of the tract and the total acreage of the wooded
area(s) of the tract (i.e., area within the dripline of existing trees on
site);
(4) Locations of the tract where tree removal is to take place;
(5) The location of each one-hundred-foot by one-hundred-foot sample
plot used to determine the average wooded acre as defined above;
(6) For each sample plot inventoried to determine the average wooded
acre, the application shall provide a list identifying the species of
tree, the number of trees of each species and the location of each
individual tree in that plot;
(7) The total number by species of existing trees with a diameter at
breast height (DBH) of four inches or greater on the tract;
(8) The total number by species of trees with a DBH of four inches or
greater which are to be removed;
(9) The number, species and sizes of trees existing on the site shall be
estimated based upon the inventory of one-hundred-foot by one-
§ 222-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5
1:991
hundred-foot sample plots as follows: site with wooded area(s) of
less than two acres; one sample plot; site with wooded area(s)
between two and five acres: two sample plots; and site with wooded
area(s) greater than five acres: three sample plots. The sample
plot(s) selected shall be representative of the wooded area(s) of
the site in terms of tree species, size and density. One or more
additional sample plots may be required if the size and/or nature of
the wooded area(s) dictate the need for additional sample plots;
(10) All trees with a DBH of 16 inches or greater, significant and historic
trees shall be specifically identified by location on the map and
listed on a separate schedule showing species and common name
and size. All efforts shall be made to preserve such trees, including,
if necessary, relocation of infrastructure, roadways and buildings;
(11) A specific replacement plan for the replanting of removed trees in
accordance with § 222-5.1;
(12) Methods and locations of tree preservation measures to be
employed during construction to ensure the preservation of the
wooded areas and individual trees to be preserved on site. Such
methods shall be consistent with best management practices and,
to the maximum degree practicable, shall exclude disturbance
within the dripline of existing trees to remain.
C. Where the application only requires a building and zoning permit, an
individual plot plan shall be prepared showing the location of trees to
be removed and replaced. The plan shall be reviewed for approval by
the appointed officer prior to issuance of a tree removal permit.
Compliance with the tree removal permit shall be monitored by the
Township Engineering Department as part of its site development
inspection procedures.
D. Tree conservation and replacement plans required under § 222-5B shall
be reviewed by the Engineering Department and the Department of
Planning and Zoning for review and comment to be submitted to the
applicable board. Approval of the tree conservation and replacement
plan by the applicable board shall constitute a tree removal permit and
shall become a condition of that board's approval unless waived by the
board (e.g., in the case of a minor subdivision where review by the
appointed officer prior to issuance of a building permit would suffice).
Compliance with the approved tree conservation and replacement plan
shall be monitored by the Township Engineering Department as part of
its site development inspection procedures, and no subsequent tree
removal permit shall be required. Any contribution in lieu of planting
trees permitted under § 222-5.3C shall be a condition of the board's
approval and paid prior to sign-off on the plans.
E. The tree removal permit issued by the appointed officer or by the board,
as applicable, shall be valid so long as the approved application is valid.
§ 222-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-5
1:992
§ 222-5.1. Tree replacement plan.
For all replacement requirements, the following formulas shall apply:
The removal or damage to trees not approved for removal shall be
considered a violation of this article.
F. Any substantial change in a tree removal permit shall necessitate the
submission of a revised plan to the board or appointed officer, as
applicable, for review and approval.
G. Any person may examine, and/or receive copies of, an application made
pursuant to this article in accordance with applicable provisions of the
Open Public Records Act.156
H. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the developer shall designate
on all relevant lots the trees to be retained, which designation shall be
based upon the tree removal permit.
I. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Construction
Official shall receive a release from the appointed officer or his or her
designee that all trees to be retained and all trees to be replaced under
the tree removal permits are in fact in existence and that all debris
(trash) generated as a result of these activities has been removed.
A. For trees with a DBH equal to or greater than four inches and less than
16 inches, replacement shall be based upon the percentage of the trees
removed as set forth below:
Percentage of Trees Removed
from Entire Development
Percentage of Trees to be
Replaced with Trees of
Minimum Size 2.5 Inch Caliper
80% to 100% 80%
60% to 79% 60%
40% to 59% 40%
20% to 39% 20%
Less than 20% 10%
B. For trees with a DBH equal to or greater than 16 inches, the removed
tree shall be replaced:
Existing Tree to be Removed
(inch caliper)
Number of Replacement Trees
(minimum size 2.5 inch
caliper)
Less than 18 3
Less than 21 4
156. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 222-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5.1
1:993
§ 222-5.2. Shade trees (street and parking area trees).
§ 222-5.3. Tree replacement; contributions to Tree Fund.
Existing Tree to be Removed
(inch caliper)
Number of Replacement Trees
(minimum size 2.5 inch
caliper)
Less than 24 5
Less than 27 6
Less than 29 7
Less than 31 8
Less than 33 9
Less than 35 10
Less than 37 11
Less than 39 12
Less than 40 13
Less than 41 14
41 inches or greater 15
C. The species or type of replacement tree, the mix of replacement tree
types and the manner of planting shall be in accordance with the best
practices guidelines established by the Shade Tree Commission and as
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board.
D. Any trees proposed in the landscaping plan may be credited toward the
number of replacement trees, provided such trees are at least 2.5
inches in caliper in the case of deciduous trees or at least six feet or
greater in height in the case of evergreen or coniferous trees.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall, as part of its best practices
guidelines, establish the minimum requirement for trees to be planted
along proposed Township rights-of-way.
B. There shall be planted that number and type of shade tree required as
specified in the best practices guidelines prepared by the Shade Tree
Commission on proposed rights-of-way.
C. The types and locations of shade trees to be planted shall be shown in
the plans submitted to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment in conjunction with the application for development or on
the plot plan where the application only requires a building and zoning
permit.
A. Consistent with the intent of this chapter, applicants shall make all
reasonable attempts to maximize tree preservation. To the extent that
tree replacement is necessary, the applicant shall make all reasonable
§ 222-5.1 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-5.3
1:994
§ 222-5.4. Tree Fund.
§ 222-5.5. Historic and significant tree register; removal of historic
and significant trees.
attempts to provide all required replacement trees on the site from
which trees were removed.
B. If placement of all replacement trees on the removal site proves to be
impractical, in lieu of replanting trees on the removal site, the applicant
shall have the option of planting replacement trees of types selected by
the Shade Tree Commission from the approved list of trees as
established by it at an off-site location chosen by the Township in
consultation with the Shade Tree Commission. Such off-site locations
shall be public property and rights-of-way, including but not limited to
public parks, public schools and public buildings.
C. In the alternative, if placement of all replacement trees on the removal
site proves to be impractical, the applicant may make a contribution to
be deposited in the Township Tree Fund as established by this article.
The contribution in lieu of planting of trees shall be based on a fixed
rate of material and installation costs for those trees. This rate shall be
adjusted annually and based on estimates by the Township Engineer.
A. There shall be established by this article a Township Tree Fund for the
purposes set forth in this article.
B. All funds collected as contributions in lieu of replanting shall be
deposited in a dedicated account clearly designated as the Township
Tree Fund. All funds so deposited shall be used solely for the planting of
trees and/or shrubbery in public parks, property surrounding public
buildings and within rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of Franklin
Township or for other such purposes that advance the purpose and
authority of the Township Shade Tree Commission per Township
ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., including but not limited to
training, public education, awareness and outreach outlined in the
Township's Community Forestry Management Plan.
C. The Tree Fund shall be administered by the Township Manager, who
shall report to the Township Council and the Shade Tree Commission on
a quarterly basis detailing the use of the fund.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall establish and maintain an official
register of historic and significant trees in Franklin Township. "Historic
trees" are defined as trees linked to an historic time or event.
"Significant trees" are trees which, because of size, species or age,
contribute to the beauty of the Township. Historic and significant trees
are suitable for Township register nomination if they are located on
either public or private land. The property owner upon which the
historic or significant tree is located shall be formally notified by the
Shade Tree Commission of any such designation.
§ 222-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5.5
1:995
§ 222-6. Application for tree removal permit not involving site plan
and/or subdivision approval or building permit.
An application for a permit for removal of trees where site plan and/or
subdivision approval or a building permit is not involved shall be made
directly to the appointed officer and shall contain the name of the applicant,
location of the property, a plot plan as aforesaid, including a statement of
what trees would be removed, and the purpose for which the application
is being made, including but not limited to the following: clearing for
agricultural use, harvesting of timber, fire protection, private parks, scenic
improvement, hardship or danger to adjacent property, removal of trees for
growth in other locations, and installation of utilities or sewer lines after,
and only after, permits for the same have otherwise been obtained.
§ 222-7. Criteria for approval or disapproval of permit.
In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application pursuant
to this article, the following criteria shall be considered by the appointed
officer or board, as applicable:
B. Before any tree designated in accordance with this article as historic or
significant can be removed, the property owners shall obtain a permit
from the Township. At the time of the issuance of the permit, the issuing
authority, as designated by the Township Manager, shall advise the
property owner of any alternatives available to the removal of the tree.
There shall be no fee associated with the issuance of this permit.
A. The appointed officer or board shall inspect or otherwise learn about
the trees which are under consideration and shall similarly check the
soil, drainage, and other pertinent conditions. Said officer or board
shall consider protection of trees to remain on the property during and
after construction and grading and shall consider also whether the
destruction or removal of trees would result in soil erosion, would
impair existing drainage patterns, would adversely affect adjacent
properties by removal of screening or in other ways, or would impair
substantially the aesthetic values of the area. Consideration shall be
given also to preservation of trees of special interest because of size,
species, or historic connection.
B. In addition, for preservation of trees in the land grading operation,
including lowering, raising, and filling land areas, the following
standards shall be met unless modified in specific cases or in general by
the appointed officer or board, as applicable, with consideration for
tree species and conditions of soil, drainage, slope and other factors:
(1) Roots beneath the crown of a tree shall not be bared.
(2) Root areas of a tree shall not be reduced nearer to the base of the
tree than the area of the crown of the tree.
§ 222-5.5 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-7
1:996
§ 222-8. Review and approval of permits.
§ 222-9. Performance guaranty.
The appointed officer may require performance bonds according to the size
and nature of projects to be administered by the Township according to this
article for preservation of trees, control of erosion and sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil.
§ 222-10. Inspections.
(3) The surface beneath a tree shall not be raised with soil or other
material, permanently or temporarily, for more than six inches
unless the tree is welled in and provision is made for the well to
drain to the outer reaches of the crown of the tree or to the natural
ground surface if that is nearer. Design of wells must have approval
of the appointed officer or board. The appointed officer or board, as
applicable, shall have authority to affix reasonable conditions to the
grant of a permit concerning trees.
A. Applications for tree removal permits involving the issuance of a
subdivision, site plan and/or a building permit shall be processed
during and by the regular procedures for review of said subdivision, site
plan and/or building permit applications in accordance with § 222-5. No
building permit shall be issued without the issuance of any permits
required under this article.
B. Applications for tree removal permits not involving the issuance of
subdivision, site plan approval and/or building permits shall be
reviewed by the appointed officer in accordance with this article.
C. All approved tree removal permits not issued in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan approval and/or building permits shall expire at
the end of six months from the date of issuance unless extended upon
application for an additional six-month period.
A. The Township shall provide for inspection of projects involving
preservation of trees and control of soil erosion, sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil. To this end, the Township may enter into working
agreements with the Soil Conservation District for sharing in the
inspections of projects certified by the District. All other projects for
which conservation permits are required according to this article shall
be made subject to inspections by the Township at any time. The
inspector shall certify that installation and practices are or are not in
compliance with performance principles and standards prescribed by
this article and with any specific requirements that have been stated as
conditions of approval of the application. With projects for which
performance guaranties have been posted, the applicant shall be
required to have a certified plan and permit on site during construction
or other operations and to show the same to any agency or agent of the
§ 222-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-10
1:997
§ 222-11. Fees for tree removal permit.
When filing an application for tree removal, the applicant shall pay a fee
according to the following schedule:
§ 222-12. Appeals.
Whenever any application for a tree removal permit shall be denied by
the appointed officer, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Franklin
Township Manager, who may modify, affirm or reverse the decision of the
appointed officer.
§ 222-13. Violations and penalties; restitution.
Township or the Soil Conservation District whenever requested to do
so.
B. The appointed officer may issue a stop-operations order if a project is
not being executed in accordance with the certified plan, whether that
plan is one certified and administered by the Soil Conservation District
or one administered wholly by the Township. This provision is in
accordance with Section 9 in the State Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, Chapter 251, P.L. 1975.157
C. As stated in Section 11 of the State Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act,158 no certificate of occupancy for a building shall be issued by the
Township unless there has been compliance with the provisions of a
certified plan for permanent measures to control soil erosion and
sedimentation in accordance with this article. A formal report of such
compliance must be filed with the municipal agent authorized to issue
certificates of occupancy, and a copy of the report shall be sent to the
Soil Conservation District.
D. The Township may, within 30 days after the date of a report of such
compliance, release in whole or in part any performance bond it is
holding, depending upon the Township's assessment of need to
withhold all or a portion of the bond to assure full compliance with
requirements and adequate maintenance of the facilities.
A. For transplanting a tree in a living condition: no fee.
B. With a building permit, subdivision or site plan approval: no fee over
and above the fee required for the building permit, subdivision or site
plan approval.
C. Without a building permit, subdivision or site plan approval: $25.
D. For clearing land of trees: $500 per acre and part thereof.
157. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-47.
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-49.
§ 222-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-13
1:998
§ 222-14. Authorization to enter land.
Each application for tree removal or land disturbance permit shall be
deemed to be authorization by the applicant for the appointed officer, the
Department of Engineering and Public Works, the Shade Tree Commission,
the Department of Planning and Zoning, the Soil Conservation District,
and the Bureau of Forestry of the state, or a representative of any one of
them, to enter upon the land referred to in the application for inspections
contemplated by this article, for both consideration of approval and review
of operations if approval is granted. If the applicant is not the owner of the
land, said applicant shall furnish with the application a sworn authorization
from the owner for such entry.
A. Any person, partnership, association, organization, company, firm,
corporation, industry, public agency or utility, legal entity or other party
who violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties contained in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Each and every day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
B. In addition to the penalties prescribed above, the court shall require
that restitution be made to the Township by any person who removes a
tree in violation of this article in an amount equal to the cost of each
tree removed as established in accordance with § 222-5.3C of this
article, which shall be deposited in the Township Tree Fund.
§ 222-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-14
1:999

ARTICLE II
Trees and Shrubs
§ 222-15. Prohibited acts.
No person shall do or cause to be done by others, either purposely,
carelessly or negligently, any of the following acts to a tree, shrub or plant
on a public right-of-way or park:
§ 222-16. Planting on public land prohibited.
No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted in any public
highway or park without written permission from the Director of Public
Works.
§ 222-17. Maintenance of trees and shrubs.
The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the Township shall keep all
trees, bushes and/or shrubs maintained in a safe manner so they shall not
create a hazard to the general public and shall keep trees, shrubs and/or
bushes in compliance with § 112-24, Brush and hedges near roadways and
intersections.
§ 222-18. Notice to property owner for the removal of dangerous
trees and/or shrubs.
In case any tree or shrub, or any part thereof, along the municipal roadway
shall become dangerous to the public safety, the owner of the property in
front of which such tree or shrub shall be located shall remove the same
or the required part thereof forthwith upon service of written directive to
the effect from the Department of Public Works. The notice shall be sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such property.
§ 222-19. Failure to remove dangerous trees and/or shrubs abutting
the right-of-way of a municipal highway.
If the owner fails to remove the tree or shrub, or portion thereof, within two
weeks after service of written notice to do so, the work shall be performed
by the Township under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, who
shall certify the cost thereof to the Tax Collector.
A. Spray with any chemical any such tree, shrub or plant;
B. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to any such tree or shrub or
to any guard about such tree or shrub;
C. Remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any such tree or
shrub.
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-20
1:1001
§ 222-20. Certified costs.
Upon receipt of the certified costs, the Tax Collector shall charge the
foregoing as a lien upon the lands, and such amount shall be added to and
become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the
lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes, and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 222-21. Removal of dangerous trees and/or shrubs within the
right-of-way of the municipal highway.
The Township shall be empowered to prune or remove trees and/or shrubs
deemed to be a danger to the public by the Director of Public Works within
the right-of-way of any municipal roadway.
§ 222-22. Wire attached to trees; pruning.
Whenever it becomes necessary for the Township to prune or remove any
tree within the right-of-way of a municipal highway, any person having a
wire running through such public highway shall temporarily remove such
wire or wires within 24 hours after the service upon the owner of the wire
or wires, or his agent, of a written notice from the Department of Public
Works. Any utility company, instead of temporarily removing such service
wire, shall have the option of pruning or removing such tree.
§ 222-23. Complaint; violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article may be served with a
complaint to appear in Franklin Township Municipal Court for such violation
and, upon such violation and upon conviction, shall be subject to the
penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, for each and
every day in which such violation shall continue.
§ 222-24. Continued violations.
If any person shall continue to violate any of the provisions of this article
after being duly notified of such violation or shall neglect or refuse to
comply with any lawful order of the Department of Public Works, the failure
to comply with a second or each of any subsequent notifications or orders
shall be construed as an additional violation of this article, and each such
additional offense shall subject the offending party, upon conviction, to the
same penalty as provided for the first offense.
§ 222-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 222-24
1:1002
Chapter 226
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 226-1. Definitions.
§ 226-2. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 226-3. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 226-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-2004 by Ord. No.
3420; 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 3442; 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 3455]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time as may be in current use.
A. The Director of the Department of Public Safety or, in his absence,
disability or inability to act, the Chief of Police of the municipality, is
hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street
or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing
is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Director of the Department of
Public Safety and in accordance with Subection A above shall provide
for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any street or
portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 222-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-4
1:1003
supplement thereto shall be liable to penalties in compliance with state
surcharges or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 226-5. Effect of chapter.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 226-6. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Franklin, Somerset County,
are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
with or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 226-7. Parking.
Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time
limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other,
more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey
statute or as hereinafter provided.
§ 226-8. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
A. Upon the declaration of any emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs. The effectiveness of this subsection is continent
upon the signs being erected as required by law.
B. The Director of Public Safety or the Chief of Police or, in his absence,
the ranking police officer, is also empowered to suspend temporarily
any prohibition against parking when weather conditions, accidents,
road construction, fire, public celebrations or other sudden or unusual
conditions dictate or require such suspension to avoid interference with
the free flow of traffic. In such instances, all signs prohibiting parking in
such areas shall be covered or otherwise obscured. [Added 8-10-1993
by Ord. No. 1782]
§ 226-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-9
1:1004
§ 226-9. Parking prohibited in snow emergencies. [Added
10-10-2019 by Ord. No. 4302-19159]
A. Removal.
(1) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either
side of any street in the Township. This prohibition is applicable
whether or not a no parking/snow emergency sign is posted on any
street.
(2) The parking prohibition in Subsection A(1) of this section shall
remain in effect after the snow has ceased, until the streets have
been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not
interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
B. Posting of signs.
(1) No parking/snow emergency signs shall be posted on all main
entrances to the Township of Franklin on all state, county and local
roads, together with such other locations as are set forth below.
The lack of such sign on any particular street in the Township of
Franklin shall not be construed to mean that parking is permitted
during snow emergencies.
(a) Signs reading "No Parking On Any Street When Snow
Covered," at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size shall be posted
at the main entrances to the Township of Franklin.
(2) Notification that the emergency no parking signs are being or will
be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
NO PARKING SNOW SIGN LOCATIONS
Amwell Road (Route 514) and Market Street
Baldwin Avenue and Township line
Canal Road and Blackwells Mills Causeway
Canal Road and Georgetown-Franklin Turnpike (Route 518)
Canal Road and Griggstown Causeway (Route 632)
Cedar Avenue and Township line
Easton Avenue (Route 527) and Davidson Avenue
Easton Avenue (Route 527) and Township line
Easton Avenue (Route 527) and Worlds Fair Drive
Elizabeth Avenue (Route 621) and Township line
Hamilton Street (Route 514) and Township line
159. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 226-9, Temporary parking prohibition
for snow plowing and removal, as amended.
§ 226-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-9
1:1005
NO PARKING SNOW SIGN LOCATIONS
Landing Lane (Route 617) and Township line
Maple Avenue and Township line
Marcy Street and Township line
Rolling Hills Drive at intersection of Meadow Hills Drive and
Garden Hill Drive
Route 27 and (Main Street) and Township line
Route 27 and Barbieri Court
Route 27 and Beekman Road
Route 27 and Bennetts Lane
Route 27 and Bennington Parkway
Route 27 and Booker Street
Route 27 and Bunker Hill Road (Route 632)
Route 27 and Camner Avenue
Route 27 and Chester Avenue
Route 27 and Church Street
Route 27 and Churchill Avenue
Route 27 and Claremont Road (Route 648)
Route 27 and Clover Place
Route 27 and Cortelyous Lane
Route 27 and Delar Parkway
Route 27 and Douglass Street
Route 27 and Franklin Boulevard (Route 617)
Route 27 and Georgetown-Franklin Turnpike (Route 518)
Route 27 and Gold Star Drive
Route 27 and Henry Street
Route 27 and High Street
Route 27 and Irving Street
Route 27 and Juliet Avenue
Route 27 and Koolidge Court
Route 27 and Laurel Avenue (Route 603)
Route 27 and Main Street
Route 27 and Matilda Avenue
Route 27 and Millstone Road
Route 27 and Oak Place
Route 27 and Pleasant Plains Road
Route 27 and Princeton Ridings Boulevard
§ 226-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-9
1:1006
NO PARKING SNOW SIGN LOCATIONS
Route 27 and School Avenue
Route 27 and Shaw Drive
Route 27 and Sinclair Boulevard
Route 27 and Skillmans Lane
Route 27 and South Dover Avenue
Route 27 and South Middlebush Road (Route 615)
Route 27 and Springfield Avenue
Route 27 and Stewart Avenue
Route 27 and Veronica Avenue
Route 27 and Vliet Road
Route 27 and Voorhees Avenue
Somerset Street and Route 27
Somerset Street and Township line
Westminster Road at intersection of Julie Court and Deborah
Drive
Weston Canal Road (Route 623) and Edgewood Terrace
Weston Canal Road (Route 623) and Manville Causeway (Route
623)
Weston Canal Road (Route 623) and Route 287 Exit 12 ramp
(northbound)
Weston Canal Road (Route 623) and Route 287 Exit 12 ramp
(southbound)
Whitehall Lane and Westminster Road
C. Exemptions.
(1) Exempt streets (parking where permitted).
The following streets are exempt from the provisions of § 226-9A:
(a) Brookline Avenue.
(b) Home Street.
(c) Ambrose Street.
(d) Philips Road.
(2) Individual property parking exemption permit.
(a) Where a property does not have any off-street parking or a
Township-designated parking area, a snow parking permit can
be applied for at the Department of Public Works.
§ 226-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-9
1:1007
§ 226-10. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets. [Amended 11-13-1997 by Ord. No. 2043]
[1] A Police Department Traffic Officer will inspect the
property and will advise the Director whether the issuance
of the permit is valid.
(b) The snow parking permit is no charge.
(c) Placement of sticker. The seasonal sticker, issued by the
Department of Public Works, must be visibly placed based on
the Police Department's designated location for each approved
vehicle.
(d) Vehicles which park on the listed exempted streets do not
require a permit.
D. Removal of vehicles. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in
violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the
safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Adams Street South 4 hrs From Elizabeth Avenue to its
westerly terminus
Ambrose Street East 24 hrs From Somerset Street to
Hamilton Street
Amwell Road Both 24 hrs Beginning 100 feet west of
Susan Drive to South
Middlebush Road
Amwell Road Both 24 hrs From the Millstone/Franklin
Township line east to the
intersection of South
Middlebush Road
Beekman Road
[Added
8-10-1999 by
Ord. No.
3059]
Both All From NJ Highway 27 to a point
780 feet plus or minus
northwesterly of Stewart
Avenue
Bell Street Both 24 hrs From Elizabeth Avenue to its
northwesterly terminus
Belmar Street South 24 hrs From Franklin Boulevard to
Girard Avenue
§ 226-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1008
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Belmar Street Northeast 24 hrs From Franklin Boulevard to a
point 100 feet northwesterly
thereof
Belmont Drive Both 24 hrs From schoolhouse Road to
Campus Drive
Bennetts Lane Both 24 hrs From NJ State Highway Route
27 westerly a distance of 100
feet
Bennington
Parkway
Both 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Route 27 to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom
Berry Street Both 24 hrs From School Avenue to Camner
Avenue
Blackwells Mills
Road
Both 24 hrs From Canal Road to the
Franklin Township/Montgomery
Township municipal line
Bunker Hill
Road
Both 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Route 27 to a point 150 feet
northerly therefrom
Carmen Street
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
3673]
West 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to Rogers
Avenue
Cedar Grove
Lane
Both 24 hrs From the curbline of Easton
Avenue and extending 525 feet
thereof
Cedar Grove
Lane
Both 24 hrs From Amwell Road to a point
200 feet north thereof
Churchill
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Berry Street to Somerset
Street
Churchill
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Shirley Avenue to Clyde
Road
Clifton Street
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
3673]
West 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to Rogers
Avenue
Clyde Road Both 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 105
feet south thereof
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:1009
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Cottontail Lane Both 24 hrs From Schoolhouse Road to
Weston Canal Road
Davidson
Avenue
Both 24 hrs Entire length
Dekalb Street
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 3673;
repealed
10-28-2008 by
Ord. No.
3790]
Dekalb Street
[Added
1-6-2009 by
Ord. No.
3809]
East 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to end
DeMott Lane
[Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No.
3610]
North 24 hrs From a point 550 feet west of
the curbline of Dellwood Lane
to Amwell Road
DeMott Lane
[Amended
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No.
3610]
North 24 hrs From the curbline of Easton
Avenue to a point 760 feet west
thereof
DeMott Lane
[Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No.
3610]
South 24 hrs From Amwell Road to Easton
Avenue
DeMott Lane South 24 hrs From the curbline of Easton
Avenue and extending 425 feet
westerly thereof
DeMott Lane
jughandle
Both 24 hrs From the northwest quadrant
of the Easton Avenue
intersection for the entire
length of the jughandle
DeMott Lane Both 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
New Brunswick Road to a point
550 feet easterly thereof
§ 226-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1010
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
DeMott Lane Both 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
New Brunswick Road to a point
550 feet westerly thereof
DeMott Lane Both 24 hrs From Amwell Road northerly
curbline to a point 390 feet
north thereof
Douglas Avenue Both 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Route 27 to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom
Drake Street
[Added
8-12-1996 by
Ord. No.
1974]
Both 24 hrs From Brookline Avenue to
Home Street
East Millstone
Causeway
Both 24 hrs Entire length
Easton Avenue Both 24 hrs From the New Brunswick line
to 100 feet north of Davidson
Avenue
Easton Avenue -
mid-block
jughandle
Both 24 hrs Within the curbing limits of the
entrance and exit drive of the
shopping center opposite the
mid-block on Easton Avenue
between Academy Road
Academy/John F. Kennedy
Boulevard
Easton Avenue/
John F. Kennedy
- jughandle
northbound
Both 24 hrs From the intersection of the
northwesterly side of John F.
Kennedy Boulevard with the
northwesterly side of Easton
Avenue, thence running
southerly a distance of
approximately 400 feet
Easton Avenue/
John F. Kennedy
- jughandle
southbound
Both 24 hrs Entire length
Elizabeth
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Schoolhouse Road to the
South Bound Brook Borough
line
Elizabeth
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Amwell Road to a point
100 feet north thereof
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:1011
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Fifteenth Street
[Added
5-28-1996 by
Ord. No.
1959]
Both 24 hrs From Willow Avenue to
Hollywood Avenue [Added
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1959]
Fifteenth Street
[Added
6-13-2002 by
Ord. No.
3292]
Both 24 hrs From Willow Avenue to Rue
Chagall
Foxwood Drive Both 24 hrs From the southerly side of
Easton Avenue, thence running
southerly through the turnoff,
including both east and west
sides, to the exit on Foxwood
Drive and continuing
southwesterly for an
approximate distance of 45 feet
Foxwood Drive Both 24 hrs From the westerly prolongation
of the southerly lot lint of Lot
36 in Block 383 on both sides
of Foxwood Drive to the
southerly sideline of Easton
Avenue
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From Hamilton Street to
Somerset Street
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 280
feet north thereof
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From a point 280 feet north of
Hamilton street to a point 250
feet south of Highland Avenue
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 200
feet south thereof
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Highland Avenue to a point 250
feet northeasterly thereof
Franklin
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
Highland Avenue to a point 250
feet southwesterly thereof
§ 226-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1012
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Franklin
Boulevard
East 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
Easton Avenue to a point 150
feet south thereof
Franklin
Boulevard
West 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
Easton Avenue to a point 200
feet south thereof
Georgetown/
Franklin
Turnpike
North 24 hrs From Route 27 for a distance of
plus or minus 715 feet westerly
thereof
Georgetown/
Franklin
Turnpike
South 24 hrs From the westerly side of
Route 27 for a distance of plus
or minus 650 feet westerly
thereof
Golfview Drive Both 24 hrs Entire length
Griggstown
Causeway
Both 24 hrs From Canal Road to the
Franklin Township/Montgomery
Township municipal line
Hall Street North 24 hrs From Elizabeth Avenue to its
westerly terminus
Hamilton Street South 24 hrs From Home Street to Brookline
Avenue
Hamilton Street Both 24 hrs From the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Meister
Street to a point 95 feet
westerly from the prolongation
of the westerly curbline of
Highland Avenue
Hamilton Street Both 24 hrs From a point 100 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Matilda
Avenue to a point 100 feet west
of the westerly curbline of
Matilda Avenue
Hamilton Street North 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
Franklin Boulevard to a point
400 feet east thereof
Hamilton Street South 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
Franklin Boulevard to a point
200 feet east thereof
Hamilton Street Both 24 hrs From Franklin Boulevard west
to a point 100 feet west of
Susan Drive
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:1013
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Hamilton Street North 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard to a
point 105 feet easterly thereof
Hamilton Street North 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard to a
point 130 feet westerly thereof
Hamilton Street South 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
Clyde Road to a point 105 feet
easterly thereof
Hamilton Street South 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
Clyde Road to a point 105 feet
westerly thereof
Highland
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
Franklin Boulevard to a point
250 feet southeasterly thereof
Highland
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
Franklin Boulevard to the
easterly curbline of Archer
Avenue
Highland
Avenue
West 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 95
feet north thereof
Highland
Avenue
East 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 102
feet northerly thereof
Hollywood
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Easton Avenue to Fourth
Street
John F. Kennedy
Boulevard
Both 24 hrs From Hamilton Street to
Easton Avenue
Juliet Avenue
[Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
1969]
West 24 hrs From Hamilton Street to Myrtle
Avenue
Landers Street
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
3673]
East 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to Rogers
Avenue
§ 226-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1014
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Landing Lane East 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Easton Avenue to a point plus
or minus 230 feet northeast
thereof on the Township and
County line
Landing Lane West 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Easton Avenue to a point plus
or minus 300 feet northeast
thereof on the Township and
county line
Leif Erickson
Avenue
East 24 hrs From the intersection of
Bunkerhill Road to a point 978
feet thereof
MacAfee Road North 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
school
days
From a point beginning 894
feet east of Berger Street
intersection and continuing to a
point 134 feet thereof
Main Street West 24 hrs From the northerly curbline of
Route 27 to a point 75 inches
northerly therefrom
Marshall Street
[Added
9-24-2012 by
Ord. No.
3991]
Both 24 hrs From Juliet Avenue north to its
terminus
Martin Street North 24 hrs From Franklin Boulevard and
extending 230 feet easterly
thereof
Martino Drive Both 24 hrs From DeMott Lane to Wilson
Road
Matilda Avenue Both 24 hrs From a point 100 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 100
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Hamilton Street
Matilda Avenue
[Added
11-26-2013 by
Ord. No.
4042-13]
Both 24 hrs From Somerset Street to Ray
Street
New Brunswick
Road
Both 24 hrs From DeMott Lane to Cedar
Grove Lane
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:1015
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
New Brunswick
Road
Both 24 hrs From the southerly curbline of
DeMott Lane to a point 350
feet south thereof
New Brunswick
Road
Both 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard to a
point 140 feet west thereof
Norma Avenue Both 24 hrs From Ralph Street to Franklin
Boulevard
Old Stage Road South 24 hrs From the westerly curbline of
Route 27 to a point 50 feet
westerly therefrom
Parkside Street West 24 hrs From Mark Street to Fuller
Street
Pearl Street
[Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
1974]
Both 24 hrs From Ambrose Street to Home
Street
Pierce Street Both 24 hrs From Elizabeth Avenue to
Belmont Drive
Pierce Street
[Added
5-22-2001 by
Ord. No.
3220]
Both 24 hrs From Elizabeth Avenue to
Davidson Avenue
Pine Street
[Added
2-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 3275;
repealed
11-26-2013 by
Ord. No.
4042-13]
Randolph Road Both 24 hrs From Weston Canal Road to
Schoolhouse Road
Rogers Avenue
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
3673]
North 24 hrs Clifton Street to Belmar Street
§ 226-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1016
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Roosevelt
Avenue [Added
2-8-2000 by
Ord. No.
3104]
Both 24 hrs Entire length
School Avenue East 24 hrs Entire length
Schoolhouse
Road
Both 24 hrs Entire length
Somerset Street North 24 hrs From the easterly curbline of
Main Street to a point 120 feet
easterly therefrom
South Dover
Avenue [Added
5-27-1998 by
Ord. No.
2084]
West 24 hrs From Somerset Street to a
point 50 feet northerly thereof
South Dover
Avenue [Added
5-27-1998 by
Ord. No.
2084]
East 24 hrs From Somerset Street to a
point 75 feet northerly thereof
South
Middlebush
Road
Both 24 hrs From Amwell Road to a point
100 feet south thereof
Stewart Avenue
[Added
8-10-1999 by
Ord. No.
3059]
Both All Entire length
Thomson
Parkway
Both 24 hrs From South Middlebush Road
to Amwell Road
Veronica
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Hamilton Street to Route
27
Viking Avenue
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
3673]
West 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to Rogers
Avenue
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:1017
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Waldorf Street
[Added
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 3673;
repealed
9-18-2007 by
Ord. No.
3716]
Waldorf Street Southwest24 hrs From Franklin Boulevard to a
point 100 feet northwesterly
thereof
Waldorf Street
[Added
5-22-2007 by
Ord. No.
3699]
West 24 hrs Franklin Boulevard to Lovers
Lane
Weston Canal
Road
Both 24 hrs From a point 50 feet southerly
of the southerly sideline of the
Weston/Manville Causeway to a
point 50 feet northerly of the
northerly sideline of Weston/
Manville Causeway
Weston Canal
Road
South 24 hrs Starting at the imaginary
intersection line of Randolph
Road and continuing west for
2,411 feet
Weston Canal
Road
Both 24 hrs From the easterly curb of
Cottontail Lane to a point 200
feet east thereof and from the
westerly curbline of Campus
Drive to a point 300 feet west
thereof
Willow Avenue Both 24 hrs From Easton Avenue and
extending 180 feet westerly
thereof
Willow Avenue Both 24 hrs From the southeast quadrant of
the Easton Avenue/Willow
Avenue intersection, both sides
for the entire length of the
jughandle
§ 226-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-10
1:1018
§ 226-11. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed on any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Willow Avenue
[Added
6-13-2002 by
Ord. No.
3292]
East 24 hrs From Fifteenth Street to the
northerly intersection of Willow
Avenue and Alton Drive
Willow Avenue
[Added
5-28-1996 by
Ord. No.
1959]
South 24 hrs From a point 252 feet south of
Fourteenth Street to a point
230 feet southerly thereof
Worlds Fair
Drive
Both 24 hrs Entire length
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in excess of four tons between
the hours specified upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
[Added 11-31-1997 by Ord. No. 2043; amended 6-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 3137]
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Churchill
Avenue
Both 24 hrs From Berry Street to Shirley
Avenue
Howard Avenue West 24 hrs From its intersection with Campus
Drive to its intersection with
McKinley Place
Howard Avenue East 24 hrs From its intersection with
McKinley Place to a point 238 feet
southerly thereof
Jerome Avenue Both 24 hrs From its terminus 375 feet south
of its intersection with McKinley
Place to its terminus 175 feet
north of its intersection with
McKinley Place
McKinley Place Both 24 hrs From its intersection with Howard
Avenue to its terminus 125 feet
east of its intersection with
Jerome Avenue
§ 226-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-11
1:1019
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Berger Street Both Two hours 4 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Buttonwood
Drive
Both Two hours 24 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Conerly Road
[Added
10-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 3331]
South 5 minutes 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
school
days
From Drake Road to a
point 375 feet easterly
thereof
Hamilton Street South Two hours 24 hrs From Home Street to
Ambrose Street
Heather Drive Both Two hours 24 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Hughes Road Both Two hours 24 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Lewis Street South 30 minutes 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
From Franklin
Boulevard to Norma
Avenue
Market Street
[Added
6-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 1900]
East 15 minutes 6:30 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 252 feet
south of the
intersection of Market
Street with Amwell
Road and running 25
feet southerly
therefrom
Renfro Road Both Two hours 24 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
§ 226-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-11
1:1020
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Somerset Street
[Added
5-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 1836]
Northwest15 minutes 24 hrs From Ambrose Street
to a point 75 feet
southeasterly thereof
Webster Road Both Two hours 24 hrs From the northerly
pavement edge of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard
to a point 100 feet
north thereof
§ 226-12. Parking prohibited for street cleaning. [Amended
6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4158-16]
§ 226-13. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described.
Name of Street Sides Location
Arlington Avenue East From Easton Avenue to the
northern boundary of Lot 51 as
depicted on the Tax Map of the
Township of Franklin
Arlington Avenue West From northern boundary of Lot 20
as depicted on the Tax Map of the
Township of Franklin to Rodney
Avenue
Baier Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Street to a point 250 feet
northerly thereof
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on the days
specified upon any streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Days Hours Location
Hamilton
Street
Westbound Monday 8:30 a.m. to
10:30 a.m.
Franklin
Boulevard to
New Brunswick
border
Hamilton
Street
Eastbound Tuesday 8:30 a.m. to
10:30 a.m.
Franklin
Boulevard to
New Brunswick
border
§ 226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-13
1:1021
Name of Street Sides Location
Baier Avenue East From Hamilton Street to Franklin
Boulevard
Baier Avenue [Added
5-24-2011 by Ord. No.
3933]
West From a point 172 feet north of the
extended northerly curbline of Park
Street to a point 210 feet north
thereof
Battle Place [Added
9-14-2010 by Ord. No.
3895]
South Entire length
Bayberry Drive Both From its beginning at New
Brunswick Road to its end at New
Brunswick Road
Berger Street Both From Arthur Avenue to Vanderbilt
Street
Berkley Place [Added
4-25-2006 by Ord. No.
3604]
South From Brookline Avenue to end
Berry Street Both From School Avenue to Churchill
Avenue
Berry Street [Added
11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
3797]
East From School Avenue to Camner
Avenue
Berry Street [Added
11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
3797]
West From a point 37 feet south of
Voorhees Avenue to Camner Avenue
Beverly Avenue West From Easton Avenue to a point 240
feet southerly
Canoe Lane [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
East Entire length
Castleton Avenue [Added
4-8-1998 by Ord. No.
2070]
West From Easton Avenue to the
southerly lot line of Lot 5 in Block
327 as depicted on the Tax Map of
the Township of Franklin
Castleton Avenue [Added
5-23-2006 by Ord. No.
3610]
West From the southerly lot limit of Lot
55 in Block 383 to the northerly lot
limit of Lot 45 in Block 383 as
depicted on the Tax Map of the
Township of Franklin
§ 226-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-13
1:1022
Name of Street Sides Location
Castleton Avenue [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3857]
West From a point 47 feet, three inches,
north of the northerly curbline/road
edge of Grandview Avenue to a
point 25 feet south of the southerly
curbline/road edge of Grandview
Avenue
Campus Drive Both From Elizabeth Avenue to
Cottontail Lane
Church Street East From State Route 27 to Laurel
Avenue
Church Street West From Route 27 and extending 134
feet north thereof
Cobblers Circle [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Even
house
numbers
Entire length
Cooper Avenue South From Highland Avenue easterly to
Whittier Avenue
Cortelyou Lane Both From South Middlebush Road to
Route 27
Dekalb Street [Added
3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
3673 ]
East From a point 311 feet north of the
northerly edge of Rogers Avenue to
a point 311 feet northerly thereof
Dekalb Street [Added
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.
3477; repealed
10-28-2008 by Ord. No.
3790]
Elm Street North From Canal Street to Wortman
Street
Ethel Street [Added
11-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1798]
North From Elizabeth Avenue to Belmont
Drive
Fourth Street Both From Hollywood Avenue to Willow
Avenue
Franklin Boulevard North From Norma Avenue to Carmen
Street
Franklin Boulevard Both From a point 280 feet north of
Hamilton Street to a point 250 feet
south of Highland Avenue
Fuller Street [Added
6-25-2013 by Ord. No.
4024-13]
East From Booker Street to Franklin
Boulevard
§ 226-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-13
1:1023
Name of Street Sides Location
Hadler Drive East From Hamilton Street to a point
100 feet northerly thereof
Hamilton Street North From the New Brunswick city line
to Hawthorne Drive
Hamilton Street South From the New Brunswick city line
to Brookline Avenue
Hamilton Street North From Kee Avenue to North
Lawrence Avenue
Hamilton Street North From a point 200 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Baier Avenue to
a point 250 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Baier Avenue
Hamilton Street South From Dewald Avenue to a point 250
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Baier Avenue
Hamilton Street North From Matilda Avenue to a point 300
feet westerly thereof
Hamilton Street North From Norma Avenue to a point 80
feet easterly thereof
Hawthorne Drive West From Whittier Avenue to 300 feet
before the intersection of
Hawthorne Drive and the westerly
end of Poe Avenue
Hawthorne Drive West From Hamilton Street to Whittier
Avenue
Henry Street West From Somerset Street to Hamilton
Street
Highland Avenue [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
4162-16]
Both From Hamilton Street to Green
Street
Highland Avenue West From Pine Grove Avenue to Park
Street
Home Street West From Somerset Street to Hamilton
Street
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Frontage Rd. Block 403/
Lots 7, 8 and 9 [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3271]
SoutheastBeginning at the intersection of the
most southerly access of the
Frontage Road and the
northwesterly side of John F.
Kennedy Boulevard and ending at
the intersection of the most
northerly access of the Frontage
Road and the northwesterly side of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
§ 226-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-13
1:1024
Name of Street Sides Location
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Frontage Rd. Block 403/
Lots 7,8 and 9
South Beginning at the intersection of the
southerly side of the Frontage Road
and the northwesterly side of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard and
extending westerly 50 feet from
said intersection. [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No. 3271]
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Frontage Rd. Block 403/
Lots 7, 8 and 9 [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3271]
North Beginning at the intersection of the
northerly side of the Frontage Road
and the northwesterly side of John
F. Kennedy Boulevard and
extending westerly 60 feet from
said intersection.
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Frontage Rd. Block 365/
Lots 20-23 [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3271]
NorthwestBeginning at the intersection of the
most southerly access of Frontage
Road and the southeasterly side of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard and
ending at the intersection of the
most northerly access of Frontage
Road and the southeasterly side of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Frontage Rd. Block 374/
Lots 2-5 [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3271]
NorthwestBeginning at the intersection of the
most southerly access of the
Frontage Road and the
southeasterly side of John F.
Kennedy Boulevard and ending at
the intersection of the most
northerly access of the Frontage
Road and the southeasterly side of
John F. Kennedy Boulevard
Kathryn Street [Added
2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3526]
North From Douglas Avenue to a point 60
feet westerly thereof
Lakeside Road [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
3738]
South From Easton Avenue to end
Lakeside Road [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
3738]
North From First Street to end
Laurel Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of State
Highway Route 27 to a point 100
feet west thereof
Lewis Street North From Franklin Boulevard to Norma
Avenue
§ 226-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-13
1:1025
Name of Street Sides Location
Lewis Street North From Frederick Street and Francis
Street
Lillian Street [Added
2-9-2010 by Ord. No.
3864]
South From the southwest corner of
Lillian Street and Henry Street
west to the terminus of Lillian
Street
MacAfee Road [Added
3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3534]
West From a point 909 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Berger street
and continuing 188 feet northerly
therefrom
Market Street East From Livingston Avenue to Elm
Street
Market Street West From Amwell Road to Bradley
Street
Martin Street South From Franklin Boulevard to Norma
Avenue
Matilda Avenue [Added
2-26-2002 by Ord. No.
3275; amended
11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
4042-13]
Both From Hamilton Street to Ray Street
Mettlers Lane Both From Amwell Road to Weston Road
Millstone Road West From Somerset Street to Hamilton
Street
Mine Brook Lane [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
West Entire length
New Brunswick Road Both From Cedar Grove Road to
Elizabeth Avenue
North Dover Avenue Both From Hamilton Street to a point
116 feet northerly thereof
Oakland Avenue [Added
5-10-1994 by Ord. No.
1835]
NorthwestFrom Easton Avenue to a point 125
feet southwesterly thereof
Olcott Street [Added
6-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2093]
East From DeBow Street to Amwell Road
Park Street North From Highland Avenue to a point
600 feet westerly thereof
Pershing Avenue [Added
5-10-1994 by Ord. No.
1832]
West From Victor Street to Mark Street
§ 226-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-13
1:1026
Name of Street Sides Location
Phillips Road South
and east
From Matilda Avenue to Franklin
Boulevard
Phillips Road West From a point 1,106 feet easterly of
the easterly side line of Matilda
Avenue to a point 1,465 feet
westerly of the easterly intersection
of Phillips Road with the southerly
side line of Franklin Boulevard
Pine Street Both From Matilda Avenue to Ray Street
Seely's Run [Added
8-12-2003 by Ord. No.
3390]
East Beginning at a point 435 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Rolling
Road and continuing 250 feet
therefrom
Shaw Drive North From Route 27 to a point 50 feet
northwesterly thereof
South Dover Road West From Somerset Street to Myrtle
Avenue
Stothoff Street Both From Matilda Avenue to a point 278
feet westerly thereof
Susan Drive East Beginning 432 feet from the
northerly curbline of Denise Court
to Amwell Road
Susan Drive West From the intersection of Clyde
Road to a point northwesterly of
1,085 feet plus or minus, such point
being the property line between
Lots 7 and 8, Block 87.03
Suydam Road Both From South Middlebush Road to
Canal Road
Ten Mile Run Boulevard
[Added 10-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 3902]
Both Entire length
Timberhill Drive [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Odd
house
numbers
Entire length
Union Avenue North From Church Street to a point 300
feet easterly thereof
Union Avenue South From Church Street to Laurel
Avenue
Weston/Manville Causeway North Entire length
William Street East From Amwell Road to Bradley
Avenue
§ 226-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-13
1:1027
Name of Street Sides Location
Winston Drive From Foxwood Drive to a point 176
feet northerly thereof
Yardley Court [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
North Entire length
§ 226-14. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified of any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
B. For purposes of this section, weekends shall be defined as Saturdays
and Sundays and holidays shall be defined as New Years Day, Martin
Luther Kings Birthday, President's Day, Good Friday, Memoria1 Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, General Election Day,
Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Thanksgiving Friday and Christmas
Day.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Baylor Street
[Added
10-14-1998
by Ord. No.
3013]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school Days
From its intersection with
Claremont Road to a
point 198 feet
northeasterly thereof
Churchill
Avenue
[Repealed
6-5-2000 by
Ord. No.
3137]
Berry to Shirley
Conerly Road
[Added
10-22-2002
by Ord. No.
3331]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From a point 375 feet
easterly of Drake Road to
a point 500 feet easterly
thereof
Conerly Road
[Added
10-22-2002
by Ord. No.
3331]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From Drake Road to a
point 600 feet easterly
thereof
Francis Street East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Hamilton Street to
Lewis Street
§ 226-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-14
1:1028
§ 226-15. Overnight parking. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3677]
§ 226-16. Routes for trucks over tons.
(Reserved)
§ 226-17. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Frederick
Street
East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Hamilton Street to
Lewis Street
Hawthorne
Drive
West 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From Hamilton Street to
Whittier Avenue
Leupp Lane East 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Layne Road
Lewis Street South 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
From Franklin Boulevard
to Norma Avenue
Martin Street North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From 235.87 feet easterly
of Franklin Boulevard to
Norma Avenue
MacAfee Road Southeast8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From Berger Street to
Boulder Lane
A. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is designed primarily to
transport a person for primarily recreational instead of transportation
purposes, or a vehicle that serves as a mobile, temporary dwelling. This
may include a vehicle that is self-propelled, towed or carried by another
vehicle, but shall not include camper caps that fit over pickup trucks.
This term shall also include the following: watercraft, motor homes,
travel trailers, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park the following described
vehicles upon any streets in the Township between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
(1) Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 12,500 pounds,
any trailer or semitrailer, or any omnibus.
(2) All recreation vehicles, boat trailers, utility trailers, landscaping
trailers or any other type of trailer requiring a New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission registration plate, whether such registration
plates are considered private or commercial.
(3) Any unattached trailer regardless of the status of the registration.
§ 226-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-17
1:1029
A. Vehicles over the registered gross weights set forth are excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street WeightLocations
Abbott Road 6 tons From Drake Road to Belmar Street
Annapolis Street
[Added 4-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 3372]
4 tons From Churchill Avenue to Hamilton
Street
Arden Street 4 tons Entire length
Baier Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Beekman Road
[Added 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 3565]
4 tons Entire length
Bennetts Lane 4 tons From South Middlebush Road to Route
27
Bennington Parkway 4 tons Entire length, from Route 27 to its
terminus west of Meadow Avenue
Berger Street 6 tons Entire length, from Vanderbilt Avenue
to its terminus
Berry Street [Added
4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 3372]
4 tons From Churchill Avenue to School
Avenue
Blackwell's Mills Road
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
20
tons
Entire length
Bloomfield Avenue 6 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
Appleman Road
Brookline Avenue 4 tons From Hamilton Street to Drake Street
Bunker Hill Road
[Added 2-11-2020 by
Ord. No. 4313-20]
5 tons Entire length
Butler Road [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Buttonwood Drive 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Berger Street
Canal Road [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Between Elm Street and the northerly
curbline of Bunker Hill Road
§ 226-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-17
1:1030
Name of Street WeightLocations
Canal Road 4 tons From its intersection with the
northerly side line of Georgetown-
Franklin Turnpike (Route 518) to its
intersection with the southerly side
line of Griggstown Causeway, a
distance of approximately 14,500 feet
Canal Road [Added
2-11-2020 by Ord.
No. 4313-20]
5 tons From Griggstown Causeway to Bunker
Hill Road
Carroll Place [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Chester Avenue
[Added 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 3421]
4 tons Between Hamilton Street and Victor
Street
Church Street 4 tons In the Village of Kingston, entire
length, from Laurel Avenue to State
Highway 27
Churchill Avenue
[Added 4-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 3372]
4 tons From New Jersey Route 27 to Veronica
Avenue
Cortelyou Lane 4 tons Entire length
Culver Street 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
Dahmer Road 4 tons Entire length
Davidson Avenue [Added 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3755; repealed
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3835]
Debow Street 4 tons Entire length
Doria Road 4 tons Amwell Road to Smith Road
Easton Avenue/
Frontage Road [Added
5-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 2083]
4 tons Entire length, Frontage Road off
Easton Avenue between Foxwood
Drive and Castleton Avenue
Ellen Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Between Franklin Boulevard and Davis
Avenue
Field Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Foxwood Drive 4 tons From the Easton/Foxwood Drive
jughandle to Winston Drive
§ 226-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-17
1:1031
Name of Street WeightLocations
Frank Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Between Franklin Boulevard and
Millstone Road
Franklin Street
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Fuller Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Between Franklin Boulevard and
Irving Street
Griggstown Causeway
[Added 2-11-2020 by
Ord. No. 4313-20]
5 tons Entire length
Grouser Road [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Hadler Drive 6 tons Entire length, from Hamilton Street to
Berger Street
Heather Drive 6 tons From John F. Kennedy Boulevard to
Lilac Lane
Henry Street 4 tons Entire length, from Hamilton Street to
Somerset Street
Holly Street Avenue 4 tons Entire length, from Franklin Boulevard
to Hillcrest
Hollywood Avenue 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
Home Street 4 tons From Hamilton Street to Somerset
Street
Howard Avenue
[Added 10-28-1997
by Ord. No. 2042]
4 tons From Campus Drive to McKinley Place
Hughes Road 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Renfro Road
Irving Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Jacques Lane 4 tons Entire length
John E. Busch Ave 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
Juliet Avenue [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
§ 226-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-17
1:1032
Name of Street WeightLocations
Kathryn Street 4 tons Entire length, from Douglas Avenue to
Newport Avenue
Kossuth Street 4 tons Entire length
Lake Avenue 6 tons Entire length, from Hamilton Street to
Kuhn Street
Lakeside Road 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
Leupp Lane 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to John F. Kennedy
Boulevard
Link Road 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Drake Road
Magnolia Road
[Added 5-11-2004 by
Ord. No. 3456]
6 tons Entire length
Main Street 4 tons Entire length
Marcy Street 4 tons Entire length
Market Street [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Matilda Avenue
[Added 2-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 3275]
4 tons From Hamilton Street to its
southeasterly terminus at Pine Street.
(Vehicles entering and exiting the
business located on Lot 63 in Block
154, 60 Mark Street, having no means
of access except Matilda Avenue, are
exempt from these provisions.)
Meister Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Millstone Road 4 tons Entire length
Myrtle Avenue 4 tons Entire length
New Brunswick Road [Amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3755;
repealed 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3835]
Newport Avenue
[Added 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 3421]
4 tons Entire length
Oak Place [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Olcott Street 4 tons Entire length
§ 226-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-17
1:1033
Name of Street WeightLocations
Old Georgetown Road
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Old Vliet Road [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Park Street 4 tons From Highland Avenue to Baier
Avenue
Pershing Avenue
[Added 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 3421]
4 tons Between Hamilton Street and Mark
Street
Pine Street [Added
2-26-2002 by Ord.
No. 3275]
4 tons From Somerset Street to its
northeasterly terminus at Matilda
Avenue
Pine Grove Ave 4 tons Entire length
Prospect Street
[Added 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 3421]
4 tons Entire length
Railroad Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Ralph Street 4 tons From Norma Avenue easterly to
Matilda Avenue
Ray Street [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Renfro Road 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to its terminus
Roberts Road 4 tons Entire length
Rose Street 4 tons Entire length, from Douglas Avenue to
Sydney Place
Schoolhouse Road 4 tons From Randolph Road to Weston Canal
Road
Sebring Road 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Hadler Drive
Shaw Drive [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Shaw Drive 4 tons Entire length, from Union Street to
Route 27
Shirley Avenue
[Added 4-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 3372]
4 tons From Churchill Avenue to Hamilton
Street
§ 226-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-17
1:1034
Name of Street WeightLocations
Skillman's Lane
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Smith Road 4 tons Entire length, from Olcott Street to
Amwell Road
Society Hill Boulevard
[Added 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 3565]
4 tons Entire length
South Dover Avenue
[Added 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 3421]
4 tons Entire length
South Lawrence
Avenue [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Stewart Avenue
[Added 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 3565]
4 tone Entire length
Susan Drive 4 tons Entire length, from Amwell Road to
Clyde Road
Suydam Road [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Sycamore Place
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Sydney Place [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
3421]
4 tons Entire length
Tunnell Road 6 tons Entire length from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Drake
Union Street 4 tons Entire length, from Church Street to
Shaw Drive
Van Cleef Road
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
20
tons
Entire length
Vliet Road 4 tons Entire length, from Route 27, through
its intersection with South Middlebush
Road to its intersection with
Claremont Road
Walnut Street 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
§ 226-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-17
1:1035
§ 226-18. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted
on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street WeightLocations
Webster Road 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to its terminus
Wheeler Place 4 tons From the intersection of Hamilton
Street to the intersection of Churchill
Avenue
William Street [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
Willow Avenue 4 tons Entire length, from Easton Avenue to
its terminus
Wilson Road 4 tons From Amwell Road to Treptow Road
Wilson Road 4 tons From Amwell Road to Smith Road
Winston Drive 6 tons Entire length, from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Appleman Road
Wortman Street
[Added 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3538]
4 tons Entire length
B. Commercial vehicles over the registered gross weights set forth are
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets. [Added 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 3835]
Name of Street WeightLocations
Davidson Avenue 4 tons Between Pierce Street and New
Brunswick Road
New Brunswick Road 4 tons Between John F. Kennedy Boulevard
and Elizabeth Avenue (CR 621)
Old New Brunswick
Road
4 tons Between New Brunswick Road and the
northerly terminus of municipal
jurisdiction
§ 226-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-18
1:1036
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Ambrose Street Southbound From Hamilton
Street to
Somerset Street
(entire length)
West side only
Arden Street
[Added
11-26-1991 by
Ord. No. 2680]
Westbound From Holly Street
to Hillcrest
Avenue
Both sides
Arthur Avenue Southbound From Franklin
High School
parking lot exit to
Hamilton Street
(entire length)
Both sides
Beekman Road
[Added
8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 3059]
Southbound From the
northerly curbline
of Route 27 to a
point 365 feet in
the northerly
direction
Neither side
Church Street Northbound From Route 27 to
Laurel Avenue
West side only
Dewald Avenue Northbound From Hamilton
Street to Lewis
Street
Both sides
Francis Street Northbound From Hamilton
Street to Lewis
Street (entire
length)
West side, all times;
east side, except 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Frank Street Westbound From Franklin
Boulevard west to
Booker Street
Both sides
Frederick Street Southbound From Lewis Street
to Hamilton Street
(entire length)
West side, all times;
east side, except 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Gurley Street Southbound From School
Avenue to
Churchill Avenue
Both sides
Home Street Northbound From Somerset
Street to Hamilton
Street
East side only
Lewis Street Eastbound From Franklin
Boulevard to
Norma Avenue
South side only
§ 226-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-18
1:1037
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Pine Street
[Added
2-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 3275]
Northbound From Ray Street
to Matilda Avenue
Neither side
Thomson
Parkway
Eastbound From South
Middlebush Road
to Amwell Road
Neither side
Vanderbilt Street Northbound From Hamilton
Street to the
Franklin High
School parking lot
entrance (entire
length)
Both sides
§ 226-19. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Baier Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Beekman Road [Added
10-8-1999 by Ord. No.
3059]
Between NJ Highway Route 27 to South
Middlebush Road
Belmar Street Between Abbott Road and Franklin
Boulevard
Belmont Drive [Added
5-27-1998 by Ord. No.
2085]
Between School House Road and Campus
Drive
Bennington Parkway Between Route 27 and its northwesterly
terminus
Berger Street Between John F. Kennedy Boulevard and its
westerly terminus
Berger Street Between John F. Kennedy Boulevard and
Girard Avenue
Blackwells Mills Entire length
Buffa Drive [Added
1-11-2005 by Ord. 3516]
Between South Middlebush Road (CR No.
615) and 50 feet of the easterly curbline of
Joan Road.
Canal Road Between Georgetown/Franklin Turnpike
and Elm Street
§ 226-18 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-19
1:1038
Name of Street Limits
Cedar Avenue [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
3354]
Between Mercury Street and the Borough
of South Bound Brook corporate line-
Township of Franklin corporate line
Churchill Avenue Between Route 27 and Veronica Avenue
Clover Place [Added
8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
3233]
Between Route 27 and Eden Street
Cottontail Lane [Repealed
12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
4260-18]
Culver Street Entire length
DeMott Lane Between Amwell Road and Easton Avenue
Douglas Avenue Between Somerset Street and Hamilton
Street
Drake Road From its most northerly intersection with
Winston Drive to its most southerly
intersection
Fordham Road [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
3354]
Between Marcy Street and its southerly
terminus
Foxwood Drive Between Easton Avenue and Winston Drive
Gifford Road [Added
8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
4290-19]
Entire length
Girard Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Belmar
Street
Highland Avenue Between Franklin Boulevard and Irvington
Avenue
Highland Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Hillcrest Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Arden Street
Hollywood Avenue Entire length
John E. Busch Ave Entire length
Kennedy Boulevard Between Hamilton Street and Easton
Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
3354]
Between Regent Street and the Borough of
South Bound Brook corporate line-
Township of Franklin corporate line
Marcy Street Between its southerly terminus and
Fordham Road [Added 1-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 3354]
§ 226-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-19
1:1039
Name of Street Limits
Marcy Street Between Fordham Road and Borough of
South Bound Brook Corporate Line —
Township of Franklin Corporate Line
[Added 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 3354]
Martino Drive Between DeMott Lane and Wilson Road
Matilda Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Millstone Road Between Somerset Street and Hamilton
Street
New Brunswick Road Between DeMott Lane and Cedar Grove
Road
Norma Avenue Between Hamilton Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Oakland Avenue Between Easton Avenue and Highland
Avenue
Pine Grove Avenue Entire length
Ray Street Between Douglas Avenue and Pine Street
Ridge Boulevard [Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3281]
From 50 feet east of Forest Avenue (east
intersection) to Stockton Avenue. Yield
controls to be established on Forest Avenue
southbound
Rose Street [Added
2-11-2003 by Ord. No.
3358]
From Douglas Avenue to Sydney Place
Smith Road [Added
8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
3233]
Between Olcott Street and 50 feet west of
Doria Road
Stewart Avenue [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
3059]
Between NJ Highway Route 27 and
Beekman Road
Stockton Avenue [Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3281]
From 50 feet south of Brentwood
Boulevard to 50 feet north of Ridge
Boulevard
Thomas Road [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
3354]
Between Marcy Street and its southerly
terminus
Walnut Avenue Entire length
Willow Avenue Entire length
Wilson Road [Added
8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
3233]
Between Amwell Road and Treptow Road
§ 226-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-19
1:1040
Name of Street Limits
Winston Drive Between John F. Kennedy Boulevard and
the junction of Appleman and Abbott Road
§ 226-20. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Abbott Road and Johnson
Road
Johnson Road
Adams Street and Madison
Avenue [Added 6-10-2010by
Ord. No. 3884]
Madison Avenue
Arden Street and Holly Street Arden Street
Austin Avenue and Grandview
Avenue [Added
10-14-2008by Ord. No.
3787]
Grandview Avenue
Bartle Road and Hadler Drive
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Bartle Road
Bartle Road and Kuhn Street
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Bartle Road
Belmont Drive and Pierce
Street [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1871; amended
11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3857160; 12-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 4260-18]
All approaches
Berry Street and Baker Street
[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 3546]
Baker Street
Berry Street and Blair Street
[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 3546]
Blair Street
Berry Street and Camner
Avenue [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Camner Avenue
160. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that the implementation of removing stop signs on
Pierce Street shall be effective 3-14-2010.
§ 226-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1041
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Berry Street and Ellen Street
[Added 5-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 3546]
Ellen Street
Berry Street and School
Avenue [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
School Avenue
Berry Street and Spruce
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Spruce Street
Berry Street and Voorhees
Avenue [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Voorhees Avenue
Beverly Avenue and
Grandview Avenue [Added
10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
3787]
Grandview Avenue
Blackwells Mills Road and
Canal Road
Both Blackwells Mills Road and Canal
Road, all approaches
Blair Avenue and Gurley
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Gurley Street
Blake Avenue and Reeves
Street
Reeves Street
Bloomfield Avenue and
Appleman Road
Bloomfield Avenue
Bloomfield Avenue and
Elmwood Street [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Elmwood Street
Booker Street and Frank
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Booker Street
Burns Street and Kee Avenue
[Added 10-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 3789]
Kee Avenue
Burns Street and Miller
Avenue [Added 10-28-2008
by Ord. No. 3789]
Miller Avenue
Camner Avenue and Frank
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Frank Street
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1042
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Camner Avenue and Fuller
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Camner Avenue
Camner Avenue and Gurley
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Gurley Street
Castleton Avenue and
Grandview Avenue [Added
10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
3787]
Grandview Avenue
Cedar Avenue and Mercury
Street
Mercury Street facing westbound traffic
Cedar Brook Drive and
Heather Drive [Added
10-9-2007 by Ord. No.
3717]
Cedar Brook Drive
Chester Street and Victor
Street
Chester Street
Clyde Road and Commerce
Drive
Commerce Drive
Clyde Road and Jiffy Road Jiffy Road
Cobblers Circle and Mine
Brook Lane [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Mine Brook Lane
Codington Avenue and
Annapolis Street
Codington Avenue
Codington Avenue and
Wheeler Street
Codington Avenue
Colonial Drive and Mettlers
Road
Colonial Drive where it (Colonial Park)
intersects to Mettlers Road
Cooper Avenue and
Hawthorne Drive [Added
2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
3961]
Hawthorne Drive
Cooper Avenue and Whittier
Avenue [Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3961]
Whittier Avenue
Cottontail Lane and Pierce
Street [Added 12-11-2018
by Ord. No. 4260-18]
All approaches
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1043
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Darwin Road and Norfolk
Road [Added 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 3354]
Darwin Road
Davidson Avenue and Pierce
Street [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1871]
Pierce Street
Davis Avenue and Battle Place
[Added 3-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3866]
Battle Place
Davis Avenue and Ellen Street
[Added 3-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3866]
Ellen Street
Davis Avenue and Frank
Street
Frank Street
Davis Avenue and Fuller
Street [Added 3-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 3866]
Davis Avenue
Dekalb Street and Rogers
Avenue [Added 12-02-1993
by Ord. No. 1802]
Rogers Avenue
Delmonico Avenue and
Annapolis Street
Delmonico Avenue
Delmonico Avenue and
Wheeler Street
Delmonico Avenue
Dennett Road and Flower
Road [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 3642]
Dennett Road
Dennett Road and Hadler
Drive [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 3642]
Dennett Road
Elm Street and Franklin
Street [Added 6-10-2010by
Ord. No. 3884]
Franklin Street
Elm Street and William Street
[Added 6-10-2010by Ord.
No. 3884]
William Street
Equator Avenue and Samuel
Place
Equator Avenue at Samuel Place, both
sides
Flower Road and Sebring
Road [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 3642]
Flower Road
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1044
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Forest Avenue and Brentwood
Blvd [Added 3-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 3281]
Brentwood Boulevard, westbound
Fort Street and Nassau Street
[Added 1-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 3354]
Fort Street
Franklin Street and Welsh’s
Lane [Added 6-10-2010by
Ord. No. 3884]
Welsh’s Lane
Frank Street and Alex Place
[Added 3-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3866]
Alex Place
Fuller Street and Booker
Street
Booker Street at its intersection with
Fuller Street
Girard Avenue and Elmwood
Street
Girard Avenue
Girard Avenue and Fairmount
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Fairmount Avenue
Hawthorne Drive and Byron
Place [Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3961]
Byron Place
Hawthorne Drive and Cooper
Avenue (eastern intersection)
[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 3961]
Cooper Avenue
Hawthorne Drive and Poe
Avenue (eastern intersection)
[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 3961]
Poe Avenue
Hawthorne Drive and Poe
Avenue (western intersection)
[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 3961]
Poe Avenue
Hawthorne Drive and Whittier
Avenue (eastern intersection)
[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 3961]
Whittier Avenue
Heather Drive and Rolling
Road [Added 10-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3717]
Heather Drive
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1045
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Henry Street and Dunbar
Street [Added 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3706]
Dunbar Street
Henry Street and Kassul Place
[Added 8-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 3706]
Kassul Place
Henry Street and Lillian
Street [Added 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3706]
Lillian Street
Highland Avenue and
Irvington Avenue
Highland Avenue
Hill Avenue and Kuhn Street
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Hill Avenue
Hill Avenue and Lake Avenue
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Hill Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue and Dumont
Street [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Dumont Street
Hillcrest Avenue and Elmwood
Street [Amended 8-11-2009
by Ord. No. 3840]
Elmwood Street
Hillcrest Avenue and
Fairmount Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Fairmount Avenue
Hollywood Avenue and 15th
Street
Hollywood Avenue
Hughes Road and Chandler
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Chandler Road
Hughes Road and Landry
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Landry Road
Hughes Road and Larsen Road
[Added 5-12-2009 by Ord.
No. 3825]
On Larsen Road
Hughes Road and Sherman
Circle [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Sherman Circle (North)
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1046
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Hughes Road and Sherman
Circle [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Sherman Circle (South)
Hughes Road and Summerall
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Summerall Road
Irvington Avenue and Carmen
Street [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Carmen Street
Irvington Avenue and Dumont
Street [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Dumont Street
Irvington Avenue and
Elmwood Street [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Elmwood Street
Irvington Avenue and
Fairmount Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Fairmount Avenue
Irvington Avenue and
Highland Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Highland Avenue
Kee Avenue and Green Street Green Street
Kossuth Street and Kent
Street [Added 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3706]
Kent Street
Kossuth Street and Lee Drive
[Added 8-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 3706]
Lee Drive
Kossuth Street and Lillian
Street [Added 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3706]
Lillian Street
Kossuth Street and Oliver
Street [Added 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3706]
Oliver Street
Kuhn Street and Hadler Drive
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Kuhn Street
Lake Avenue and Hill Avenue Hill Avenue
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1047
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Lake Avenue and Kuhn Street
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Lake Avenue
Lake Avenue and Spring
Street
Spring Street
Lakeside Road and First
Street [Added 2-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 3864]
First Street
Landry Road and Tripplet
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Tripplet Road
Layne Road and Kyle Road
[Added 6-29-2006 by Ord.
No. 3620]
Kyle Road
Leupp Lane and Layne Road
[Added 6-29-2006 by Ord.
No. 3620]
Layne Road
Leupp Lane and Tamarack
Road [Added 6-29-2006 by
Ord. No. 3620]
Tamarack Road
Liberty Lane and Colony Court
[Added 10-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 3717]
Liberty Lane
Liberty Lane and Rolling Road
[Added 10-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 3717]
Liberty Lane
Livingston Avenue and
Franklin Street
Franklin Street
Livingston Avenue and William
Street
William Street
Madison Avenue and Hall
Street [Added 6-10-2010by
Ord. No. 3884]
Hall Street
Magnolia Road and
Buttonwood Drive
Magnolia Road
Main Street and Lillian Street Lillian Street
Marcy Street and Fordham
Road
The near right side of the westerly
approach of Marcy Street facing
eastbound traffic
Market Street and Bradley
Avenue [Added 6-10-2010by
Ord. No. 3884]
Bradley Avenue
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1048
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Market Street and Elm Street Market Street at the northwest corner
Market Street and Livingston
Avenue [Added 6-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 3884]
Livingston Avenue
McGuffy Avenue and Wade
Avenue
McGuffy Avenue
Memorial Drive and Cottontail
Lane [Added 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 4260-18]
Memorial Drive
Mettlers Road and Weston
Road [Added 10-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 4085-14]
All approaches
Miller Avenue and Green
Street [Amended
10-28-2008 by Ord. No.
3789]
Miller Avenue
Myrtle Avenue and South
Dover Ave
South Dover Avenue
Nassau Avenue and Griggs
Street [Added 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 3354]
Nassau Avenue
Norris Road and Rolling Road
[Added 10-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 3717]
Norris Road
North Dover Avenue and
Vassar Street
Vassar Street
North Lawrence Avenue and
Vassar Street [Added
5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1958]
Vassar Street
Olcott Street and Smith Road Smith Road
Old Georgetown Road and
Carroll Place [Added
10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
3787]
Carroll Place
Parkside Street and Fuller
Street
Parkside Street
Parkside Street and Mark
Street
Parkside Street
Park Street and Lafayette
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Lafayette Avenue
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1049
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Park Street and North Dover
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
North Dover Avenue
Park Street and North
Lawrence Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
North Lawrence Avenue
Pershing Avenue and Mark
Street
Pershing Avenue
Prospect Street and Rose Street [Repealed 2-11-2003 by Ord. No.
3358]
Ralph Street and Lafayette
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Lafayette Avenue
Ralph Street and North Dover
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Ralph Street
Ralph Street and North
Lawrence Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Ralph Street
Randolph Road and Pierce
Street [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1871]
Pierce Street
Renfro Road and Hughes Road
[Added 5-12-2009 by Ord.
No. 3825]
On Hughes Road
Renfro Road and Larsen Road
[Added 5-12-2009 by Ord.
No. 3825]
On Larsen Road
Rolling Road and Cedar Brook
Drive [Added 10-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3717]
Rolling Road
Sebring Road and Hadler
Drive [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 3642]
Sebring Road
Seelys Run and Cedar Brook
Drive [Added 10-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3717]
Seelys Run
Seelys Run and Rolling Road
[Added 10-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 3717]
Seelys Run
Shaw Drive and Union Street Shaw Drive
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1050
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Spring Street and Kuhn Street
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3642]
Kuhn Street
Summerall Road and Tripplet
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Tripplet Road
Sunset Avenue and Brentwood
Boulevard [Added 3/12/2002
by Ord. No. 3281]
Facing Brentwood Boulevard westbound
Sunset Avenue and Brentwood
Boulevard [Added 3/12/2002
by Ord. No. 3281]
Facing Brentwood Boulevard eastbound
Sydney Place and Rose Street
[Added 2-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 3358]
Facing Rose Street
Timberhill Drive and Canoe
Lane [Added 10-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 3902]
Canoe Lane
Timberhill Drive and Cobblers
Circle [Added 10-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 3902]
Cobblers Circle
Timberhill Drive and Mine
Brook Lane [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Mine Brook Lane
Timberhill Drive and Ten Mile
Run Boulevard [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Ten Mile Run Boulevard
Timberhill Drive and
Timberhill Drive [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3902]
Timberhill Drive
Timberhill Drive and Yardley
Court [Added 10-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 3902]
Yardley Court
Treptow/Martino and Willow/
Wilson
Willow Avenue/Wilson Road
Varga Lane and Cottontail
Lane [Added 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 4260-18]
Varga Lane
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:1051
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Vassar Street and Lafayette
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
Lafayette Avenue
Vassar Street and North Dover
Avenue [Added 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 3840]
North Dover Avenue
Vassar Street and North
Lawrence Avenue [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
3840]
Vassar Street
Victor Street and Pershing
Avenue
Victor Street
Voorhees Avenue and Gurley
Street [Added 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3546]
Gurley Street
Wade Avenue and Charles
Street
Charles Street
Waldorf Street and Rogers
Avenue
Waldorf Street
Webster Road and Landry
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Landry Road
Webster Road and Summerall
Road [Added 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 3825]
On Summerall Road
Webster Road and Vince Road
[Added 5-12-2009 by Ord.
No. 3825]
On Vince Road
West Point Avenue and Dutton
Street
Dutton Street
Whittier Avenue and Winslow
Avenue [Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3961]
Winslow Avenue
Whittier Avenue and Lowell
Place [Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3961]
Lowell Place
William Street and Bradley
Avenue [Added 6-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 3884]
Bradley Avenue
Wortman Street and Elm
Street [Added 6-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 3884]
Elm Street
§ 226-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-20
1:1052
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Wortman Street and
Livingston Avenue [Added
6-10-2010 by Ord. No.
3884]
Livingston Avenue
Wortman Street and Welsh's
Lane
Welsh's Lane
§ 226-21. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On:
Abbott Road and Kingsbridge
Road
Signs having sides 36 inches in length shall
be installed on Kingsbridge Road
Canal Road and Suydam Road Canal Road facing northbound traffic
Forest Avenue and Brentwood
Boulevard [Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
3281]
Facing Brentwood Boulevard eastbound
Hawthorne Drive and Cooper
Avenue (northerly
intersection) [Repealed
2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
3961]
Winston Road/Appleman
Road and Appleman Road
Easterly approach of Appleman Road
facing westbound traffic
§ 226-22. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a turn at any locations listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Amwell Road and
Charles Street [Added
5-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 3610]
Left From Charles Street southbound to
Amwell Road eastbound between
the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. -
Mondays through Fridays
Amwell Road and
French Street [Added
5-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 3610]
Left From French Street southbound to
Amwell Road eastbound between
the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. -
Mondays through Fridays
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-22
1:1053
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Amwell Road and
McGuffy Avenue
[Added 5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
Left From McGuffy Avenue southbound
to Amwell Road eastbound between
the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. -
Mondays through Fridays
Amwell Road and
Wilson Road [Added
5-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 3610]
Left From Wilson Road southbound to
Amwell Road eastbound between
the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. -
Mondays through Fridays
Berger Street and
Arthur Street
Left Westbound on Berger Street to
southbound on Arthur Street
Cedar Grove Lane
[Added 2-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3732]
Left From driveway to Cedar Grove Lane
southbound between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m. (driveway No. 152)
DeMott Lane and
Easton Avenue
U-turn From the westerly curbline of
Easton Avenue and extending 400
feet west thereof onto DeMott Lane
Easton Avenue and
Culver Street [Added
11-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 4255-18]
Left From Culver Street eastbound to
Easton Avenue northbound
Easton Avenue [Added
2-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 3732]
Left From exit driveway to Easton
Avenue northbound (exit driveway
No. 1714)
Easton Avenue and
Lakeside Road [Added
11-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 4255-18]
Left From Lakeside Road to Easton
Avenue northbound
Easton Avenue and
Walnut Avenue [Added
11-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 4255-18]
Left From Walnut Avenue eastbound to
Easton Avenue northbound
Easton Avenue and
Frontage Avenue
[Added 2-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3732]
Left/Right From Frontage Road north- and
southbound to Easton Avenue northand
southbound (curb opening on
western curbline 380 feet south of
the south curbline of Foxwood)
Elizabeth Avenue
[Added 2-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3732]
Left From exit driveway to Elizabeth
Avenue southbound (exit driveway
from Shop Rite located 150 feet sout
of Harper Street)
§ 226-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-22
1:1054
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Route 27 and Beekman
Road [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 3059]
Left Southbound on Beekman Road to
northbound Route 27
Route 27 and Franklin
Mall Driveway
Left Franklin Mall entrance/exit to
northbound Route 27
Route 27 and Holland
Drive [Added
2-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 3732]
Left From Holland Drive eastbound to
Route 27 northbound
Route 27 and Veronica
Plaza
Left Veronica Plaza entrance/exit to
northbound Route 27
Route 27 and Vliet
Road [Added
5-11-1997 by Ord.
No. 2016]
Left Eastbound Vliet Road to northbound
on Route 27
Somerset Street and
Pine Street [Added
2-26-2002 by Ord.
No. 3275]
Left Southwesterlybound Pine Street to
northeasterly on Somerset Street
Wilson Road and
Treptow Road [Added
5-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 3610]
Left From Wilson Road northbound to
Treptow Road, westbound between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(school buses are exempt)
§ 226-23. No turn on red.
(Reserved)
§ 226-24. Loading zone.
(Reserved)
§ 226-25. Bus stops. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 3338]
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location during all hours of every day.
A. John F. Kennedy Boulevard northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Sebring Road - near side. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Sebring Road and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 226-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-25
1:1055
(2) Leupp Lane - near side. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Leupp Lane and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Buttonwood Drive - near side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly curbline of Buttonwood Drive and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Renfro Road - far side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of Renfro Road and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(5) Webster Road - far side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of Webster Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) New Brunswick Road - far side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of New Brunswick Road and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
B. John F. Kennedy Boulevard southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Between New Brunswick Road and Easton Avenue - midblock.
Beginning 200 feet north of the northerly curbline of New
Brunswick Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Webster Road - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Webster Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Renfro Road - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Renfro Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Buttonwood Drive - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Buttonwood Drive and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(5) Berger Street - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Berger Street and extending 150 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Sebring Road - near side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of Sebring Road and
extending 105 northerly therefrom.
C. Easton Avenue northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Between Radio Court and Neuville Drive - midblock. Beginning 400
feet north of the northerly curbline of Radio Court and extending
135 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) John F. Kennedy Boulevard - far side. Beginning at the northerly
curbline of John F. Kennedy Boulevard and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom.
(3) Easton Avenue jughandle - near side. Beginning at the southerly
curbline of the Easton Avenue jughandle and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
§ 226-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-25
1:1056
(4) Davidson Avenue - far side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of Davidson Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
D. Easton Avenue southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Between Davidson Avenue and the municipal corporate boundary
with the Borough of South Bound Brook - midblock. Beginning 170
feet north of the northerly curbline of Davidson Avenue and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Between Cedar Grove Lane and Lakeside Road - midblock.
Beginning 192 feet south of the southerly curbline of Cedar Grove
Lane and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Easton North Drive - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Easton North Drive and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) John F. Kennedy Boulevard - far side. Beginning at the southerly
curbline of John F. Kennedy Boulevard and extending 130 feet
southerly therefrom.
(5) Between Foxwood Drive and John F. Kennedy Boulevard - midblock.
Beginning 50 feet north of the northerly curbline of Foxwood Drive
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Castleton Avenue - near side. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Castleton Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(7) Between Oakland avenue and Reeve Street - midblock. Beginning
150 feet south of the southerly curbline of Oakland Avenue and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
E. Hamilton Street eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Shirley Avenue - near side. Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Shirley Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Wheeler Place - near side. Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Wheeler Place and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Girard Avenue - near side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the westerly curbline of Girard Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Francis Street - far side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of Francis Street and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(5) Franklin Boulevard - near side. Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Franklin Boulevard and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 226-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-25
1:1057
(6) Baier Avenue - near side (polongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the westerly curbline and continuing to a point 170
feet west therefrom. [Added 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3986]
(7) Highland Avenue - near side (prolongation). Beginning at the
prolongation of the westerly curbline and continuing to a point 158
feet west therefrom. [Added 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3986]
F. Hamilton Street westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Franklin Boulevard - far side. Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Franklin Boulevard and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Francis Street - near side. Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Francis Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Girard Avenue - near side. Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Girard Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Wheeler Place - far side. Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Wheeler Place and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(5) Lake Avenue - far side. Beginning at the westerly curbline of Lake
Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
G. Along Route NJ 27, southbound (westerly side): [Added 4-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 3441]
(1) Near side bus stops:
(a) Juliet Avenue. Beginning at the northerly curbline of Juliet
Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Millstone Road. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Millstone Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Bennetts Lane. Beginning at the northerly curbline of Bennetts
Lane and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) Cozzens Lane. Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Cozzens Lane and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(e) Bennington Parkway. Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Bennington Parkway and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(f) Raymond Road. Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Raymond Road and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(2) Far side bus stops:
(a) Henry Street. Beginning at the southerly curbline of Henry
Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 226-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-25
1:1058
(b) Industrial Drive. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Industrial Drive and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(c) Hampton Road. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Hampton Road and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(d) Kingsberry Drive. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Kingsberry Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(e) Rolling Hills Drive. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Rolling Hills Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(f) Hidden Lake Drive. Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Hidden Lake Drive and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
(g) Ruth Road. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Ruth Road and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(h) Cortelyous Lane. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Cortelyous Lane and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(i) Holland Drive. Beginning at the southerly curbline of Holland
Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(j) Westminster Road. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Westminster Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(k) Thomas Avenue. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Thomas Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(l) Delar Parkway. Beginning at the southerly curbline of Delar
Parkway and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(m) Beekman Road. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Beekman Road and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(n) South Middlebush Road. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
South Middlebush Road and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(o) Bunker Hill Road. Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Bunker Hill Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(p) Goldstar Drive. Beginning at the southerly curbline of Goldstar
Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom. (NJT
Shelter)
§ 226-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-25
1:1059
(q) Princeton Highlands Boulevard. Beginning at the southerly
curbline of the Princeton Highlands Boulevard and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom. (NJT Shelter)
(r) Jones Drive. Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Jones Drive and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(s) Kingston Terrace. Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of the Kingston Terrace and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Mid-block bus stops:
(a) Between Veronia Avenue and Bennetts Lane. Beginning 900
feet south of the southerly curbline of Veronica Avenue and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Between Sinclair Boulevard and Kingsberry Drive. Beginning
200 feet south of the southerly curbline of Sinclair Boulevard
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(c) Between Masonia Drive and Carlisle Road. Beginning 120 feet
south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Masonia
Drive and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(d) Between Stewart Avenue and Delar Parkway. Beginning 185
feet south of the southerly curbline of Stewart Avenue and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(e) Between Roberts Street and Stillwell Road. Beginning 500 feet
south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Roberts
Street and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(f) Between South Middlebush Road and Bunker Hill Road.
Beginning 835 feet south of the southerly curbline of South
Middlebush Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
(in front of the Stop & Shop).
(g) Between Stanworth Road and Bunker Hill Road. Beginning 435
feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of
Stanworth Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(h) Between County Route 518 and Old Road North. Beginning
190 feet south of the southerly curbline of County Route 518
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(i) Between Old Road North and Old Road South. Beginning 200
feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of the
Old North Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(j) Between Old Road North and Old Road South. Beginning 3,600
feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Old
§ 226-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-25
1:1060
§ 226-26. Taxi stands.
(Reserved)
§ 226-27. Lane use reservations.
(Reserved)
§ 226-28. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the following streets are
established as follows:
Street Speed Limit (mph) and Location
Apgar Drive [Statutory
12-19-1996]
35, from Randolph Road to Weston Canal Road
Belmar Street
[Amended 8-12-2003
by Ord. No. 3393]
30, entire length
Belmont Dive Zone 1: 45, from Schoolhouse Road to Pierce
Street; thence
Zone 2: 40, to Campus Drive
Bennetts Lane 40, from Route 27 to Clyde Road
Bennetts Lane 35, between South Middlebush Road and Clyde
Road
Berger Street 30, entire length
Berry Street 25, from Churchill Avenue to Hamilton Street
Blackwells Mills Road Zone 1: 30, from Franklin Township/
Hillsborough Township municipal line to a point
500 east of Canal Road
Zone 2: 40, from a point 500 feet east of Canal
Road to South Middlebush Road
Butler Road Zone 1: 25, between Griggstown-Canal Road
and 2,700 feet west of South Middlebush Road
North Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (in
front of the Just Because Flower Shop).
(k) Between Old Road North and Old Road South. Beginning 4,000
feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Old
North Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (in
front of Baumley Nursery Building 4271).
(l) Between Promenade Boulevard and Raymond Road. Beginning
1,420 feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline
of Promenade Boulevard and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom (in front of Kingston Mall).
§ 226-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-28
1:1061
Street Speed Limit (mph) and Location
Zone 2: 30, between 2,700 feet west of South
Middlebush Road and South Middlebush Road
Campus Drive 35, entire length
Canal Road Zone 1: 40, from Canal Road 518 to 1,050 feet
south of Griggstown Road Causeway; thence
Zone 2: 35, to Butler Road; thence
Zone 3: 30, to Blackwells Mills Road; thence
Zone 4: 25, to Grouser Road; thence
Zone 5: 30, to Elm Street
Carmen Street 25, entire length
Cedar Street 25, between Mercury Street and the Franklin
Township/South Bound Brook corporate line
Churchill Avenue
[Amended 3-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 1822]
Zone 1: 35, from Clyde Road to Veronica
Avenue
Zone 2: 30, from Veronica Avenue to Route 27
Clyde Road 40, from Hamilton Street to Bennetts Lane
Commerce Drive [Added
5-6-1993 by Ord. No.
1768]
35, entire length
Cortelyou Lane 30, entire length
Dahmer Road [Statutory
5-17-1995]
35, entire length
Davidson Avenue 45, entire length
Dellwood Lane 30, entire length
DeMott Lane Zone 1: 40, between Amwell Road and Fairfield
Road
Zone 2: 30, between 200 feet south of Fairfield
Road and Easton Avenue
Fifteenth Street 30, entire length
Garfield Avenue 25, from Interstate 287 Overpass to Edgewood
Terrace
Girard Avenue Zone 1: 35, from Hamilton Street to 350 feet
north of Clinton Street; thence
Zone 2: 30, to Belmar Street
Golfview Drive 25, entire length
Grouser Road Zone 1: 30, between Griggstown-Canal Road
and 975 feet east of Van Cleef Road
§ 226-28 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-28
1:1062
Street Speed Limit (mph) and Location
Zone 2: 35, between 975 feet east of Van Cleef
Road and Amwell Road
Jacques Lane 30, entire length
Jiffy Road [Added
5-3-1993 by Ord. No.
1768]
30, between Clyde Road and Commerce Drive
John F. Kennedy
Boulevard
40, with a 25 mph speed limit in the Saint
Matthias School during recess or going to or
leaving school during opening or closing hours
Leif Erickson 25 mph, entire length
Lincoln Avenue 25, entire length
Martino Drive 35, between DeMott Lane and Wilson Road
Mettlers Lane Zone 1: 35, from Amwell Road to 900 feet north
of Colonial Drive
Zone 2: 40, from 900 feet north of Colonial
Drive to Weston Road
Zone 3: 30, from Weston Road to Schoolhouse
Road
New Brunswick Road 35, between DeMott Lane and Cedar Grove
Lane
New Brunswick Road
[Statutory — See
Township Engineer's
12-19-1996
Certification at end of
section.]
25/35, between John F. Kennedy Boulevard and
DeMott Lane
Pierce Street Zone 1: 35, from Randolph Road to Belmont
Drive
Zone 2: 30, from Belmont Drive to Elizabeth
Avenue
Zone 3: 40, between Davidson Avenue and
Cedar Grove Road [Added 5-3-1993 by Ord.
No. 1768]
Randolph Road 40, from Schoolhouse Road to Weston Canal
Road
Schoolhouse Road Zone 1: 35, from Weston Canal Road (signed
Canal Road) to 1,600 feet therefrom; thence
Zone 2: 30, to 1,500 feet west of Belmont Drive;
thence
Zone 3: 35, to Elizabeth Avenue
§ 226-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-28
1:1063
Street Speed Limit (mph) and Location
Schoolhouse Road
[Added 6-29-2006 by
Ord. No. 3620]
40, between Randolph Road and Weston Canal
Road
Skillman Lane 30, entire length
Society Hill Boulevard 30, from Stewar Avenue to Claremont Road
South Middlebush Road 40, from Butler Road to Claremont Road
Stewart Avenue 35, from Route 27 to Beekman Road
Suydam Road 35, between South Middlebush Road and Canal
Road
Treptow Road 35, between Cedar Grove Lane and Wilson
Road
Van Cleef Road [Added
8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1913].
Zone 1: 30, from Blackwells Mills Road to
Grouser Road
Zone 2: 35, from Grouser Road to Amwell Road
Veronica Avenue 40, entire length
Vliet Road 40, entire length
Washington Avenue 25 mph, entire length
Weston Road 40, between Weston Causeway and Cedar
Grove Road
Willow Avenue Zone 1: 25, from Easton Avenue to Alton Drive,
most easterly intersection
Zone 2: 30, from Alton Drive, most easterly
intersection, to westerly terminus of Treptow
Road guiderails.
Wilson Road 25, between Amwell Road and Treptow Road
Worlds Fair Drive 40, from Pierce Street to Easton Avenue
§ 226-29. Motorized bicycles excluded. [Amended 12-11-1980 by
Ord. No. 1032]
It shall be unlawful for any motorized bicycle to be operated upon, through
or over the following described lands or portions thereof:
§ 226-30. Handicapped parking.
A. The bike path located along the entire length of John F. Kennedy
Boulevard from Amwell Road to Easton Avenue.
B. The bike path located along Easton Avenue from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Cedar Grove Lane.
A. Handicapped parking on street.
§ 226-28 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1064
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, the following locations are hereby designated as
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued
special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
32 Ambrose Street,
westerly side
1 Beginning at a point 367 feet
north of the westerly curbline of
Somerset Street and extending
to a point 30 feet north thereof
83 Ambrose Street
[Added 9-13-2011
by Ord. No. 3946;
repealed 9-24-2019
by Ord. No.
4300-19]
146 Baier Avenue,
westerly side [Added
9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 4209-17]
Beginning at a point 155 feet
north of Phillips Road and
running 25 feet northerly
therefrom
152 Baier Avenue,
westerly side [Added
2-08-2000 by Ord.
No. 3102]
1 Beginning at a point 180 feet
north of Phillips Road and
running 22 feet northerly
therefrom
166 Baier Avenue.
westerly side [Added
12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 1931; repealed
1-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 1986]
1
174 Baier Avenue,
southwesterly side
[Added 11-23-1993
by Ord. No. 1804;
repealed 4-24-2004
by Ord. No. 3448]
1
234 Blake Avenue,
southwesterly side
[Repealed
10-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 4212-17]
1
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-30
1:1065
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
82 Brookline Avenue,
westerly side
1 Beginning at a point 212 feet
north of the projected northerly
side line of Berkeley Place and
extending to a point 40 feet
northerly thereof
102 Brookline
Avenue,
northwesterly side
[Added 9-25-2001
by Ord. No. 3241]
1 Beginning at a point on the
northwesterly side of Brookline
Avenue 380 feet south of the
intersection of Brookline Avenue
and Hamilton Street and
running 21 feet southerly
therefrom
107 Brookline Avenue
[Added 9-23-2014
by Ord. No.
4084-14]
1 Beginning of the space to start
on the southeast side of
Brookline Avenue at a point 247
feet southeast of Hamilton
Street and end at a point 268
feet southeast of Hamilton
Street. This places the space
directly in front of 107
Brookline Avenue.
113 Brookline
Avenue, easterly side
[Added 1-14-2003
by Ord. No. 3348]
1 Beginning at a point on the
easterly side line of Brookline
Avenue 183 feet south of the
Hamilton Street curbline and
extending to a point 20 feet
southerly therefrom
120 Brookline
Avenue, westerly side
1 Beginning at a point 180 feet
south of the Hamilton Street
curbline and extending to a
point 23 feet southerly thereof
11 Chester Avenue,
easterly side [Added
3-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 1884; repealed
3-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 3440]
1
49 Franklin Street,
northeasterly side
[Added 9-24-2013
by Ord. No.
4037-13]
1 From a point 28 feet north of
Elm Street, continuing to 53
feet north of Elm Street
§ 226-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1066
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
598 Hamilton Street,
southerly side
[Added 2-13-1996
by Ord. No. 1934]
2 From a point 25 feet east of the
intersection of Henry Street to a
point 44 feet easterly thereof
601 Hamilton Street
(Kee Avenue)
[Repealed
2-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 3366]
1
27 Hawthorne Drive,
northeasterly side
[Added 8-8-1995 by
Ord. No. 1909]
1 From a point 69 feet of the
intersection of Poe Avenue to a
point 22 feet southeasterly
thereof
224 Hillcrest Avenue
[Added 8-12-2003
by Ord. No. 3389]
1 Beginning at a point on the
westerly side line of Hillcrest
Avenue, starting from a point
233 feet south of Arden Street
and extending to a point 25 feet
south thereof
228 Hillcrest Avenue
[Added 1-14-2003
by Ord. No. 3348]
1 Beginning at a point on the
westerly side of Hillcrest
Avenue 340 feet south of the
Arden Street curbline and
extending 25 feet southerly
therefrom
2805 Holland Drive
[Added 11-9-2006
by Ord. No. 3646]
1 On the northern curbline of
Holland Drive beginning at a
point 168 feet east of Whitehall
Lane and ending at a point 193
feet east of Whitehall Lane
29 Home Street
[Repealed
11-28-2000 by Ord.
No. 3166]
1
43 Home Street,
easterly side [Added
5-11-1999 by Ord.
No. 3041]
1
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-30
1:1067
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
63 Home Street,
easterly side [Added
2-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 3029; repealed
8-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 3561]
1 From a point 37 feet south of
the southerly side of Pearl Place
to a point 22 feet southerly
thereof
86 Home Street,
easterly side
1 Beginning at a point 275 feet
north of the projected northerly
side line of Pearl Street and
extending to a point 30 feet
northerly thereof
91 Home Street,
easterly side
1 Beginning at a point 288 feet
north of the northerly side line
of Pearl Street and extending 23
feet easterly therefrom
105 Home Street,
easterly side
1 Beginning at a point 415.5 feet
south of Hamilton Street and
continuing 23 feet in a southerly
direction therefrom
166/168 John F.
Kennedy Boulevard
[Added 5-23-2006
by Ord. No. 3610;
amended 6-29-2006
by Ord. No. 3620]
1 Beginning at a point 163 feet
north of the southerly lot limit
of Block 403, Lot 9 and
continuing 25 feet north
therefrom. Actual location is on
a frontage road off of John F.
Kennedy Boulevard
Kee Avenue
[Repealed
2-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 3366]
Lewis Street,
southerly side
1 Beginning at a point 135 feet
east of the easterly side line of
Franklin Boulevard and
extending 23 feet in an easterly
direction therefrom
Main Street (59),
northwesterly
[Added 10-23-2001
by Ord. No. 3246]
2 Parking space 1: beginning at a
point on the northwesterly side
of Main Street 208 feet south of
the intersection of Main Street
and Lillian Street and running
17 feet southerly therefrom
§ 226-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1068
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
Parking space 2: beginning at a
point on the northwesterly side
of Main Street 288 feet south of
the intersection of Main Street
and Lillian Street and running
25 feet southerly therefrom
Market Street,
easterly side
1 Beginning at a point 229 feet
south of the intersection of
Market Street with Amwell
Road and running 23 feet
southerly therefrom
15 Parkside Street,
northwest side
[Added 3-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 3531]
1 Beginning at 390 feet and
ending at 415 feet northwest of
Fuller Street
31 Parkside Street
[Added 3-11-2008
by Ord. No. 3741]
1 Beginning at a point on the
southwest side line of Parkside
Street 158 feet south of the
Mark Street curbline and
extending to a point 25 feet
southerly therefrom
283 Park Street
[Added 2-12-2008
by Ord. No. 3732]
1 Along the northern road edge
beginning at a point 125 feet
east of Baier Avenue and ending
at point 150 feet east of Baier
Avenue
Phillips Road (58/Apt.
91), southerly side
[Added 8-13-2002
by Ord. No. 3307]
1 From a point 774 feet easterly
of a point at the intersection of
the southerly curbline of Phillips
Road and the easterly curbline
of Franklin Boulevard and
running 22 feet easterly
therefrom
Phillips Road (120),
northerly side
[Added 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 3035]
1 From a point 96 feet east of
Baier Avenue to a point 22 feet
easterly thereof
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-30
1:1069
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
Phillips Road (178/
Apt. 167), southerly
side [Added
8-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 3307; repealed
4-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 3448]
198 Phillips Road, Apt. 159 [Added 3-8-2005 by Ord. No.
3531; repealed 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3752]
214 Phillips Road,
Apt. 153 [Added
2-14-2006 by Ord.
No. 3596]
1 Beginning at a point 333 feet
northeast from Matilda Avenue
and ending at a point 358 feet
northeast of Matilda Avenue
226 Phillips Road,
Apt. 147 [Added
10-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 3567]
1 Beginning 160 feet north of the
northwest curbline of Matilda
Avenue and continuing to a
point 185 feet north of the
northwest curbline of Matilda
Avenue
234 Phillips Road,
Apartment 145A
[Added 9-13-2011
by Ord. No. 3946;
repealed 9-12-2017
by Ord. No.
4209-17]
1
Victor Street,
southerly side
[Added 9-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1854]
1 Beginning at a point 164 feet
easterly of the easterly side line
of Pershing Avenue and running
22 feet easterly therefrom
Victor Street,
southerly side
[Added 3-12-1996
by Ord. No. 1942;
amended 4-23-1996
by Ord. No. 1953]
1 From a point 136 feet easterly
of the intersection of Pershing
Avenue to a point 22 feet
easterly thereof
Victor Street (134)
[Added 2-29-1999
by Ord. No. 3029;
repealed 2-12-2002
by Ord. No. 3272]
1
§ 226-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1070
Street
Number
of
Spaces Location
158 Victor Street,
southerly side
[Added 5-24-2005
by Ord. No. 3546]
1 Beginning at a point 218 feet
east of Pershing Avenue and
running 22 feet easterly thereof
Victor Street (158)
[Added 2-28-2000
by Ord. No. 3102;
repealed 3-8-2005
by Ord. No. 3531]
1
B. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and Board of Education
property.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, the following locations are hereby designated as
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued
special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
(2) All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as described below and as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (reserved parking sign
and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Municipal
Complex
2 Road "B" south of the front door
sidewalk apron on the west side
Municipal
Complex
2 Front door of the lbrary off Road
"A"
Municipal
Complex
2 Opposite the southwesterly
doors of the municipal building
off Road "C"
Municipal
Complex
1 Road "C" opposite the court side
of the front of the Public Safety
Building on the north side of
Road "C"
Municipal
Complex
1 Road "C" opposite the police side
of the front of the Public Safety
Building on the north side of
Road "C"
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-30
1:1071
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Municipal
Complex
2 Road "A" opposite the front
doors of the Villagers Barn
Theatre
Municipal
Complex
[Amended
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
3 Lot "L" adjacent to the east side
of the Villagers Barn Theatre
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 Lot ”J” adjacent to the mid-point
concrete sidewalk
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
6 Road ”F” adjacent to the south
side of the Community/Senior
Center
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 East side of Lot ”P” south side of
Community/Senior Center
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 West side of Lot ”O” south side
of Community/Senior Center
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
3 East side of Lot ”O” adjacent to
the west side of the Villagers
Barn Theater
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 Road ”E” adjacent to the north
side of the Community/Senior
Center
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 South side of Road ”C” east of
the intersection of Road ”D” (In
Lot ”C”)
Municipal
Complex [Added
5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3610]
2 North side of Road ”A” east of
the intersection of Road ”D” (In
Lot ”F”)
C. Handicapped parking on private property open to the public .
§ 226-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1072
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.46, the following locations are hereby designated for use
by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
(2) All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as described below and as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (reserved parking sign
and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles. 161
Property
Number
of
Spaces Location
Cedar Grove
Center [Added
5-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 1838]
7 Shopping center at the
southeasterly intersection of Cedar
Grove Lane and New Brunswick
Road, now or formerly known as
Cedar Grove Center, shown on
attached Exhibit 226-30G 004A and
B
Housing Authority,
northerly side
1 Immediately adjacent to 119 Mark
Street
Franklin Plaza 11 Shopping center at the
northwesterly intersection of Route
27 and Veronica Avenue, now or
formerly known as Franklin Plaza,
shown on attached Exhibit
226-B(2)-001
Veronica Plaza 5 Shopping center at the
northeasterly intersection of Route
27 and Veronica Avenue, now or
formerly known as Veronica Plaza,
shown on attached Exhibit
226-B(2)-002
Rutgers Plaza 15 Shopping center at the
southeasterly intersection of
Easton Avenue and John F. Kennedy
Boulevard, now or formerly known
as Rutgers Plaza, shown on
attached Exhibit 226-B(2)-003
161. Editor's Note: All of the exhibits referenced in the following table are on file in the
Township offices.
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-30
1:1073
Property
Number
of
Spaces Location
Health/Social 2 935 Hamilton Street, now or
formerly known as the Health and
Social Services Building, front of
building at northeasterly side of
parking lot
McIntosh Inn
[Added
1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 1873]
6 Motel on the westerly side of
Davidson Avenue, now or formerly
known as McIntosh Inn, shown on
attached Exhibit 226-30C 005
D. Handicapped parking on all other private property.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A.
39:5A.1, the following locations are hereby designated for use by
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards
by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
(2) All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as described below and as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (reserved parking sign
and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles. 162
Property
Number
of
Spaces Location
Professional
Center at
Somerset
6 Office condominium park at the
southwesterly intersection of
Hamilton Street and Clyde Road,
now or formerly known as
Professional Center at Somerset,
shown on attached Exhibit 226-30D
001
Somerset Estates
[Added
2-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 2055]
1 Apartment complex along the
southwesterly side of Franklin
Boulevard from Phillips Road to
Matilda Avenue for 301 Franklin
Blvd, Apt. 38, shown on attached
Exhibit 226-30D 002
162. Editor's Note: All of the exhibits referenced in the following table are on file in the
Township offices.
§ 226-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-30
1:1074
§ 226-31. Control of movement and parking on public and Board of
Education properties.
Property
Number
of
Spaces Location
1 For 158 Baier Avenue, Apt. 47A,
shown on attached Exhibit 226-30D
003
1 For 399 Franklin Boulevard, Apt.
136, shown on attached Exhibit
226-30D 004 [Added 3-11-1998
by Ord. No. 2061]
E. Signs, pavement markings: installation and maintenance.
(1) Signs, designed pursuant to state statute and any regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be erected adjacent to the
parking spaces indicated in § 226-30C and D to carry out the
provisions of this section.
(2) Installation, maintenance and replacement of signs designating
handicapped parking spaces on private property shall be the
responsibility of the property owner or homeowners' association.
Private property includes but is not limited to industrial,
commercial, multifamily and single-family residences and
condominiums.
(3) The Police Department shall notify any property owner of a
handicapped parking sign which is in a state of disrepair and/or in
need of replacement. The property owner shall have 30 days to
repair or replace such sign. Failure to carry out such repair or
replacement as required shall constitute a violation of this section.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction therefor, be
fined $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, be fined at
least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on such terms and in
such form as the court shall deem appropriate. Every day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 3408]
A. Regulation for the movement and parking of traffic on municipal and
Board of Education property. [Amended 11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
1803; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 3610]
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, no person
shall park or operate a vehicle within the Municipal Complex, 475
DeMott Lane, Somerset, NJ, and Board of Education property
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1075
except in accordance with Site Plan of such complex on file with
the Township Clerk.
(a) Municipal Complex.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street.
Name of Street Limits
Road ”A” From a point 15 feet west of DeMott
Lane to the Road ”D”/Road ”F”
intersection
Road ”D” From a point 15 feet west of DeMott
Lane to a point 15 feet north of the
Road ”A”/Road ”F” intersection
[3] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
entire lengths of Roads "A," "B," "C," "D," ”E” and ”F”
is 15 miles per hour;
[c] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[4] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[5] Reserved parking. The parking lots described below are
reserved parking for various types of vehicles which must
be properly identified as per site plan:
[a] Public Safety Building Parking Lot "G": for police
vehicles.
[b] Public Safety Building Parking Lot "H": for employees.
[c] Public Safety Building Parking Lot "K": for police
vehicles only.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1076
[d] Municipal Building Lot "J": for municipal vehicles and
employees except that the first 14 stalls beginning at
the southwest corner and continuing northwest for
126 feet shall be designated visitor parking.
[e] Municipal Building Lot "A": for visitors (except
between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. for
Councilmembers only).
[f] Municipal Building Lot "B": for municipal vehicles.
[g] Three slots on the north side of Road "C" east of the
intersection of Road "C" and Road "D" (reserved for
bicycles, motorcycles and compact vehicles).
[h] Public Safety Building Parking Lot ”N”: for police
vehicles.
[i] Eleven stalls on the southside for Road ”E” alongside
the Community/Senior Center: for employees.
[j] On Road "D," six spaces reserved for the Engineering
and Community Development vehicle. The spaces are
located on the southern curbline, near the Community
Development wing. [Added 11-9-2006 by Ord. No.
3646]
[6] Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
any time upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Roads "A," "B,"
"C," "D," ”E” and
”F”
Both Entire length, except for two
handicapped spaces and three
visitor spaces on west side of
Road "B" and six spaces
easterly/northerly side of Road
”C” reserved for emergency
vehicles
[7] One-way streets. The following described street is hereby
designated as one-way in the direction indicated. Parking
on this street will be permitted only on the side indicated
below:
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1077
Name
of
Street Direction Limit
Parking
Permitted
Road "B" NorthboundFrom prolongation of
the north curbline of
Road "A" to the south
curbline of Road "D"
Two
handicapped
spaces and
three visitor
spaces on
the west
side
Road
”C”
WestboundFrom prolongation of
the north curbline of
Road ”A” to the east
curbline of Road ”D”
Six spaces
on east/
north side
for
emergency
vehicles
only
[8] Pedestrian crosswalks. The following locations are hereby
designated as crosswalks:
[a] Across Road "A" beginning 117 1/2 feet west of the
Road "C" intersection and extending eight feet south
therefrom.
[b] Across Road "A" beginning at a point 217 feet west of
the Road "C" intersection and extending 12 feet
therefrom.
[c] Across Road "C" beginning at a point 76 feet from
Road "A" intersection and extending six feet
therefrom.
[d] Across Road "C" beginning from a point 168 feet of the
Road "A" intersection and extending eight feet
therefrom.
[e] Across Road "A" beginning at a point 20 feet east of
the Road "D" intersection and extending six feet
therefrom.
[f] Across Road "C" beginning at a point 21 1/2 feet
westerly of the Road "D" and extending six feet
therefrom.
[g] Across Road "D" beginning at a point 58 feet north of
the Road "E" intersection and extending 10 feet
therefrom.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1078
[h] Across Road "D" beginning at a point 428 feet
northwesterly of the DeMott Lane intersection and
extending eight feet therefrom.
[i] Across Road ”D” beginning 280 feet northwest of the
DeMott Lane intersection and extending six feet
therefrom.
[j] Across Road ”D” beginning 122 feet northeast of the
Road ”E” intersection and extending six feet
therefrom.
[k] Across Road ”D” beginning 15 feet north of the Road
”C” intersection and extending six feet therefrom.
[l] Across Road ”D” beginning 30 feet south of the Road
”C” intersection and extending six feet therefrom.
[m] Across Road ”F” beginning 73 feet southwest of the
Road ”D” intersection and extending six feet
therefrom.
[n] Across westerly driveway of Lot ”L” beginning 15 feet
south of the Road ”A” intersection and extending six
feet therefrom.
[o] Across easterly driveway of Lot ”L” beginning 15 feet
south of the Road ”A” intersection and extending six
feet therefrom.
[9] No-passing zones: Roads "A," "B," "C," "D," "E" and "F" as
indicated on site plan.
[10] Turn prohibitions. No person shall make a turn at any
location listed:
Intersection
Turn
ProhibitionMovement Prohibited
Road "D" and Road
"B"
Right Eastbound on Road "D"
onto southbound Road
"B"
(b) Commerce Drive/Dahmer Road emergency access right-of-way.
No person shall operate a vehicle on the Township property
located between the westerly terminus of Commerce Drive and
the easterly side of Dahmer Road.
(c) Pine Grove Manor School bus frontage road off Phillips Road.
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 3643]
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1079
[1] Said roadway shall be one way, with all authorized traffic
traveling in a northbound direction entering on the
southern access and exiting on the northern access.
[2] No person shall park an unauthorized vehicle at any time
on either curbline. An authorized vehicle shall be an
authorized, registered school vehicle of the type to
transport students to and from school.
[3] Any vehicle parked in violation shall be subject to removal
at the expense of the owner.
(2) All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet state and federal
specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(3) No person shall ride a skateboard or scooter-type vehicle on any
road, sidewalk or parking lot within the Municipal Complex.
(4) Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
statute, every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Regulations for the movement and the parking of traffic on private
property open to the public.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the
following private property that is open to the public and to which
the public is invited shall have the movement of traffic controlled
by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or park
a vehicle in violation of the regulations.
Property RegulationMovement
Somerset Village/Easton Center
[Added 9-14-1999 by Ord. No.
3068]
Trucks
over 4
tons
Prohibited on
driveway (Road B)
from Shopping
Center to Foxwood
Drive
Commercial building, Block 134/
Lots 2-12, northeast intersection
of Franklin Boulevard and Ellen
Street [Added 3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 3202]
One-way Ingress only from
Franklin Boulevard
into site
Commercial building, Block 219/
Lot 1.01, northeast intersection
of Hamilton Street and Baier
Avenue [Added 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 3213]
One-way Egress only from
site to Hamilton
Street
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1080
Property RegulationMovement
Somerset News Apartment
Complex [Added 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 3677]
No
stopping
or
standing
at all
times
Prohibited on Reler
Lane from the
prolongation of
western curbline of
Route 27 to a point
150 feet west on
both the northerly
and southerly
curbline of Reler
Lane
C. Regulations for the movement and the parking of traffic on all other
private property.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the
regulations of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed.
(a) Country Club Homes: Beaconsfield Road, Haverhill Place,
Henley Drive.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street:
Name of
Street Limits
Henley Drive
East
Entire length, from the prolongation of
north curb of Beaconsfield Place to its
terminus.
[3] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Haverhill Place and Road ”A” Road ”A”
Beaconsfield Place and Road ”B” Road ”B”
[4] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed
limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1081
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Henley Drive
West
15 Entire length
Henley Drive
East
15 Entire length
Beaconsfield
Place
15 Entire length
Haverhill Place 15 Entire length
Road ”A” 15 Entire length
Road ”B” 15 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[6] Restricted parking. No person shall stop of stand a vehicle
anytime upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Henley Drive West Both Entire length
Henley Drive East Both Entire length
Beaconsfield Place Both Entire length
Haverhill Place Both Entire length
Road ”A” Both Entire length
Road ”B” Both Entire length
(b) Society Hill II: Daniel Drive, Fisher Drive, Kirby Lane, Lyon
Lane, Pool Drive, Taylor Drive, Tracy Court, Veros Lane.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street:
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1082
Name of Street Limits
Stewart Avenue
[Repealed 8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 3058]
Fisher Drive Entire length, from Stewart
Avenue to the prolongation
of the west curb of Lyon
Lane.
Daniel Drive Entire length, from the
prolongation of west curb of
Lyon Lane to Stewart
Avenue.
[3] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections.
Intersection Stop on
Route NJ 27 and Stewart
Avenue
Stewart Avenue
Stewart Avenue and Fisher
Drive
Fisher Drive
Stewart Avenue and Society
Hill Boulevard
Society Hill Boulevard
Taylor Drive at its "T" Bottom leg of "T"
(northeast corner)
[4] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Stewart Avenue
[Repealed
8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 3059]
Taylor Drive 15 Entire length
Pool Drive 15 Entire length
Fisher Drive 15 Entire length
Veros Lane 15 Entire length
Lyon Lane 15 Entire length
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1083
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Daniel Drive 15 Entire length
Kirby Court 15 Entire length
Tracy Court 15 Entire length
[c] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[6] No-passing zones: Stewart Avenue: [Repealed 8-10-1999
by Ord. No. 3059]
(c) Quail Crest II: aka Quail Brook East, Challenger Road, Jarvis
Place, McAuliff Court, McNair Court, Michael J. Smith Court,
Onizuka Court, Resnik Court, Scobee Lane.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street:
Name of Street Limits
Challenger Road Entire length, from east intersect with
New Brunswick Road to west
intersection with New Brunswick Road.
[3] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop on
Jarvis Place and Resnick Court Resnick Court
Jarvis Place and Michael J. Smith
Court
Michael J. Smith
Court
Challenger Road and New
Brunswick Road (both
intersections)
Challenger Road
[4] Speed limits.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1084
[a] The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Challenger Road 25 Entire length
McNair Court 15 Entire length
Scobee Lane 15 Entire length
Michael J. Smith
Court
15 Entire length
Jarvis Place 15 Entire length
Resnick Court 15 Entire length
McAuliffe Court 15 Entire length
Onizuka Court 15 Entire length
[c] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
(d) Quail Brook IIIA: Cotswold Place, Glastonbury Lane,
Hawkshead Way, Shilling Drive, Roads ”A,” ”B,” ”C” off
Glastonbury. [Repealed 2-10-1994 by Ord. No. 1818]
(e) Society Hill III: Amberley Court, Bethany Court, Caitlin Court,
Chelsea Court, Lindsey Court, Pool Drive, Rachel Court,
Townsend Court.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Speed limits. Speed limits for both directions of travel on
the following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Lindsey Court 15 Entire length
Pool Drive 15 Entire length
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1085
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Bethany Court 15 Entire length
Caitlyn Court 15 Entire length
Chelsea Court 15 Entire length
Rachel Court 15 Entire length
Townsend Court 15 Entire length
Amberley Court 15 Entire length
[3] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[4] Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
any time upon any of the following described roadways or
parts of roadways:
Road Side Location
Lindsey Court Both Entire length
Pool Drive Both Entire length
Bethany Court Both Entire length
Caitlyn Court Both Entire length
Chelsea Court Both Entire length
Rachel Court Both Entire length
Townsend Court Both Entire length
Amberley Court Both Entire length
(f) Society Hill VI: Amethyst Way, Arthur Glick Boulevard, Edward
Drive, Gregory Lane, James Court, Topaz Drive.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
South Middlebush Road and
Edward Drive (both intersects)
Edward Drive
James Court and Amethyst Way James Court
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1086
Intersection Stop Signs On
Amethyst Way and Edward
Drive (both intersects)
Amethyst Way
Topaz Drive and Edward Drive Topaz Drive
Amethyst Way and South
Middlebush Road
Amethyst Way
Edward Drive and Gregory Lane Edward Drive
Arthur Glick Boulevard and
South Middlebush Road
Arthur Glick Boulevard
Arthur Glick Boulevard and
Gregory Lane (2 northeasterly
intersects)
Gregory Lane
Arthur Glick Boulevard and
Gregory Lane (1 southwesterly
intersect)
Arthur Glick Boulevard
[3] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Amethyst Way 15 Entire length
James Court 15 Entire length
Edward Drive 15 Entire length
Topaz Drive 15 Entire length
Gregory Lane 15 Entire length
Arthur Glick
Boulevard
15 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[4] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owners or
operators expense.
[5] No stopping/standing. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle any time upon an of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1087
Road Side Hours Location
Amethyst Way Both All Entire length
James Court Both All Entire length
Edward Drive Both All Entire length
Topaz Drive Both All Entire length
Gregory Lane Both All Entire length
Arthur Glick
Boulevard
Both All Entire length
(g) Quail Brook V A&C: Abbey Drive, Becket Place, Boxgrove
Place, Bridington Lane, Burnham Street, Coburn Lane,
Haworth Place, Hyde Park Road, Jonathon Place, Lyndhurst
Drive, Prestbury Lane, Selby Court, Wells Road.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through streets:
Name of Street Limits
Lyndhurst Drive Entire length, from the Municipal
corporate line to New Brunswick Road
Wells Road Entire length, from Lyndhurst Drive to
New Brunswick Road
Hyde Park Road Entire length, from Wells Road to its
terminus
[3] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stops Signs on
Lyndhurst Drive and New
Brunswick Road
Lyndhurst Drive
Bridington Lane and Abbey Drive Bridington Lane
Lyndhurst Drive and Wells Road Wells Road
New Brunswick Road and Wells
Road
Wells Road
Wells Road and Hyde Park Road Hyde Park Road
Selby Court and Coburn Lane Selby Court
[4] Speed limits.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1088
[a] The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Lyndhurst Drive 25 Entire length
Boxgrove Place 15 Entire length
Bridington Lane 15 Entire length
Wells Road 15 Entire length
Abbey Drive 15 Entire length
Prestbury Lane 15 Entire length
Selby Court 15 Entire length
Coburn Lane 15 Entire length
Becket Place 15 Entire length
Hyde Park Road 15 Entire length
Jonathon Place 15 Entire length
Haworth Place 15 Entire length
[c] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owners or
operators expense.
(h) Forrest Gate: Oakcroft Lane, Road A, all courts.
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through streets, except where yield signs
are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Oakcroft Lane Entire length
[3] Speed limits.
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1089
[a] The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Oakcroft Lane 25 Entire length
Road A 15 Entire length
All courts 15 Entire length
[c] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[4] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[5] No stopping/standing. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle any time upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Road Side Hours Location
Oakcroft Lane North All Entire length
Road ”A” Both All Entire length
All courts Both All Entire length
(i) Wynnefield at Somerset, Balboa Way, Cabot Way, Columbus
Drive, DeLeon Circle, DeSoto Drive, Hudson Court, Marco Polo
Way, Verrazano Drive. [Added 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1853]
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Through streets. The following street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through streets, except where yield signs
are provided for in the designation:
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1090
Name of Street Limits
Verrazano Drive Between south Middlebush Road and
Vliet Road
Columbus Drive Between west intersect with
Verrazano Drive and the east intersect
with Verrazano Drive.
Columbus Drive Between southeast intersect with
Verrazano Drive and its terminus.
[3] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Verrazano Drive and Vliet
Road
Verrazano Drive
DeSoto Drive and South
Middlebush Road
DeSoto Drive
Hudson Court and Cabot Way Cabot Way
South Middlebush Road and
Verrazano Drive
Verrazano Drive
DeSoto Drive and Balboa Way
(both intersects)
Balboa Lane (both
intersects)
Balboa Way and Marco Polo
Way
Balboa Way
DeSoto Drive and Megellan
Way
DeSoto Drive
[4] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1091
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[6] Restricted parking. No person shall stop a vehicle anytime
upon any of the streets or parts of street described:
Location Restriction
Professional Center at Somerset
[Added 9-9-1998 by Ord. No.
3002]
None
Housing Authority [Added
10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 3010]
None
(j) Countryside at Franklin, Bridle Court, Gallop Lane, Gallop
Lane West, Pony Court, Rolling Hills Drive. [Added
11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 3086]
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
[2] Stopping/standing prohibited. No person shall stop or
stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads except Rolling Hills
Drive
Both All Entire
length
[3] Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as
shown on the attached site plan signed with the R7-8 and
R7-8P (reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
[4] Through streets. The following street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through streets, except where yield signs
are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Rolling Hills Drive Between Route NJ 27 and a
point 50 feet west of Bridle
Court-Mustang Trail
Gallop Lane West Entire length
Bridle Court Entire length
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1092
[5] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Pony Court and Gallop
Lane
Pony Court
[6] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Rolling Hills
Drive
25 Entire length
All other roads 15 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[7] Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or
operator's expense.
[8] No-passing zones. The following is hereby designated as a
no-passing zone:
Name of Street Limits
Rolling Hills
Drive
Between Route 27 and its westerly
terminus, within the Countryside at
Franklin property
[9] Lane use reservations. The lane locations described are
designated as lane use reservations and traffic shall move
as indicated:
Intersection Restriction
Route NJ 27 and
Rolling Hills Drive
Left lane of Rolling Hills Drive
reserved for left turn only
Route NJ 27 and
Rolling Hills Drive
Right lane of Rolling Hills Drive
reserved for right turn only
(k) (Reserved)163
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1093
(l) Somerset Run. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3786]
[1] Parking. All vehicles must park only in permitted or
designated areas and between the lines provided.
Name of Street
Biltmore Lane
Blairsden Court
Breakers Lane
Brushwood Court
Crossfield Lane
Knollcrest Court
Longwood Lane
Merriwold Lane
Osborne Court
Post Lane
Rosecliff Court
Sherwood Court
Stone Manor Drive
Thistlehill Lane
Viscaya Court
Windfall Lane
[2] State statutory no parking. No person shall park a vehicle
upon any street in the complex in violation of any of the
regulations described below:
[a] All vehicles where permitted shall be parked parallel
to the curbline facing in the direction of traffic, and
within six inches of the road edge or curbline.
[b] No vehicles shall be parked within an intersection.
[c] No vehicles shall be parked on a crosswalk.
[d] No vehicles shall be parked in front of a driveway.
[e] No vehicles shall be parked within 25 feet of a
crosswalk or sideline of an intersecting street.
[f] No vehicles shall be parked on a sidewalk.
[g] No vehicles shall be parked within 50 feet of a stop
sign.
163. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(k), Somerset Glenn, added 6-29-2006 by Ord. No.
3621, as amended, was repealed 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3842.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1094
[h] No vehicles shall be parked within 10 feet of a fire
hydrant.
[i] No vehicles shall be parked in any appropriately
marked space for the physically handicapped unless
the vehicle is properly marked with an official permit.
[3] Stopping/standing prohibited. No person shall stop or
stand a vehicle upon any street or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Side HoursLength
Blairsden Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Brushwood Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Chesterwood Way Both All Entire
Conrad Way Both All Entire
Crossfield Lane South All From Biltmore Lane
to Breakers Lane
Knollcrest Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Longwood Lane East All From a point 175
feet south of
Blairsden to a point
100 feet164 of
Blairsden.
Manor Boulevard Both All Entire
Merriwold Lane Both All New Brunswick
Road to Osborne
Court
Osborne Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Post Lane (through
street)
Both All Cul-de-sac
Post Lane (through
street)
West All From the northern
curbline of Viscaya
to a point 235 feet
north
Rosecliff Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Sherwood Court Both All Cul-de-sac
Stone Manor Drive
[Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 3829]
Inner All Entire
Viscaya Court Both All Cul-de-sac
164. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1095
Name of Street Side HoursLength
Westover Way Both All Entire
Windfall Lane Both All Cul-de-sac
[4] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Stone Manor Drive and
Manor Boulevard [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Manor Boulevard
Stone Manor Drive and
Crossfields Lane (N)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Crossfields Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Biltmore Lane (N)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Biltmore Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Windfall Lane (N)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Windfall Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Breakers Lane (N)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Breakers Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Crossfields Lane (S)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Crossfields Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Stone Manor Drive
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Stone Manor Drive (E-W)
Stone Manor Drive and
Chesterwood Way
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Chesterwood Way
Stone Manor Drive and Post
Lane [Amended 6-9-2009
by Ord. No. 3829;
3-9-2010 by Ord. No.
3866]
Stone Manor Drive
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1096
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Stone Manor Drive and
Sherwood Court [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Sherwood Court
Stone Manor Drive and
Merriwold Lane [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Merriwold Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Knollcrest Court [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Knollcrest Court
Stone Manor Drive and
Longwood Lane (W)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Longwood Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Biltmore Lane (S) [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Biltmore Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Windfall Lane (S) [Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3829]
Windfall Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Breakers Lane (S)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Breakers Lane
Stone Manor Drive and
Longwood Lane (E)
[Amended 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829]
Longwood Lane
Crossfields Lane and
Roseclliff Court
Rosecliff Court
Crossfields Lane and
Biltmore Lane
Biltmore Lane
Crossfields Lane and
Breakers Lane
Breakers Lane
Longwood Lane and
Blairsden Court
Blairsden Court
Merriwold Lane and Osborne
Court
Osborne Court
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1097
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Merriwold Lane and Conrad
Way
Conrad Way
Chesterwood Way and
Westover Way (N)
Westover Way
Chesterwood Way and
Westover Way (S)
Westover Way
Post Lane and Viscaya Court
(N)
Post Lane
Post Lane and Viscaya Court
(S)
Viscaya Court
Post Lane and Viscaya Court (S) [Added 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3829; repealed 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3866]
Post Lane and Thistlehill
Lane
Thistlehill Lane
Post Lane and Brushwood
Court
Brushwood Court
Brushwood Court and
Thistlehill Lane
Thistlehill Lane
[5] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Biltmore Lane 25 Entire length
Blairsden Court 15 Entire length
Breakers Lane 25 Entire length
Brushwood Court 15 Entire length
Chesterwood Way 15 Entire length
Conrad Way 15 Entire length
Crossfield Lane 25 Entire length
Knollcrest Court 15 Entire length
Longwood Lane 25 Entire length
Manor Boulevard 25 Entire length
Merriwold Lane 25 Entire length
Osborne Court 15 Entire length
Post Lane 25 Entire length
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1098
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Rosecliff Court 15 Entire length
Sherwood Court 15 Entire length
Stone Manor Drive 25 Entire length
Thistlehill Lane
[Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 3829]
25 Entire length
Viscaya Court 15 Entire length
Westover Way 15 Entire length
Windfall Lane 25 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[6] Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to
obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, to block
entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, refuse containers or to present
in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner’s or operator’s expense.
[7] Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be
checked by the Police Department to ensure installations
meet state and federal specifications, and all signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
[8] Violations and penalties. Unless penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of
a violation of this Subsection C(1)(l) or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
(m) Society Hill I: Crabapple Lane, Pear Tree Lane. [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3840]
[1] General parking. All vehicles must park only in permitted
or designated areas and between the lines provided.
[2] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1099
Intersection Stop On
Society Hill Boulevard and
Pear Tree Lane
Pear Tree Lane
Society Hill Boulevard and
Crabapple Lane
Crabapple Lane
Pear Tree Lane and Pear
Tree Lane
Pear Tree Lane IFO B#15
Pear Tree Lane and Pear
Tree Lane
Pear Tree Lane IFO B#16
Pear Tree Lane and Pear
Tree Lane
Pear Tree Lane Next to
B#16
Pear Tree Lane and Pear
Tree Lane
Pear Tree Lane IFO B#1
[3] Through streets. The following streets are hereby
designated as through streets:
Streets
Crabapple Lane
[4] Speed limits. The speed limits for all streets in both
directions of travel shall be 15 MPH. Regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
[5] Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to
obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block
entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, refuse containers or present in
any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
[6] Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be
checked by the Police Department to ensure installations
meet state and federal specifications, and all signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
[7] Violations and penalties. Unless penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of
a violation of this Subsection C(1)(m) or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-31
1:1100
(n) Quail Crest I: Carlisle Court, Claridge Road, Croyden Court,
Exeter Court, Hampton Court, St. Anns Court, Stanwick Court.
[Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3900]
[1] Stopping/standing prohibited. No person shall stop or
stand a vehicle upon any street or parts of streets
described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Length
All streets Both All Entire
[2] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Claridge Road and Carlisle
Court
Carlisle Court
Claridge Road and Exeter
Court
Exeter Court
Claridge Road and Hampton
Court
Hampton Court
Claridge Road and St. Anns
Court
St. Anns Court
Claridge Road and Stanwick
Court
Stanwick Court
Claridge Road and Stanwick
Court
Stanwick Court
[3] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roadways are:
Name of
Street MPH Limits
All streets 15 Entire length
[b] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
[4] Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to
obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block
entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, refuse containers or present in
any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner’s or operator’s expense.
§ 226-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-31
1:1101
§ 226-32. Traffic controls for street and highway construction and
maintenance operations. [Added 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1933;
amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3374; 10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
4119-15]
[5] Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be
checked by the Police Department to insure installations
meet state and federal specifications, and all signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
[6] Violations and penalties. Unless penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of
a violation of this Subsection C(1)(n) or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
D. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance. All signs,
posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to
insure installations meet state and federal specifications, and all
signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
E. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
A. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and
highways.
(1) The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work above and
below ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing
the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can
become dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better
promote the public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary
to establish controls and regulations directed to the safe and
expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force
performing these operations.
(2) The Township of Franklin in the County of Somerset and State of
New Jersey does hereby adopt the current Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as MUTCD, except as
hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates
§ 226-31 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-32
1:1102
whenever construction maintenance operations or utility work
obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or
utility who fails to comply with the provisions of MUTCD while
performing such work is in violation of this section.
B. Preconstruction meetings.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case
of a public utility as required under the public utility agreement,
wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact
the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Franklin Township Police
Department in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to
submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction work. Preconstruction meetings must be scheduled
far enough in advance (a minimum of two weeks) of the desired
start date so as to allow for efficient planning.
(2) Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this
section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Police Department is
in violation of this section.
C. Hazardous conditions. The person, contractor or utility shall provide
the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Police Department with at least two
emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency
problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of
any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached, or if
the emergency contract person does not respond in a timely manner to
the call from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition,
the Township may respond to correct such hazardous conditions. The
reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Township shall be
charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible for such
conditions.
D. Hours. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or
utility work on any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00
a.m. or after 3:30 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 3:30 p.m. by the officer in charge of the
Traffic Safety Bureau of the Franklin Township Police Department if it is
determined by that officer that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 3:30 p.m. would not substantially
delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard.
E. Road closing and detours. Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not
be permitted unless approved by the officer in charge of the Traffic
Safety Bureau of the Police Department. Advance notice of detours
must be given to motorists, except in emergent circumstances.
F. Traffic directors. Any person, contractor, or in the case of a public utility
as required under the public utility agreement (other than municipal,
county or state employees), wishing to conduct work on, above or below
any of the roads listed in Table 1; is working within 200 feet of an
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:1103
intersection of any road within the Township; is working in the vicinity
of specific geographic features (e.g., sharp curves, alongside of rivers,
steep embankments, etc.); is working within 1,000 feet of a Franklin
Township Board of Education property; and/or diverts or interrupts
motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic flow shall be required to hire offduty
Franklin Township police officers or traffic directors to ensure
compliance with the MUTCD as well as to control traffic traveling
through the work zone. The Professional Services Division of the
Franklin Township Police Department shall be contacted at least 48
hours before starting work to arrange for the hiring of off-duty officers
if needed. The number of officers or traffic directors required shall be
determined by the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Police Department and
approved by the Chief of Police. For all work on roads listed in Table
1 attached, traffic control shall be by off-duty Franklin Township police
officers. The requirement to hire off-duty officers for work on, above,
below, or adjacent to the roads listed in Table 1 shall only apply to work
that will take in excess of one hour to complete. All work on, above,
below, or adjacent to the roads listed in Table 1 taking less than one
hour, or taking place on roads other than those listed in Table 1, may
be controlled with traffic directors, unless off-duty Franklin Township
police officers are deemed necessary by the Traffic Safety Bureau and
approved by the Chief of Police. All civilian flagmen must wear lime
green glow-type traffic vests and must be educated as to the proper
operation of traffic flag controls. If flagmen cannot see each other, they
must have walkie-talkie communication between them. In the event
that work requires any road to be closed to traffic 24 hours a day,
the hiring of off-duty Franklin Township police officers will be required
when it is deemed necessary by the Traffic Safety Bureau and approved
by the Chief of Police.
TABLE 1
Name of Street Location
Amwell Road/Hamilton Street
(County 514)
Entire length
Belmont Drive Entire length
Bennetts Lane Route 27 to South Middlebush
Road
Blackwells Mills Road Entire length
Bunker Hill Road (County 632) Entire length
Butler Road Entire length
Campus Drive Entire length
Canal Road Entire length
Cedar Grove Lane (County 619) Entire length
Churchill Avenue Entire length
Claremont Road (County 648) Entire length
§ 226-32 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-32
1:1104
TABLE 1
Name of Street Location
Clyde Road Entire length
Cortelyous Lane Entire length
Cottontail Lane Entire length
Davidson Avenue Entire length
DeMott Lane Entire length
Easton Avenue (County 527) Entire length
Elizabeth Avenue (County 621) Entire length
Franklin Boulevard (County 617) Entire length
Georgetown/Franklin Turnpike
(County 518)
Entire length
Highland Avenue Entire length
Jacques Lane Entire length
John F. Kennedy Boulevard Entire length
Kingston/Rocky Hill Road (County
603)
Entire length
Laurel Avenue (County 603) Entire length
Manville Causeway (County 623) Entire length
Matilda Avenue Entire length
Mettlers Lane Entire length
New Brunswick Road Entire length
Pierce Street Entire length
Randolph Road Entire length
Schoolhouse Road Entire length
Skillmans Lane Entire length
South Middlebush Road (County
615)
Entire length
State Highway Route 27 Entire length
Suydam Road Entire length
Treptow Road/Martino Drive Entire length
Van Cleef Road Entire length
Veronica Avenue Entire length
Weston Canal Road (County 623) Entire length
Weston Road Entire length
Willow Avenue Entire length
Wilson Road Entire length
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:1105
§ 226-33. Resident Permit Parking Program. [Added 5-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 3694A; amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3779]
TABLE 1
Name of Street Location
Worlds Fair Drive Entire length
G. Stop work. The Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau shall have the
authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment and
vehicles, stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of
open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any
nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
H. Site preparation and maintenance. It is to be expressly understood that
no materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in roadway or
sidewalk area until all construction, signs, lights, devices and pavement
markings are installed. All construction signs which do not currently
apply must be bagged or removed from view of the motorists (i.e.,
Flagman Ahead signs after workmen have finished for the day).
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, for a first offense pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days; for a second
offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250
and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90
days.
(2) A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Rules and regulations.
(1) Resident parking permit restrictions shall be authorized on streets
where there has been demonstrated an ongoing, excessive and
daily problem which creates a hardship and public safety issues for
residents of a municipal street. "Ongoing," "excessive" and "daily"
shall be defined to mean that a problem is occurring every day, not
just weekly, monthly or periodically.
(a) The purpose of a permit parking program is to:
[1] Address a critical parking problem that creates a public
safety hazard.
[2] Establish a residential parking program in those areas of
the Township in order to facilitate and make more
convenient parking within the Township for persons who
reside in those residential areas.
§ 226-32 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-33
1:1106
[3] Protect residential areas from excessive noise, trash and
refuse caused by the entry of vehicles from outside that
residential neighborhood.
[4] Protect residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining
access to their residences.
(b) The establishment of a resident permit parking zone shall be
upon the advice of the Chief of Police or his designee, who shall
be responsible for investigating whether or not the area
warrants the requested restrictions.
(2) A resident parking permit of a design specified by the Township will
be issued to residents of Franklin who own or lease a motor vehicle.
(3) Application for parking permits shall be made on a form by the
Township. Proof of residency of the owner or lessee of a vehicle
must be presented when applying for a permit.
(a) The following is proof of residency:
[1] A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license, reflecting an
address on a street upon which the permit parking
restrictions are imposed in the Township of Franklin; and
[2] A copy of a valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for
which the permit is sought showing an address on a street
upon which the permit parking restrictions are imposed.
(b) In the case of a vehicle claimed to be leased and used by a
Franklin resident, a copy of the automobile lease shall be
presented to the Township in lieu of the New Jersey motor
vehicle registration. Completed applications shall be submitted
to the Franklin Township Police Department Traffic Safety
Bureau. Applications submitted without a copy of a driver's
license and vehicle registration or lease shall be not processed.
(4) Permit applications shall be available at the Franklin Township
Police Department at any time during the current year. Renewals
may be completed beginning November 1.
(5) The resident's sticker is to be placed on the rear window on the
driver's side in the lower left corner of the vehicle it is issued to.
(6) There shall be no cost for the permits.
(7) There shall be no visitor permits issued.
(8) The sale of a permit is prohibited. Permits are only valid for the
vehicle they are issued to and the street/location they are issued
for.
B. Abuse of permit. Resident permits are subject to revocation for the
following:
§ 226-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-33
1:1107
(1) If any such permit is used on any vehicle that it is not registered to
under this section.
(2) Willfully providing any false or inaccurate information for the
purpose of obtaining a permit hereunder.
C. Term of permits. Resident permits shall expire annually on December
31. Any vehicle bearing an expired resident permit and parked on a
street posted as "Permit Only" shall be subject to the same penalty as a
vehicle parked on the street without a resident permit as set forth in
Subsection E.
D. Exemptions. The prohibition set forth in Subsection G shall not apply to
the following:
(1) Contractor/service and delivery vehicles. Contractor, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park adjacent to the residential premises where they
are working without permit during the times they are rendering
service.
(2) Emergency and utility vehicles. Emergency vehicles, municipal
vehicles, gas, electric, telecommunications and other similar
vehicles may park within the Township during times they are
rendering service or repairs within the Township.
(3) Health care providers may park their vehicles within the Township
during the times they are rendering assistance or healthcare
service to residents of the Township. "Health care provider" is
defined as a nurse, home health aid, physical therapist or any other
medical professional.
(4) Handicapped parking: any motor vehicle identified and registered
for a handicapped driver by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission and displaying the required handicapped plates or
placards.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any vehicle parked on a street posted "Permit Parking Only"
without a valid resident permit shall be subject to a parking fine in
the amount of $25.
(2) Any violation of Subsection B above shall be result in the offending
person being subject to a fine in an amount up to $250 for a first
offense and $500 for each subsequent offense thereafter.
(3) The Franklin Township Police Department may remove and
impound any vehicles which are parked in violation of this article.
The cost of said removal shall be borne by the vehicle owner or
lessee.
F. Enforcement.
§ 226-33 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-33
1:1108
§ 226-34. Mid-block crosswalks. [Added 10-11-2011 by Ord. No.
3950]
(1) The Franklin Township Police Department shall have the authority
to issue summonses for violations of this section.
(2) Enforcement of this section shall be under the jurisdiction of either
the Franklin Township Police Department and/or Chief of Police of
the Franklin Township Police Department.
G. Resident permit parking only at certain times on certain streets. No
person shall park or cause to be parked any vehicle on streets or parts
of streets as described within the following sections unless an
appropriate and current parking permit issued by the Township of
Franklin is displayed on said vehicle for those streets or parts of streets
as described or listed with the following sections.
Name of Street Side Hours Days Location
Carmen Street
[Added 10-28-2008
by Ord. No. 3790;
amended 1-6-2009
by Ord. No. 3809]
East 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
All Franklin Boulevard to
Irvington Avenue
Clifton Street East 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
All Franklin Boulevard to
Rogers Avenue
Dekalb Street West 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
All Franklin Boulevard to
Rogers Avenue
Dekalb Street
[Added 10-28-2008
by Ord. No. 3790]
West 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
All From a point 311 feet
north of the northerly
edge of Rogers
Avenue to the
terminus to the north
Landers Street West 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
All Franklin Boulevard to
Rogers Avenue
Rogers Avenue
[Added 10-28-2008
by Ord. No. 3790]
West 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
All Carmen Street north
to dead end
A. In an effort to improve pedestrian safety in the following vicinities, the
following mid-block crosswalks are authorized to be installed:
§ 226-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-34
1:1109
§ 226-35. Road closure except for emergency vehicles. [Added
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4170-17]
Roadway Location
Mettlers Road [Added
4-24-2018 by Ord. No.
4235-18]
Beginning at a point 160 feet south of the
extension of the southerly road edge of
Colonial Drive to a location 8 feet south
thereof and extending across Mettlers
Road in a westerly direction at an angle to
connect the established bicycle/pedestrian
path with Colonial Park the entire width of
8 feet to the westerly side of Mettlers
Road
New Brunswick Road Beginning at a point 272 feet south the
southeasterly curbline of Stonehedge
Court to a location six feet north thereof
and extending across New Brunswick
Road at a ninety-degree angle and in a
westerly direction the entire width of six
feet to the westerly side of New Brunswick
Road
Veronica Avenue [Added
6-25-2013 by Ord. No.
4024-13]
Beginning at a point 510 feet south of the
southwesterly curbline of Churchill Avenue
to a location six feet south thereof and
extending across Veronica Avenue at a
ninety-degree angle and in an easterly
direction the entire width of six feet to the
easterly side of Veronica Avenue
Willow Road Beginning at a point 410 feet east of the
northeasterly curbline of Lyndhurst Drive
to a location six feet north thereof and
extending across Willow Road at a ninetydegree
angle and in a southerly direction
the entire width of six feet to the southerly
side of Willow Road
B. Regulatory and warning signs, conforming to the current manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, shall be
erected and maintained to effect the above mid-block crosswalks.
A. Ari Drive.
(1) That portion of Ari Drive between Block 37.02, Lot 7.04 and the
easterly curbline of Julie Court shall be closed to traffic except for
emergency vehicles.
§ 226-34 FRANKLIN CODE § 226-35
1:1110
Chapter 230
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
(2) Notice of the closing shall be posted at the beginning and ending
points of the closed section of the roadway and a barricade erected
at those points.
(3) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-94.2, no person
shall drive a vehicle on or over the closed portion of the roadway.
B. Willow Avenue. [Added 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 4266-19]
(1) That portion of Willow Avenue between Smithwold Road (adjacent
to Block 424.04, Lot 481) and the southwest terminus shall be
closed to traffic except for emergency vehicles.
(2) Notice of the closing shall be posted at the points of the closed
section of the roadway and a barricade erected at those points.
(3) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-94.2, no person
shall drive a vehicle on or over the closed portion of the roadway.
C. Meadow Avenue. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 4301-19]
(1) A fifty-foot-wide road beginning at its intersection with Bennington
Parkway (formerly known as "Franklin Parkway") and extending
southwesterly, along its various courses, a distance of
approximately 714 feet to its terminus. The above-named road as
laid out on a certain map entitled, "Franklin Park Farms, Situated in
Franklin Park, Twp. of Franklin, Somerset Co., N.J.," prepared by
John J. Kentz, C.E. and Surveyor, Summit, N.J., dated October 1930,
and filed in the Somerset County Clerk's office on February 4, 1931,
as Filed Map No. 136A.
(2) Notice of the closing shall be posted at the points of the closed
section of the roadway and a barricade erected at those points.
(3) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-94.2, no person
shall drive a vehicle on or over the closed portion of the roadway.
§ 226-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:1111
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Refers to systems
of activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by
manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating
skills to access the body for the purpose of applying therapeutic massage,
bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications may include, but are
not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy,
the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external application
of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs,
explaining and describing myofascial movement, self-care and stress
management as it relates to massage, bodywork and somatic therapies.
Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy practices are designed to affect
the energetic system of the body for the purpose of promoting and
maintaining the health and well-being of the client. Massage, bodywork
and somatic therapies do not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness,
disease, impairment or disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage and Bodywork and Therapist
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment or operation wherein massage, bodywork or somatic
therapies are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such
therapies are administered for any form of consideration. The definition
shall not include premises where therapies are applied solely on an on-call
basis, such as home or office visits.
§ 230-2. Permits required.
A. Establishment permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall
operate any establishment in the Township of Franklin as or for a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment as defined herein
unless or until there has first been obtained a permit for such
establishment from the Township of Franklin in accordance with the
terms and provisions in this chapter.
B. No person shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she
has a valid and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's
license issued to him or her by the New Jersey Board of Massage and
Body Work, pursuant to the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et
seq.
C. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to massage, bodywork
or somatic therapy given:
(1) In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical
therapist or other practitioners that are licensed by the New Jersey
Board of Medical Examiners; or
§ 230-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 230-2
1:1112
§ 230-3. Application; inspection; fees.
§ 230-4. Application for permit.
(2) In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists or other practitioners that are licensed
by the New Jersey Board of Medical Examiners; or
(3) On the premises of a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hair stylist
limited to the areas of the face, neck scalp or upper part of the
body, manicurists and pedicurists, as set forth in the Cosmetology
and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.
A. Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall file an application
with the Township Clerk's Office upon a form to be furnished by said
office, and pay an annual fee of $300 at the time of new application or
renewal, for the cost to the Township for the inspections required by
§ 230-5. Permits to be issued are valid until December 31 of the year
application is filed and shall be renewed annually beginning January 1.
B. Should a reinspection of a massage establishment become necessary as
determined by the Health Department official because of violations
observed during the initial inspection, a reinspection fee of $150 shall
be charged to the establishment for each subsequent reinspection until
all violations have been corrected. The fee must be paid by the
establishment to the Township of Franklin within 10 calendar days of
the date the charge was issued.
C. All fees shall be paid to the Township Clerk's office prior to being
considered for approval. All fees are nonrefundable and/or
nontransferrable. All permits under this chapter are subject to a late fee
of $25 if the permit is not renewed by the expiration of the current
permit.
A. Any person desiring a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment permit shall file a written application with the Township
Clerk's office on a form to be furnished by the Township Clerk's office.
The completed application shall be returned to the Township Clerk's
office for processing with the established inspection fee as required in
§ 30-3.
B. In addition to the completed application, the applicant, who shall be a
principal of the business, may be required to submit additional
documentation, including but not limited to a sketch, floor plan, and/or
building layout as applicable to the application. The application form
shall contain the following information:
(1) The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-4
1:1113
(2) The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
(3) The business address and all telephone numbers, including
facsimile, where business is to be conducted.
(4) A complete list of the names and addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists, along with proof of certification
by the State of New Jersey pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
45:11-53 et seq., and employees in the business and the name and
residence address of the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner/operator to maintain an updated
employee list and provide same to the Township Clerk's Office. The
Township Clerk shall be notified in writing within seven days,
transmitted by mail, email or facsimile, of any changes to the list.
Said list shall also be made available during all inspections.
(5) The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of
the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the
applicant is a corporation; concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation
of the business:
(a) The name, complete residence address, residence telephone
number, mobile telephone number and email address.
(b) The two previous residential addresses immediately prior to
the present residential address of the applicant.
(c) Copy of current driver's license or other government-issued
photo ID.
(d) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of
the date of the application and at least two inches by two
inches in size (passport size).
(e) The massage therapy or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such a
person has previously operated in this or another municipality
or state under a license or permit which was ultimately denied,
revoked or suspended and the reason therefor and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation.
(f) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted
and the offense for which convicted and circumstances thereof.
The applicant shall execute a waiver and consent to allow a
§ 230-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 230-4
1:1114
§ 230-5. Building requirements; inspections.
fingerprint and criminal background check by the Police
Department.
(g) The submitted application must be accompanied by a copy of
the signed lease for the property location where the proposed
massage establishment will be in operation. The applicant
must be listed as the lessee on the lease.
(h) The names and addresses of three adult residents of Somerset
County, or the abutting counties of Hunterdon, Mercer,
Middlesex or Union, who will serve as character references.
These references must be persons other than relatives and
business associates.
(6) A copy of a zoning permit or change of tenant occupancy issued by
the Zoning Officer of the Township of Franklin specifically for this
establishment, or a certificate of compliance with the conditions set
forth by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment of Franklin
Township specifically for this establishment, signed by the Board
Secretary. In cases where a construction and/or building subcode
permit is required, the establishment permit under this chapter will
not become final until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Construction Official of Franklin Township specifically for this
establishment.
A. All applications for a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment permit shall be accompanied by an application for a
zoning permit or change of tenant occupancy. The Township Clerk shall
refer the application to the Construction Code Department, the Fire
Prevention Department, the Police Department, the Health
Department, and the Zoning/Planning Department, which departments
shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage
establishment and shall make written recommendations to the
Township Clerk concerning compliance with the codes that they
administer.
B. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a permit or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless an inspection by the Health Department, Construction
Code Department and Fire Prevention Division reveals that the
establishment complies with the minimum requirements of the
Building, Fire and Health Codes for businesses operating in the
Township of Franklin. In addition, the establishment must comply with
each of the following minimum requirements:
(1) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected,
and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and regularly
§ 230-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:1115
§ 230-6. Review and approval of permit; validity/transferability.
All permit applications under this chapter are subject to an administrative
review. Upon completion of the administrative review, a written report shall
be filed with the Township Clerk. If all the requirements of this chapter have
been fully satisfied, the Township Clerk shall then approve said permit. Any
permit granted under this chapter shall only be valid to the person to whom
it was granted and shall not be transferable.
§ 230-7. Enforcement agents.
The enforcement agents for massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
permits shall be the Health Officer, Police Chief, Fire Prevention Director
and/or their designees.
§ 230-8. Display of permit.
The owner of any massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment
shall display his/her permit and that of each and every massage, bodywork
or somatic therapist employed in the establishment in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment. In addition, all
therapists on site must have in their possession a government-issued photo
I.D.
§ 230-9. Operating requirements.
cleaned and disinfected by a method approved by the Health
Department.
(2) Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapy area/room shall be
equipped with a sink and an adequate area within each room for
clients to store personal items.
(3) The owner or operator shall submit a disinfection/sterilization plan
for nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages, bodywork and/or somatic therapies to the Health
Department for approval and must operate in compliance with an
approved plan. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall
be disinfected after use on each patron and stored in a clean and
sanitary manner.
(4) A shower area for clients shall be provided within the facility; such
area shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
§ 230-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 230-9
1:1116
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork or somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and be self-closing. If the dressing
room is also used as the therapy/massage room, then adequate
procedures shall be in place to safeguard the privacy of the client. In no
case shall these doors be locked when both a client and any employee
are present.
D. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity,
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
E. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment
knowingly to place his or her hand upon or touch with any part of his or
her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital area
of any other person unless said therapy is prescribed by a licensed
physician.
G. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or operator shall
perform, or offer to perform, any act which would require the touching
of the patron's sexual or genital area unless said therapy is prescribed
by a licensed physician.
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet- and dry-heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
I. Oils, creams, lotion and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork or somatic therapies shall be kept in clean, closed
containers or cabinets.
J. Animals, except for handicap service animals, or when they are clients,
shall not be permitted in the massage work area.
K. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using proper soap or disinfectant, before
administering a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to each patron.
All restroom and workstation hand wash sinks are to be stocked with
liquid hand soap and paper towels. Dispensers for soap and paper
towels are to be wall-mounted. Restroom hand wash sinks must have
signs conspicuously displayed with the following language: "Employees
must wash hands after using the restroom." If hand-washing facilities
§ 230-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-9
1:1117
§ 230-10. Inspections.
The Health Department and/or the Zoning Inspector and/or Fire Inspector
and Township Police Department shall, from time to time, at least once a
year, make an inspection of each massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter for
the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are
complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in
are not available, the therapist shall disinfect their hands with
bactericidal agent.
L. No minors shall be allowed in the facility other than the waiting area
which shall be physically separate from the therapy areas, except when
the minors are clients and accompanied in all areas by a parent or
guardian.
M. No massage establishment shall knowingly serve any patron infected
with any fungus or other skin infections, nor shall service be performed
on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, provided that a
duly licensed physician may certify that a person may be safely
provided with a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy, prescribing the
conditions thereof.
N. A written disinfection plan for all linens, towels and reusable
instruments used by the establishment must be approved by the Health
Department, kept on site and available for review by the inspecting
official at all times. The establishment must operate in conformance
with the approved plan at all times.
O. Client records must be kept for each and every client who receives
services from the massage establishment. These records shall include
at a minimum an intake form filled out by each customer to include
their name, address, phone number, date of birth, date of service, the
specific service they've received, the licensed therapist's full name,
their New Jersey State massage and bodywork therapist license
number and the signature of the client. These records must be stored
on the premises and available by the Health Department at all times for
a period of not less than three years of the date the service was
performed.
P. Signage specifying the age restriction and the required record-keeping
requirements must be posted in English, conspicuously displayed and
clearly readable from the customer entrance of the establishment at all
times.
Q. Employees shall at all times provide access to a sanitary restroom for
clients of the massage establishment.
R. The massage establishment shall conform to and observe all applicable
rules, regulations and prohibitions set forth by the New Jersey Board of
Cosmetology.
§ 230-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 230-10
1:1118
a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow
such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in
any manner.
§ 230-11. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters, nor shall any person sleep in such massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel
or other separate businesses or club or residence if the same has been
approved by the Zoning Department or granted a variance by the Franklin
Township Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 230-12. Prohibited acts.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not exclusive of, laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy; laws relating to the commission of adultery; and
laws proscribing fornication; nor shall any owner or manager tolerate in
his or her establishment any activity or behavior which violates this
chapter.
B. Any conviction of a bodywork or somatic therapy establishment, or any
employee thereof, of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes shall devolve upon the owner or manager of the establishment, it
being specifically declared that, following such a conviction, the owner
or the manager of the establishment shall be prosecuted as an
accessory to such a violation, and the required permits will be
automatically revoked.
C. The owner or operator of the massage establishment shall not permit:
(1) Ear candling.
(2) All procedures and services that involve ear picks, ear scoops or
ear spoons.
(3) Cupping or applying the open end of a glass vessel or vessel of
another material onto the client's skin and utilizing an open flame
to heat the vessel.
(4) Any activities or therapies that utilize any form of terrestrial or
aquatic animals during therapy, including but not limited to fish
foot spas.
§ 230-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-12
1:1119
§ 230-13. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
(5) Any activities or therapies that utilize animal waste or products
that contain animal waste as an ingredient.
(6) Colon cleansing.
D. Pest control chemicals or sprays are prohibited. Pest control services
must be performed by NJDEP-licensed pest control contractors.
E. Laundering is restricted to only those linens and towels used within the
operation. The laundering of personal clothing and/or items is
prohibited. Personal clothing or other personal items may not be
commingled with the linens or towels used in the operation nor shall
personal clothing not specific to the operation be stored on the
premises.
F. No bulk food storage or meal preparation is permitted on premises.
G. Personal effects of establishment owner(s) or employee(s) are not
permitted on premises.
H. No one under 18 years of age shall be served unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
I. Alcoholic beverages shall not be stored nor consumed on the premises.
A. Establishment permits issued under this chapter may be denied,
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police, after notice and a public
hearing. Reasons for denial, suspension and revocation of an
establishment permit include but are not limited to:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the establishment permit;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made while operating
the licensed business in the Township;
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty;
(5) Conducting the permitted business within the Township in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a danger to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(6) The owner and/or operator or any employee refuses to permit any
duly authorized Township police officer or Health Official to inspect
the premises or the operations therein.
(7) The conviction of any employee of the establishment for a violation
of the prohibited acts set forth in § 230-12 shall create a rebuttable
§ 230-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 230-13
1:1120
§ 230-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished as provided in Chapter, Article II, General Penalty, in the
discretion of the court.
Chapter 236
MUNICIPAL SERVICES
presumption that the owner/operator had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation resulting in the conviction and shall
constitute cause for the suspension or revocation of the
establishment permit.
B. Notice of the hearing for the denial, suspension or revocation of a
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
therefor and the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall
be given personally or mailed to the permittee at the address provided
on the application or permit at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing. The Township Manager shall serve as hearing officer for
any hearing pursuant to this subsection.
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:1121

ARTICLE I
Homeowners' Associations
[Adopted 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1528 (Ch. 163 of the 1990 Code);
amended in its entirety 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3826]
§ 236-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — Any residential condominium, cooperative, fee simple
community, or horizontal property regime, the residents of which do not
receive any tax abatement or tax exemption related to its construction,
comprised of a community trust or other trust device, condominium
association, homeowners' association, or council of co-owners, wherein the
cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing essential services is
paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively of unit owners
within the community. No apartment building or garden apartment complex
owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly rental payments from
tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered an association. No
proprietary campground facility, as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:22A-49, shall be
considered to be an association.
CONDITIONALLY QUALIFIED STREETLIGHT POLE — Those poles
providing streetlighting for both qualified streets and parking areas
coincidentally and which if removed would eliminate necessary lighting for
a qualified street. Only those streetlight poles set forth in Schedule A165 as
conditionally qualified streetlight poles shall qualify for partial funding by
the Township in accordance with § 236-3 herein.
QUALIFIED STREET — A street or road located within an association and
providing access to driveways or parking areas within that association;
provided, however, that in no event shall areas used primarily as parking
areas or parking lots be considered qualified streets. The streets and roads
set forth on Schedule A166 annexed hereto and made a part hereof are
hereby deemed to be a listing of all qualified streets. Any street not set forth
on Schedule A shall not be deemed a qualified street notwithstanding any
provision herein.
QUALIFIED STREETLIGHT POLE — Those poles providing streetlighting
which are located on or near qualified streets and which provide lighting for
qualified streets. Streetlighting poles providing lighting for areas primarily
used as parking lots shall be excluded from the definition of "qualified
streetlight pole." Only those streetlight poles set forth in Schedule A167 as
qualified streetlights shall qualify for total funding by the Township.
REIMBURSABLE SNOW/ICE REMOVAL COSTS — Cost incurred by the
association for the removal of snow and ice from the roads and streets
165. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-1
1:1123
located on the association property as set forth in Schedule A,168 excluding
all costs attributable to clearing sidewalks, parking lots and other areas of
the association property other than roads and streets.
§ 236-2. Services to be provided.
A. The Township of Franklin shall provide the following services within an
association in the same fashion as it provides these services on public
roads and streets:
(1) Maintenance and repair of qualified streets;
(2) Maintenance and repair of waterlines (up to the curb stop of each
individual unit), storm sewers beneath qualified streets; and
(3) Streetlighting of conditionally qualified and qualified streetlight
poles.
B. For purposes of maintenance and repair pursuant to Subsection A(1)
and (2) above, the Township of Franklin shall provide the following
services: catastrophic road repair; pothole repair; repair of cracks
including alligator cracks; and other routine road repairs. The
Township shall not provide complete overlayment of qualified streets
nor shall the Township provide any maintenance and repair
necessitated as a result of any road openings, other than road openings
performed by Franklin Township.
C. For purposes of streetlighting pursuant to Subsection A(3) above, each
association shall authorize the Township of Franklin to transfer billing
of qualified streetlight poles from the association to the Township, and
the Township shall assume liability for payment of lighting said poles
from the date when the association authorizes the Township to take
ownership and upon a qualified association's addition to Schedule A.169
by official action of the Township's governing body. In accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.3a(2), the Township shall provide streetlighting to the
extent of payment for the electricity required for the operation of such
poles, but shall not be responsible for the installation or maintenance of
lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment. [Amended 8-14-2012
by Ord. No. 3983]
D. The Township shall provide annual reimbursement to any association
for the association's reimbursable costs for snow and ice removal in the
amount of 100% of reimbursement costs, as further detailed in this
chapter.
(1) The Township shall not be obligated to pay reimbursement to an
association for any service for which the costs incurred by the
association for any service for which reimbursement is sought
exceeds the cost that would have been incurred by the Township in
168. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 236-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 236-2
1:1124
providing the particular service directly. This limitation shall be
calculated and applied as follows:
(a) Following the close of each budget year, the Township will
determine the total annual cost incurred by the Township for
snow and ice removal. Based upon those figures, the Township
will determine the annual cost for each such service in
accordance with Subsection D(1)(b);
(b) The annual Township cost for snow removal shall be divided by
the total linear miles of all public streets owned and
maintained by the Township to produce the annual unit cost for
snow removal;
(c) The annual unit cost for each service shall be multiplied by the
total linear miles of the association's roads and streets, as
applicable, to produce the annual reimbursement cost ceiling
for snow removal service.
(2) The Township reserves the right to provide to the association snow
removal services in lieu of paying reimbursement to the association
for such service. If the Township elects to provide any service, or to
terminate any such service after it has been provided, the
association shall be given advance written notice. The Township
shall not be obligated to pay reimbursement to the association for
any costs incurred by the association for any services while the
same services are being provided by the Township. If the Township
elects to provide any service, the association shall pay the cost of
any insurance riders required by the Township to enable Township
vehicles to operate on the association's private roads and streets,
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.4.
(3) Requests by the association for the payment of reimbursement
under this section shall be processed pursuant to the following
procedure:
(a) The association shall submit a signed voucher to the Township
with each request for payment, using voucher forms to be
provided by the Township.
(b) The Township will review the association's documentation and
determine whether the requested reimbursement is consistent
with and authorized by this chapter. The Township will disallow
any excess amount or unauthorized portion of the
reimbursement request.
(c) Vouchers shall be submitted on an annual basis following the
end of the snow removal season for which reimbursement is
requested, but in no event later than September 15. Each
voucher shall be accompanied by copies of invoices, payment
receipts and other appropriate documentation, which
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township that all costs
§ 236-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-2
1:1125
§ 236-3. Additional services to be provided. [Amended 8-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3983]
The Township shall provide payment for streetlighting for 100% of the
conditionally qualified streetlighting poles. For purposes of streetlighting
pursuant to this section, each association shall authorize the Township
of Franklin to transfer billing for 100% of the conditionally qualified
streetlighting poles set forth in Schedule A170 from the association to the
Township. The Township shall assume liability for payment of streetlighting
for said poles from the date when the association authorizes the Township
to take ownership and upon a qualified association's addition to Schedule
A by official action of the Township's governing body. In accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.3a(2), the Township shall provide streetlighting to the
extent of payment for the electricity required for the operation of such
poles, but shall not be responsible for the installation or maintenance of
lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment.
§ 236-4. General provisions; limits upon Township's obligations;
accounting by associations.
constitute reimbursement costs and that the association
incurred all costs during the applicable reimbursement period.
Vouchers shall not be processed for payment by the Township if
they do not conform with these requirements. In that event, the
association will be given notice and the opportunity to provide
additional requested documentation and/or otherwise cure any
nonconformity with these submission requirements.
(d) After making such determination, the reimbursement amount
(less any disallowed amount) for snow removal will be reduced
by the Township if it exceeds the applicable reimbursement
cost ceiling, as calculated pursuant to § 236-2D(1).
(e) The total reimbursement amount shall then be multiplied by
the applicable percentage in § 236-2D(1) to produce the
approved reimbursed amount.
(f) Following formal approval of a reimbursement request,
payment shall be issued in accordance with routine Township
procedures.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2 et seq., unless otherwise
provided herein the Township shall not be obligated or required to
operate any municipally owned or leased vehicles or other equipment,
or to provide any of the services enumerated in this article, upon, along
or in relation to any road or street in an association which either is not
accepted for dedication to public use, or does not meet all municipal
standards and specifications for such dedication, except for width.
170. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 236-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 236-4
1:1126
§ 236-5. Schedule A.
(Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.)
B. In all cases where the Township reimburses an association in lieu of
providing services directly under this article, the association shall
provide an accounting of the use of the money paid over to it by the
Township, and for the refunding to the Township of any payments in
excess of the amounts actually expended or contractually committed by
the association, during the accounting period in order to provide the
services for which reimbursement is provided.
§ 236-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-5
1:1127
Chapter 241
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
§ 241-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack on a public right-of-way.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in
accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers only.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway intended for the use of pedestrians,
between the curbline or the lateral line of a shoulder or, if none, the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent right-of-way line.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 241-2. Permit required. [Amended 4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2071]
It shall be unlawful for any person firm, or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street or sidewalk or in any other public
way or place in the Township of Franklin any newsrack without first
submitting a completed application to the Township Clerk, receiving
approval from the Franklin Township Police Department, obtaining a decal
from the Township Clerk and affixing that decal to the newsrack. Any
newsracks being operated without such decal shall be in violation of this
chapter. No fee shall be required for such decal.
§ 241-3. Approval procedure. [Added 4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2071]
Within two days of receipt of the application, the Township Clerk shall
forward the application to the Franklin Township Police Department. Within
15 days of receipt of the application from the Township Clerk, the Franklin
Township Police Department shall approve the application, and shall direct
§ 236-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 241-3
1:1128
the Township Clerk to give the applicant a decal, if the application meets all
requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the location of the
newsrack. If the application does not meet all requirements of this chapter,
the Franklin Township Police Department shall send to the applicant, via
certified and regular mail, written notice of such denial, listing the reason(s)
for denial. Applicants whose applications were denied may file a new
application, with the appropriate changes, at any time.
§ 241-4. Form of application.
The application for a newsrack permit shall require the following
information from the applicant: name, address, phone number and contact
person of the newspaper, proposed location of the newsrack, and a
disclaimer to be signed by the newspaper that it is familiar with the
requirements of this chapter. There shall be no fee to file this application.
§ 241-5. Standards for installations and maintenance.
Any newsrack which, in whole or part, rests upon or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24 inches in width or 20
inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coinreturn
mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion, in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
§ 241-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-5
1:1129
§ 241-6. Location and placement.
Any newsrack which rests, in whole or in part, upon or on any portion
of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peelings or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly
or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle.
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business.
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. Newsrack or newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise secured
so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public right-ofway.
D. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than six feet along a curb.
E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within 12 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) Within three feet of or on any public or other area improved with
lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. However,
§ 241-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 241-6
1:1130
§ 241-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation or
employee thereof who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 248
NURSING HOMES AND REST HOMES
§ 248-1. Availability of ambulance. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478; 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1971]
All duly licensed nursing homes, rest homes and health maintenance
organizations within the Township are hereby required to own, lease, rent
or have immediately available by other arrangement an ambulance for the
conveyance of nonambulatory as well as emergency patients.
§ 248-2. Situations warranting ambulance. [Amended 4-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 1949]
A duly licensed nursing home, rest home or health maintenance
organization may call the appropriate Volunteer First Aid Squad or Rescue
Squad serving said nursing home, rest home or health maintenance
organization in any situation which falls within the definition of "advanced
life support," as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 26:2K-7 et seq., and
applicable regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Health. Such situations, by way of example, shall include chest pain,
difficulty in breathing, sudden loss of consciousness, stroke, diabetic
emergency, cardiac arrest or life-threatening hemorrhage.
§ 248-3. Proof of availability of ambulance. [Amended 8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 1971; 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
newsracks shall be allowed within three feet of or on public grass
area between the curb and the sidewalk. [Amended 4-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 2071]
(6) Located in such a manner as to obstruct the line of sight of
motorists.
(7) Located adjacent to a roadway unless there is adequate shoulder
area to allow motorists to park while using the newsrack without
impeding traffic on the roadway.
A. All nursing homes, rest homes and health maintenance organizations
will file proof of the availability of such vehicles with the Township
Clerk within 60 days from the final passage of this chapter and on or
before September 1 of each and every year thereafter.
§ 241-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:1131
§ 248-4. False alarms. [Amended 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1701;
4-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1949]
It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any nursing home, rest
home or health maintenance organization, or any agent, servant or
employee thereof, to cause any such First Aid Squad or Rescue Squad
to respond to a false alarm. For the purposes of this chapter, a "false
alarm" shall be defined as any circumstance where a determination is made
by a mobile intensive care paramedic, emergency medical technician or
mobile intensive care nurse at the scene that the situation does not meet
the designated advanced life support criteria as defined by the applicable
statute and regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 248-5. Violations and penalties; rules and regulations.
Chapter 253
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 115.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
Special events — See Ch. 325.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
B. If such vehicle is owned by the nursing home, rest home or health
maintenance organization, such proof shall indicate the make, model,
year, color, serial number, license plate number, location and ownership
of said vehicle. If such vehicle is owned by a party other than the
nursing home, rest home or health maintenance organization, proof
shall be submitted showing the agreement under which said vehicle is
available to the nursing home, rest home or health maintenance
organization.
A. Any person, firm, association, partnership, company, joint venture or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty, for each such violation. Each day such violation continues, and/
or each time a Volunteer First Aid Squad or Rescue Squad is called to
the site, shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended 4-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 1949]
B. The Township Manager may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management, provided that the Council
must first approve such rules or any changes thereto.
§ 248-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 253-1
1:1132
§ 253-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any parade, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or
any similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the
Township of Franklin.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk of the Township of Franklin.
§ 253-2. Permit required; exceptions.
No person shall organize, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade
permit shall have been obtained from the Township Clerk. This chapter shall
not apply to:
§ 253-3. Application for permit.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Township on forms provided by such official.
A. Funeral processions;
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities and occurs on
school property; and
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
A. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Township
Clerk not less than seven nor more than 30 working days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization, as well as a notarized
statement executed by an officer of such organization authorizing
the applicant to apply for a permit on behalf of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct.
§ 253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-3
1:1133
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who will constitute or partake;
and, if animals will be included in the parade or line of march, then
the specific type of animal, whether domestic or wild; and the
number and description of the motor vehicles or any other type
vehicle expected to be used in the parade, march, ceremonies,
show, exhibit or procession.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location of streets or any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Township Clerk a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his/her behalf.
(13) The application shall contain a statement of the purpose of the
parade.
(14) The applicant shall provide the Township Clerk with a satisfactory
map of a detour route, if necessary. This map should show the type
of signs and their locations. Any roadways which are involved in the
detour route and which are not incorporated with the Township of
Franklin must have prior written permission from the property
owner and this permission must be submitted at the time of
application. All signs must meet the specifications of the manual
and uniform traffic control devices. All signs must be installed
immediately prior to the closing of any streets and be removed
immediately after reopening of such streets. All signs are to be
secured to their own post and not to telephone poles or any other
sign posts, trees or objects. No signs are to be placed in front of any
traffic control devices, nor shall they, in any way, obstruct a sight
line of any roadway or driveway. The detour route and signage
placement must be approved by a police traffic officer prior to the
start of the road closing.
§ 253-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 253-3
1:1134
§ 253-4. Standards for permit issuance.
The Township Clerk shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, the Clerk finds that:
(15) Any additional information which the Township Clerk shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
C. If the parade will use or traverse any state or county road or highway
within the Township of Franklin, the application shall be accompanied
by a written consent or other written authorization to hold such parade
on the date and at the time requested, issued by the public agency or
body having jurisdiction and control over said road or highway.
D. The Clerk, when good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority
to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than seven
working days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Township to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Township.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Township other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance services to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit.
§ 253-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-5
1:1135
§ 253-5. Denial of permit. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
If the application shall be disapproved, the Township Clerk shall give
written notice thereof, by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant within three working days of the filing of said
application, setting forth the reasons for the denial of the permit.
§ 253-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Township Manager. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice of the denial by mailing a written notice of such appeal, certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the Township Clerk.
§ 253-7. Alternate permits.
The Township Clerk, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time,
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of
acceptance with the Township Clerk at least two working days prior to the
date when the parade is to be conducted. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this chapter.
§ 253-8. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, notice thereof shall be
forwarded by the Township Clerk to the following:
§ 253-9. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
A. The Township Council;
B. The Mayor;
C. The Township Attorney;
D. The Township Manager;
E. The Township Chief of Police;
F. The Township Chief Fire Inspector;
G. The Director of the Department of Public Works; and
H. The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of which vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.
A. Starting time;
§ 253-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 253-9
1:1136
§ 253-10. Duties of permittee.
§ 253-11. Public conduct during parades.
B. Minimum speed;
C. Maximum speed;
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade;
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
G. Such other information as the Township Clerk shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
B. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such
activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the
conduct of the parade and shall advise the police officer in charge of his
whereabouts during said parade for the purposes of communicating
necessary information.
C. The permittee shall notify, in writing, businesses and residents fronting
along the proposed parade route, at least 48 hours in advance of the
time scheduled for the commencement of such parade, of the fact of
such parade. Such notice may be by newspaper advertisement,
distribution of handbills or flyers, or other similar means.
D. The permittee shall be required to deposit an escrow with the Township
at the time of application. Such monies shall be used to reimburse the
Township for any costs associated with Police Department personnel
assigned to the parade when police supervision cannot be accomplished
with the regular staff/complement of patrol officers assigned to the shift
during which the parade occurs. The amount of escrow deposit shall be
determined by the Chief of Police based upon a reasonable estimate of
the manpower and time necessary to effect supervision and control of
the parade route. Any excess monies shall be returned to the parade
organizers; should cost exceed the Police Chief's reasonable estimate,
the permittee shall be required to pay such excess amounts.
A. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any lawful parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle
or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. No driver of a vehicle, street car or trackless trolley shall drive between
the vehicles or person comprising a lawful parade when such vehicles
or person are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
§ 253-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-11
1:1137
§ 253-12. Revocation of permit.
The Township Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued hereunder upon violation of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth. The person to whom the permit has been issued shall be granted a
hearing by the Clerk upon request of said person.
§ 253-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
Chapter 260
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
parks — See Ch. 93, Art. III.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 115.
Littering — See Ch. 142.
Curfew — See Ch. 161.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Firearms — See Ch. 187.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 271.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 378.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part
thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police
shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person
shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
chapter.
§ 253-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 253-13
1:1138
ARTICLE I
Fees for Park Programs
[Adopted 2-7-1980 by Ord. No. 980 (Ch. 127, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 260-1. Fees. [Amended 1-28-1986 by Ord. No. 1264]
Prior to the commencement of each particular season, the Recreation
Advisory Council will determine a fee for the programs to be run during
that season, which fee shall be commensurate with the cost of running
said programs and subject to any federal or state regulations governing the
allocation of said cost. A copy of said fee schedule shall be filed with the
Clerk of the Township of Franklin and shall be effective 30 days subsequent
to such filing.
§ 260-2. Exemptions. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1446]
The Director of the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations
and Park Administration is authorized to exempt from the imposition of
any charge any individual who shall be deemed to be economically
disadvantaged.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:1139

ARTICLE II
Park Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 8-28-1975 by Ord. No. 756 (Ch. 175, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 260-3. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
3165]
A. As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMALS — Includes cats, dogs, horses any fowl or birds; any living
creatures within jurisdiction of the park.
BRIDLEPATH — Any path maintained for equestrians.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Franklin Township Department of
Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park Administration.
FRANKLIN TOWNSHIP PARKS, PARKWAYS, PRESERVATION AREAS,
OPEN SPACE PARCELS AND RESERVATIONS — All the real property
situated in the Township of Franklin acquired by or under the
jurisdiction and care of the Department of Recreation, Community
Celebrations and Park Administration or which may be hereafter
acquired by it or come under its jurisdiction.[Amended 12-14-2004
by Ord. No. 3512]
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Franklin.
PARK POLICE OR OFFICERS — Any person employed by the
Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration or any municipal policeman or state police officer.
PATH — Any footpath, walk or any path maintained for pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN — A person afoot.
PERMIT — Any written license issued or under the authority of the
Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration permitting a special event or activity on park facilities
and grounds.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association,
joint association, firm or copartnership.
PRESERVE — An open space tract of land that is being managed for
wildlife habitat and passive recreation.[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 3512]
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVE — Every road or lane or driveway not open
to the use of the public in general.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway,
drive or path.
SAFETY ZONE — Any space, within a drive, established for pedestrians.
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:1141
§ 260-4. Construal. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
In the interpretation of the rules of the Department of Recreation,
Community Celebrations and Park Administration their provisions shall be
construed as follows:
§ 260-5. Scope. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
Franklin Township Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and
Park Administration regulations shall be effective within all the parks,
parkways and reservations under the administration of the Department and
shall regulate the use thereof by all persons.
§ 260-6. Prohibited activities. [Amended 11-13-1975 by Ord. No.
776; 8-22-1977 by Ord. No. 869]
STOPPING OR STANDING — When prohibited, any cessation or
movement of a vehicle, occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, including horses.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles, either
singly or together, while in the confines of the park's jurisdiction.
VEHICLE — Any conveyance, except baby carriages, including motor
vehicles, bicycles, tricycles, sleds, sleighs, pushcarts or vehicles
propelled by other than muscular power; also any horse trailers.
B. Word usage.
(1) Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
(2) Any term in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. Any requirement or prohibitions of any act shall, respectively, extend to
and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such
act.
B. No provisions hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed
by any officer or employee of the Department in the line of duty or work
as such or by any person, his agents or employees in the proper and
necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the
Department.
C. Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be lawful if
performed under, by virtue of and strictly within the provisions of a
permit so to do and to the extent authorized thereby.
A. Advertising. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, hand out,
deliver, place, cast or leave about any bill, billboard, placard, ticket,
handbill, circular or advertisement or do any of the following without
written permission of the Department:
§ 260-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-6
1:1142
(1) Display any flag, banner, transparency, target, sign, placard or any
other matter for advertising purposes.
(2) Operate any musical instrument, soundtrack or drum for
advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting attention to
any exhibition, show, performance or other display.
(3) Conduct public speeches or rallies.
B. Soliciting. No person shall solicit for any purpose.
C. Animals. No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in
his custody or under his control to go or be at large.
(1) Dogs in parks and open space shall be restrained by a leash not
exceeding six feet in length, except on the John Clyde Memorial
Native Grassland Preserve and on the Negri-Nepote Grassland
Preserve, where dogs are prohibited. [Amended 2-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 3803A; 3-26-2019 by Res. No. 19-133]
(2) No person shall ride or drive a horse unless it is well broken and
constantly held in such control that it may be easily or quickly
turned and stopped.
(3) No horse shall be unbridled or left unattended in any unenclosed
area without being securely fastened.
(4) No horse shall be driven or ridden in the parks or open space,
except at such locations designated for this purpose by the
Department. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3803A]
(5) No person shall hunt, molest, kill, wound, trap, take, chase, shoot
or throw missiles at, remove or have in his possession any animal,
reptile or bird or knowingly buy, receive, have in his possession,
sell or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or eggs so taken.
(6) No person shall fish in any of the rivers and canals bordering the
parks unless he has a state license. No person shall kill, wound,
discharge or throw missiles at any fish in such waters, or place
therein any piscivorous fish, poison or any other substances
injurious to fish.
(7) Dogs and horses are prohibited at all times at Bunker Hill
Environmental Center. [Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
(8) No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in his
custody or under his control to go or be at large at other parks,
parkways, preservation areas and reservations. [Added
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
(9) John Clyde Memorial Native Grassland Preserve and Negri-Nepote
Native Grassland Preserve. Dogs and horses are prohibited at all
times except that horses may be ridden on the John Clyde Memorial
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:1143
Preserve on specially designated trails only upon obtaining a
Township-issued permit from the Parks and Recreation
Department. [Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512; amended
9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3628; 3-26-2019 by Res. No. 19-133]
D. Disorderly conduct.
(1) No person shall throw stones or other missiles so as to annoy other
persons.
(2) No person shall climb or stand upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat,
statue or other structure unless the structure is designated for that
purpose.
(3) No person shall enter or leave park facilities except at established
entrances and exits.
(4) No person shall litter in the park or deposit on the ice or in the
ponds any matter that would tend to damage the ice for skating or
pollute the ponds.
(5) No person shall fail to obey or interfere with an officer in the
proper performance of his duties.
(6) No person shall remove or open permanent or temporary barriers,
signs, directionals, gates or fences.
(7) Collecting of natural materials from within the Bunker Hill
Environmental Center and grounds, and any open space parcels,
including preserves is prohibited except for educational use.
[Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
(8) Straying from trails within the Bunker Hill Environmental Center
grounds, and any open space parcels, including preserves, is
prohibited except when otherwise permitted for educational
purposes. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
(9) Picnicking within the Bunker Hill Environmental Center grounds is
prohibited except where permission has been specifically granted.
(10) Picnicking within a preserve is prohibited except where specifically
designated at picnic tables. [Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
3512]
(11) Hunting on all open space and preserves is prohibited, unless a
Township hunting permit is issued by the Franklin Township
Wildlife Control Committee. In no instance shall hunting be
permitted at the Bunker Hill Environmental Education Center.
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
E. Explosives. No person shall bring into or have in possession at said
parks any explosives, including any substance, compound, mixture or
article having properties of such a character that, alone or in
§ 260-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-6
1:1144
combination or conjunction with other substances or compounds, may
decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas or pressure,
or any or all of them, to produce rapid flaming or combustion or
administer a destructive blow to surrounding objects.
F. Firearms, weapons and tools; concealed weapons. No person shall
bring into or have in his possession:
(1) Any pistol or revolver or objects upon which loaded or blank
cartridges may be used.
(2) Any tools, instruments, skeleton keys, picklocks, jimmies or other
things known as "burglar tools," except when authorized by law.
(3) Any rifle, shotgun, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow or other
instrument or weapon in which the propelling force is a spring or
air, excepting the lawful uses of such weapons at places and times
prescribed by special permission of the Department.
(4) Any hunting knife, switchblade or dirk of any kind.
G. Fires. No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire, except in
places provided for such purposes or where a permit has been issued.
(1) All fires shall be continuously under the care and direction of a
competent person from the time the fire is kindled until it is
extinguished.
(2) No fire shall be built within 10 feet of any tree or any building or
beneath the branches of any tree or in any underbrush.
(3) No cigar, cigarette or lighted match shall be discarded carelessly or
in a manner which may start a fire.
H. Closing hours. All parks will close 30 minutes after sundown, except
where and when specific closing hours are designated.
I. Opening hours. All park areas will open at sunrise unless otherwise
specified or designated by signs.
J. Vending. No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise
or any other thing within the parks, except by special permit of the
Department.
K. Minors. No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or
allow him or her to do any act prohibited by any law or any Township
ordinance while in the presence of said parent, guardian or custodian.
L. Vehicle operation. There shall be no operation except on roadways or as
signs direct. Use of motorized vehicles, such as off-road, all-terrain
vehicles (ATVs), cars, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes,
trail bikes, motor scooters, go-carts, motorized skateboards or dune
buggies, is prohibited. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512;
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3803A]
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:1145
§ 260-7. Regulated activities.
§ 260-8. Protection of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
M. Vehicle parking. There shall be none except in designated areas.
N. No consumption of illegal drugs and/or alcoholic beverages is allowed
in any park.
O. No person shall bring into or have in his possession within any park
area any glass container for whatever purpose.
A. The following activities are permitted only at times and in areas so
designated for that purpose by the Department and are otherwise
prohibited within the parks:
(1) Swimming, bathing or wading.
(2) Boating on streams.
(3) Ice-skating, sledding or skiing.
(4) Model airplane flying.
(5) Horseback riding.
(6) Golfing.
(7) Archery.
B. All persons using the facilities of the Department must obey the posted
rules and regulations established for the proper, effective and safe
utilization of said facility.
A. Throw or place any foreign or waste substance in any lake, river,
lagoon, stream, storm sewer or drain of the parks or leading into or
bordering upon the aforementioned or any substance, matter or thing
which may or shall result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Injure trees, shrubs and grass or destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate,
disturb, sever or remove from the ground any plant, flower, growing
thing, stem, branch or leaf thereof or:
(1) Pile debris of any kind against the same.
(2) Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance thereto.
(3) Set fire or assist in setting a fire to any of the same.
(4) Ride or hitch horses or any other animal over to any of the same.
C. Injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy or tamper with
any drive, path, walk, bridge or approach thereto; or take up to remove
§ 260-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-8
1:1146
§ 260-9. Permits. [Amended 11-13-1975 by Ord. No. 776;
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
A permit authorizing a person or organization the use of any facility of
the Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration may be granted upon written application to the Director
of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park Administration, and all
conditions of approval shall be based upon all sections of this article; and
any violation of the terms, conditions, rules or regulations or a falsification
of the application shall be grounds for revocation by the Department of
Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park Administration or its
representatives.
§ 260-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 3512]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay a fine
or penalty therefor as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, for
each offense.
or carry away any asphalt, concrete, flagstone, rock, stone, gravel,
sand, clay or earth; or make any excavation of any kind, name or
nature; or harvest, cut, injure or remove any ice; or injure, deface,
displace, remove or destroy any structure, building, post, railing, bench
set, platform, stand, tree guard, telephone, telegraph, pipe or main for
conducting gas, water or wires or any hydrant, sewer, drain, pipe, main,
receiving basin, covering manhole or vent forming a part thereof or any
appurtenance or appendage connected therewith or any other property
or equipment, real or personal, owned by or under the jurisdiction
or control of said Department or appertaining to the creation,
government, use or maintenance of said parks; or injure, deface,
displace, remove or destroy any sign, inscription, post or monument
erected or marked for any purpose or any mileboard, milestone, danger
sign or signal, guide sign or post or any signaling device sanctioned,
installed or placed by said Department or Township within the parks for
the purpose of direction, restricting or regulating traffic, establishing
zones or giving information or direction to the public; or interfere with
any lamp, lamppost, gas or electric apparatus or extinguish the light
therein, except upon proper authority; or, without a permit, attach,
string, adjust or carry any wire or other object in, on or over any part
of said parks.
D. Rubbish and refuse matter. No person shall take into, carry through,
leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or on said parks or
suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee or person in his or her
charge to take into, carry through, leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop or
discharge into or on said parks any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other
material.
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:1147

ARTICLE III
Exclusive-Use Permits for Park Facilities
[Adopted 8-27-1982 by Ord. No. 1089]
§ 260-11. Exclusive-use permits and fees. [Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 3165; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512; 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
3828; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3837; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3924;
6-12-2014 by Ord. No. 4061-14]
The Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration shall be permitted to issue exclusive-use permits for the
park facilities and then establish fees as listed herein:
§ 260-12. Multiple reservations.
Multiple reservations on the same permit shall be considered as one facility
at the highest single rate.
§ 260-13. Use of other facilities.
All other facilities administered by the Department of Recreation,
Community Celebrations and Park Administration shall not be subject to
permit procedure and are on a first-come-first-served basis.171
A. Fees for facilities. [Amended 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4179-17]
Facility Resident Fee Nonresident Fee
Picnic area $40/4 hours $80/4 hours
Athletic field $30/4 hours $60/4 hours
Basketball courts $10/4 hours $20/4 hours
Tennis courts for
tournaments
$10/4 hours $20/4 hours
B. Fees for synthetic turf fields.
(1) For residents, $100/2 hours, plus $25/2 hours for lights.
(2) For nonresidents, $200/2 hours, plus $50/2 hours for lights.
(3) For resident nonprofit, $50/2 hours, plus $25/2 hours for lights.
(4) For nonresident nonprofit, $100/2 hours, plus $50/2 hours for
lights.
(5) For resident for profit, $200/hour, plus $50/2 hours for lights.
(6) For nonresident for profit, $250/hour, plus $50/2 hours for lights.
C. Deposit. A nonrefundable deposit of $20 is required with the permit
application. [Added 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 4179-17]
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:1149
§ 260-14. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the payment of permit fees:
§ 260-15. Review by Director.
Additional considerations for permit approval may be required at the
discretion of the Director of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration. They include:
A. All activities sponsored in whole or in part by the Department of
Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park Administration.
B. All activities sponsored in whole or in part by local public funding (tax
revenues).
C. The Township Council, via resolution, may exempt incorporated youthserving
organizations that are located in Franklin Township.
[Amended 6-12-2014 by Ord. No. 4061-14]
A. Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant has secured coverage for the named event and specific date in
question from an insurance agent licensed to conduct business in the
State of New Jersey in the following amounts: [Amended 11-14-2000
by Ord. No. 3165]
(1) $1,000,000 per occasion.
(2) $300,000 per person.
(3) $100,000 for property damage.
B. A wholly or partially returnable maintenance deposit of $300 made
payable to the Township of Franklin to offset additional maintenance
expenses as a result of the facility use by the applicant. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
C. A wholly or partially returnable wage deposit in the amount to be
determined by the actual estimated cost of placing an employee of the
Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration at the facility specifically as a result of the applicant's
intended use.
D. A nonrefundable fee be assessed to the permit holder in the amount to
be determinined by the actual estimated cost of placing one or more
portable toilets at a facility specifically required as a result of the
applicant’s intended use. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 3828]
171. Editor's Note: Original § 175-12, Access to permit process, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591.
§ 260-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-16
1:1150
§ 260-16. Denial of permit.
A permit may be denied by the Director of Recreation, Community
Celebrations and Park Administration if, in the opinion of the Director, the
intended use:
§ 260-17. Administrative policies and procedures. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3512]
The Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration is hereby authorized to establish administrative procedures
and policies consistent with the intent and purpose of this article. Events in
Township parks may also be subject to the special event permit process.
§ 260-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay a fine
or penalty therefor as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, for
each offense.
A. Is inconsistent with the facility's design and purpose.
B. Would cause undue hardship on the Department, park, neighborhood or
public.
C. Would be counter to public policy or local, state or federal law.
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:1151

ARTICLE IV
County Regulations
[Adopted 8-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1246]
§ 260-19. Adoption of county park rules.
The Rules and Regulations of the Somerset County Park Commission, a copy
of which is annexed hereto as Exhibit A, be and hereby are incorporated
herein by reference and are hereby incorporated into the Municipal Code
of the Township of Franklin as an amendment to such Code, inclusive of its
penalty provisions.172
§ 260-20. Enforcement agencies.
The Township of Franklin the Police Department of the Township of Franklin
and all of its enforcement agencies be and hereby are empowered to enforce
this article, which incorporates such rules and regulations, on behalf of the
Township of Franklin.
172. Editor's Note: The Rules and Regulations of the Somerset County Park Commission are on
file in the Clerk's office.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-20
1:1153

ARTICLE V
Skate Park
[Adopted 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 3570]
§ 260-21. Hours of operation.
The hours of operation for a skate park are from 9:00 a.m. until sunset. The
skate park will be closed during wet, snow or icy conditions or during park
maintenance periods. The Township reserves the right to close the skate
park if it determines that any other condition renders the skate park unsafe
for use.
§ 260-22. Rules.
Violation of these rules may result in expulsion from this facility and
revocation of any privileges for its use:
A. Participants 12 and under must have an adult present. Know your
ability and skate accordingly.
B. All persons entering the skate park are deemed to have knowledge that
the skate park is a nonsupervised activity site designed for
skateboarding and in-line skating only, and that all use of the skate park
is at the risk of the user.
C. All persons entering the skate park are deemed to have agreed to
indemnify, defend and save harmless the Township of Franklin, its
officers, employees, agents and volunteers for, from and against any
accident, injury, including death, and/or loss of property or damage
thereto sustained as a result of using the skate park.
D. Helmets, kneepads, elbow pads, appropriate footwear and wrist guards
are required for skaters within the park. Helmets must have an annual
registration sticker issued by the Department of Recreation,
Community Celebrations and Park Administration. Each user of the
skate park shall have personnel identification that includes name,
address, and telephone number in his/her possession at all times during
use of the skate park.
E. All bicycles, scooters, motorized vehicles of any kind, and skateboards
with wheelbases longer than 20 inches are prohibited.
F. Personal ramps, rails, boxes, other apparatus or modifications to the
skate surface are prohibited.
G. No food or beverages are allowed inside the skate park. Spectators and
pets are prohibited in the skate park area.
H. All skaters are to act in an orderly, safe and considerate manner while
on the premises and in the skating area. Everyone is to wait his or her
turn. Reckless or dangerous skaters will be requested to leave the
skating area and the premises immediately. Smoking, use of drugs,
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-22
1:1155
§ 260-23. Membership and registration fee.
§ 260-24. Violations and penalties.
alcohol, profanity or abusive language or vandalism is strictly
prohibited and shall result in automatic and/or permanent expulsion
from this facility.
I. Use of radios, stereos or any type of amplified sound must be in
accordance with Chapter 167, Noise, of the Code of the Township of
Franklin and must remain outside of the skate park. Head phones are
prohibited.
A. The skate park will be open for membership to residents of Franklin
Township.
B. All participants must register for a Department of Recreation,
Community Celebrations and Park Administration skate park safety
clinic.
C. The registration fee is $10 annually, $5 for a replacement ID card/
helmet stickers.
A. First offense. Upon conviction by the Franklin Township Municipal
Court of a violation of this article of the Franklin Township Code, a
person shall be punished by a fine of up to $50, plus court costs.
Suspension of facility privileges will also be at the discretion of the
Department of Recreation, Community Celebrations and Park
Administration upon conviction. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
3591]
B. Second offense. Upon conviction by the Franklin Township Municipal
Court of a second offense, a person shall be punished by a fine of up to
$50, plus court costs. Conviction of a second offense will result in the
permanent suspension of facility privileges.
§ 260-22 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-24
1:1156
ARTICLE VI
John Clyde Memorial Native Grassland Preserve (Part of Ten Mile
Run Greenway)173
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3628]
§ 260-25. General open space preserve rules. [Amended 10-13-2015
by Ord. No. 4120-15]
Franklin Township parks and open space preserves are intended for the
recreation and enjoyment of its residents and their guests. Patrons are
expected to refrain from behavior affecting the safety, peace and good order
of the parks and park visitors.
§ 260-26. Trail use rules.
A. All motorized vehicles are restricted to designated driveway and
parking areas.
B. The open space preserve's speed limit is five miles per hour on all
driveways and parking lots.
C. Pets on a leash are allowed.
D. The following is prohibited on open space preserve property:
(1) Alcoholic beverages.
(2) Dumping or littering. Use of receptacles is required.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Disturbing of wildlife animals or the habitats of wildlife animals.
(5) Hunting, weapons or firearms except by Township-issued whitetailed
deer hunting permit. (See hunting below.174)
(6) Swimming.
(7) Boating.
(8) Cutting of timber.
(9) Removal of any natural material.
(10) Fires or open flames.
(11) Playing of music.
(12) Camping or erection of tents or any other temporary structures.
173. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 19-133, adopted 3-26-2019, renamed the former Griggstown
Native Grassland Preserve as the John Clyde Memorial Native Grassland Preserve.
174. Editor's Note: See § 260-29, Hunting.
§ 260-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:1157
§ 260-27. Open space preserve hours.
§ 260-28. Motor vehicle parking.
No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other motor
vehicle shall park such vehicle in any area other than the designated motor
vehicle parking areas. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a
motor vehicle, camper or trailer in any open space area after closing time.
Any vehicle found parked in violation will be towed away at the owner's or
operator's expense and cited.
§ 260-29. Hunting.
A. Biking, snow mobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). The trails are
closed to biking, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) due to the
sensitive habitat being managed for threatened and endangered
species, for erosion prevention and in the interest of visitor safety.
B. Equestrian use.
(1) Most trails in this open space preserve are closed to equestrian use
due to the sensitive habitat being managed for threatened and
endangered species and for erosion prevention. However, an
equestrian trail is available for use by permit only. It is the rider's
responsibility to obtain the permit by contacting the Recreation
Department at (732) 873-1991. Applications may be picked up
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. at the Franklin Township
Recreation Office, located in the Senior/Community Center at the
Municipal Complex.
(2) Once a permit is issued, the rider must have the permit in his or her
possession at all times when on Township property and must show
the permit to any person who asks to see the permit.
(3) Horses are prohibited in the fields, agricultural areas or
pastureland.
(4) Equestrians are to defer to pedestrians when passing.
(5) Trails should not be utilized whenever the trails can be damaged
due to weather conditions. A complete list of equestrian rules is
available from the Recreation Department.
A. Open space preserve hours are from sunrise to 30 minutes after
sundown.
B. The grounds and parking lots must be vacated at closing.
A. Hunting is prohibited in the open space preserve unless a permit is
obtained from the Township to hunt white-tailed deer. White-tailed deer
hunting applications are available by contacting the Animal Control
§ 260-26 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-29
1:1158
§ 260-30. Cross-country skiing.
When using groomed trails in open space preserves, skiers should use field
edges and forest trails. Skiing is prohibited through the tall native grasses
in the fields.
§ 260-31. Snowshoes.
§ 260-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3803A]
Violations of any part of the article may result in fines not exceeding $2,000
for each offense.
Officer of the Township. (White-tailed deer are being hunted because
they are over-browsing our forests and preventing forest regeneration.)
B. Dates of the white-tailed deer hunt are posted on the kiosk and at
various points around the edges of the property. Hunting is not
permitted in any posted safety zones.
C. Those entering the property during hunting season must wear blaze
orange except when in the posted safety zones.
A. Snowshoeing is permitted on trails or in the forest.
B. Snowshoeing is prohibited through the tall native grasses.
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:1159

ARTICLE VII
Negri-Nepote Native Grassland Preserve (Part of the Middlebush
Greenway) Regulations
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3628]
§ 260-33. General open space preserve rules.
Franklin Township parks and open space preserves are intended for the
recreation and enjoyment of its residents and their guests. Patrons are
expected to refrain from behavior affecting the safety, peace and good order
of the parks and park visitors.
§ 260-34. Trail use prohibitions.
A. All motorized vehicles are restricted to designated driveway and
parking areas.
B. The open space preserve's speed limit is five miles per hour on all
driveways and parking lots.
C. The following is prohibited on open space preserve property:
(1) Alcoholic beverages.
(2) Dumping or littering. Use of receptacles is required.
(3) Pets.
(4) Disturbing of wildlife animals or the habitats of wildlife animals.
(5) Hunting, weapons or firearms except by Township-issued whitetailed
deer hunting permit. (See § 260-37, Hunting, below.)
(6) Swimming.
(7) Boating.
(8) Cutting of timber.
(9) Removal of any natural material.
(10) Fires or open flames.
(11) Playing of music.
(12) Camping or erection of tents or any other temporary structures.
A. Biking, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). The trails are
closed to biking, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) due to the
sensitive habitat being managed for threatened and endangered
species, for erosion prevention and in the interest of visitor safety.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:1161
§ 260-35. Open space preserve hours.
§ 260-36. Motor vehicle parking.
No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other motor
vehicle shall park such vehicle in any area other than the designated motor
vehicle parking areas. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a
motor vehicle, camper or trailer in any open space area after closing time.
Any vehicle found parked in violation will be towed away at the owner's or
operator's expense and cited.
§ 260-37. Hunting.
§ 260-38. Cross-country skiing.
When using groomed trails in open space preserves, skiers should use field
edges and forest trails. Skiing is prohibited through the tall native grasses
in the fields.
§ 260-39. Snowshoes.
§ 260-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3803A]
Violations of any part of the article may result in fines not exceeding $2,000
for each offense.
B. Equestrian use. All of the trails in this open space preserve are closed to
equestrian use due to sensitive habitat being managed for threatened
and endangered species and for erosion prevention.
A. Open space preserve hours are from sunrise to 30 minutes after
sundown.
B. The grounds and parking lots must be vacated at closing.
A. Hunting is prohibited in the open space preserve unless a permit is
obtained from the Township to hunt white-tailed deer. White-tailed deer
hunting applications are available by contacting the Animal Control
Officer of the Township. (White-tailed deer are being hunted because
they are over-browsing our forests and preventing forest regeneration.)
B. Dates of the white-tailed deer hunt are posted on the kiosk and at
various points around the edges of the property. Hunting is not
permitted in any posted safety zones.
C. Those entering the property during hunting season must wear blaze
orange except when in the posted safety zones.
A. Snowshoeing is permitted on trails or in the forest.
B. Snowshoeing is prohibited through the tall native grasses.
§ 260-34 FRANKLIN CODE § 260-40
1:1162
ARTICLE VIII
Trails
[Adopted 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 3850; amended in its entirety
3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3865]
§ 260-41. Permitted uses.
A. The Township Recreation Director shall authorize and maintain a list of
the Township's trails and their permitted and prohibited uses. The list
will be compiled after receiving the recommendation of the Trails
Advisory Committee, or when the trails go through a native grassland
preserve, the recommendation of both the Trails Advisory Committee
and the Open Space Advisory Committee. The list of trails and their
permitted and prohibited uses shall be updated as necessary and
posted on the Township's website.
B. Prior to the Trails Advisory Committee, or the Open Space Advisory
Committee making any recommendation for a change in trail use, or for
proposed uses for a new trail, notice of any such proposed change will
be announced in the Committee’s agenda, a copy of such agenda
provided to the Council, and such agenda will be posted on the
Township’s website. The Committee, when making any such
recommendation, shall open its meeting for public comment on the
proposed change and, only after providing the opportunity of public
input, vote on the proposed recommendation and forward the same to
the Township Manager and the Recreation Director.
§ 260-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-41
1:1163

ARTICLE IX
Synthetic Turf Fields
[Adopted 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. 3992]
§ 260-42. Regulations.
Use of synthetic turf fields is by permit or prior approval only. To preserve
the quality of the turf and provide a clean and healthy environment, the
following are not allowed on the synthetic turf field:
A. Food, gum, seeds, nuts, candy, or chewing tobacco.
B. Smoking, fireworks, or open flames,
C. Spitting.
D. Dogs or pets of any kind.
E. Glass.
F. Sharp objects such as tent stakes, corner flags, spikes, or poles that
may penetrate and damage the turf.
G. Metal cleats, spikes, or high-heeled shoes. All shoes or athletic footwear
must be free of mud or debris.
H. Bicycles, skateboards, scooters, or roller blades.
I. Markers or paint of any kind (unless approved for field lining purposes
by the Township).
J. Applying sunblock, lotions, oils or creams of any kind on the field.
K. Tents, ice chests, chairs or lawn furniture of any kind.
L. Golf playing.
M. Dragging coolers, blocking sleds, or any other items along the field.
N. Littering.
O. Spectators.
P. Picking or pulling grass fibers or infill materials on the field.
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:1165
Chapter 265
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 93.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 106.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Firearms — See Ch. 187.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Parades — See Ch. 253.
Special events — See Ch. 325.
§ 265-1. (Reserved)175
§ 265-2. (Reserved)176
§ 265-3. (Reserved)177
§ 265-4. Indecent exposure; nudity and dress. [Amended 8-12-2008
by Ord. No. 3776]
No person shall appear in any street or public place within the Township of
Franklin in any indecent state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress nor
shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person.
§ 265-5. (Reserved)178
§ 265-6. (Reserved)179
175. Editor's Note: Former § 265-1, Assault and molestation, was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord.
No. 3896. Said ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as set forth in the
recitations, which included the finding that state law governed or preempted the section,
were to be incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the
Township offices.
176. Editor's Note: Former § 265-2, Disorderly houses and houses of ill fame, was repealed
9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3896. Said ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as
set forth in the recitations, which included the finding that state law governed or
preempted the section, were to be incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the
ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
177. Editor's Note: Former § 265-3, Gambling, was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3896. Said
ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as set forth in the recitations, which
included the finding that state law governed or preempted the section, were to be
incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
178. Editor's Note: Former § 265-5, Interference with police officers; disobedience; refusal of
assistance, added 5-28-1970 by Ord. No. 468, was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3896.
Said ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as set forth in the recitations,
which included the finding that state law governed or preempted the section, were to be
incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
179. Editor's Note: Former § 265-6, Damage to property, was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord. No.
3896. Said ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as set forth in the
recitations, which included the finding that state law governed or preempted the section,
§ 260-42 FRANKLIN CODE § 265-7
1:1166
§ 265-7. (Reserved)180
§ 265-8. (Reserved)181
§ 265-9. (Reserved)182
§ 265-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 271
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 125.
Newsracks — See Ch. 241.
Sales — See Ch. 303.
Scrap metal dealers — See Ch. 308.
Special events — See Ch. 325.
§ 271-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1648]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any movable truck, van,
trailer, bicycle or other movable unit, including hand-carried, portable
containers in or on which food or beverage is transported, stored or
prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary locations.
MULTIPLE TRANSIENT MERCHANT FACILITY — A facility in which groups
of transient merchants as defined herein band together to conduct functions
commonly known as trade shows, craft shows and similar functions within
the facility for the same dates and times.[Added 4-11-1995 by Ord. No.
1890]
were to be incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the
Township offices.
180. Editor's Note: Former § 265-7, Trespassing, was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3896. Said
ordinance also provided that the reasons for repeal as set forth in the recitations, which
included the finding that state law governed or preempted the section, were to be
incorporated by reference; a complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
181. Editor's Note: Former § 265-8, Vagrancy, consorting with criminals, was repealed
8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3776.
182. Editor's Note: Former § 265-9, Failure to stop vehicle, added 10-11-1979 by Ord. No. 967,
was repealed 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3896. Said ordinance also provided that the reasons
for repeal as set forth in the recitations, which included the finding that state law
governed or preempted the section, were to be incorporated by reference; a complete copy
of the ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 265-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-1
1:1167
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION or VENDOR — An organization, person or
entity possessing a tax-exempt status which shall be evidenced by
furnishing to the Township a tax exempt number provided by the State
of New Jersey and/or the Government of the United States.[Amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
PEDDLER — A person, commonly referred to as a "peddler" or "hawker"
or "itinerant merchant," who goes from place to place or house to house
by traveling on the streets and carries with him goods, wares, merchandise
or other things of value for the purpose of selling and delivering them to
consumers.
SOLICITATION — To go in or upon private property in the Township of
Franklin without having been invited to do so by the owner or occupant, for
the purpose of:[Added 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
SOLICITOR — A person, commonly referred to as a "solicitor" or
"canvasser," who engages in solicitation within the Township.[Amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person who, whether a resident of the
Township or not, engages in temporary business within the Township of
selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise or services within the
Township and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad, boxcar or
boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments or shops, parking
lot, sidewalk, street, alley or other place within the Township for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately
or at public auction.
§ 271-2. Purpose. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township, to prevent fraud and dishonest business
practices from being perpetrated upon them and to protect their privacy
while balancing such interests against the opportunity for commercial,
political, religious, charitable and nonprofit organizations to exercise their
rights of free speech, and to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety by
regulating the use of the streets and property adjacent thereto by itinerant
or transient merchants, to prevent extended parking or trespassing on
private or public property, to prevent violations of Chapter 112, Land
Development, and, in the case of mobile food vendors, to prevent violations
of the State Sanitary Code, to protect traffic and pedestrian safety and
prevent violations of the Motor Vehicle Code.
Advertising, promoting, campaigning, advocacy, education,
proselytizing, handbill distribution, canvassing, voter registration or
selling any product, goods, wares, merchandise, service or other things
of value, or
A.
Conducting market research or a market or opinion survey regarding
commercial products or services.
B.
§ 271-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 271-3
1:1168
§ 271-3. Exemptions. [Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1671;
4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1890; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 3316; 2-24-2009
by Ord. No. 3815]
§ 271-4. Applicability for transient merchants.
A transient merchant shall not be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such
transient business in connection with, as part of or in the name of any local
dealer, trader, merchant of auctioneer.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the license requirements of this
chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Any person conducting a sale pursuant to statute or court order.
(2) Any person soliciting a vote or support for any political candidate
or program or conducting voter registration.
(3) Any person engaged in delivering goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles or things in the regular course of business to the
premises of a person ordering or entitled to receive same.
(4) Any person delivering or soliciting newspapers.
(5) Any person conducting a sale within a multiple transient merchant
facility as defined in § 271-1.
(6) Any person representing any entity who engages in solicitation and
which:
(a) Qualifies for tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue
Code;
(b) Qualifies for exemption from property tax under N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.6;
(c) Qualifies for exemption from sales tax under N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9;
or
(d) Was created under or is otherwise subject to the provisions of
Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes.
B. Prior to engaging in solicitation in the Township, any person, nonprofit
organization or vendor who meets the requirements for license
exemption set forth in this section shall present to the Township Clerk
documentation which verifies that the person, nonprofit organization or
vendor satisfies the criteria for exemption. Upon presentation of such
documentation, the Township Clerk will issue a certificate of exemption,
which shall be kept in the possession of the entity while engaged in
solicitation in the Township.
§ 271-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-5
1:1169
§ 271-5. Prohibition from using public streets. [Amended 7-9-1991
by Ord. No. 1648]
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, itinerant vendor, itinerant
merchant, peddler, hawker, or solicitor to sell, buy, dispose of or offer to sell
or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other things of value or
services in or on any portion of a public right-of-way.
§ 271-6. Solicitation by children. [Added 11-12-1998 by Ord. No.
3017]
§ 271-7. Solicitation by exempt persons; nonprofit organizations
and vendors. [Added 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815183]
Any person, nonprofit organization or vendor, exempt under § 271-3, who
conducts canister drives at commercial establishments, shall be limited to
A. Any nonprofit organization or vendor conducting peddling or
solicitation projects by children under the age of 14 shall designate the
custodial parent or guardian as the designated representative for each
child peddling or soliciting for the organization. The designated
custodial parent or guardian shall be notified in writing of such
designation by the organization. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3815]
B. The following additional regulations shall apply to peddling or
solicitation by children under the age of 14:
(1) An adult over the age of 18 must accompany any child under the
age of 14 who engages in public peddling or solicitation in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) The term "public peddling or solicitation" used in this section shall
be both door-to-door as well as peddling or solicitation in shopping
centers.
(3) Penalties. Violation of this section shall, in the first instance, result
in a written warning to the designated representative of the
organization and such child from the Franklin Police Department.
Upon a second offense, either by the same child or designated
representative, the Chief of Police or his designated representative
shall call the child and the designated representative of the
organization to a meeting. The refusal or failure to attend such
meeting requested by the Chief of Police or his designee shall
constitute a third offense under this section.
(4) Exception. This section shall not apply to children's activities on
Halloween.
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 271-7 through 271-15 as
§§ 271-8 through 271-16.
§ 271-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 271-7
1:1170
two persons per ingress and/or egress doorway and shall not involve any
structures, displays or furniture.
§ 271-8. License required. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1648;
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1727; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person or entity shall
engage in solicitation within the Township without first having obtained a
license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to obtain a license
prior to solicitation shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day of
solicitation without a valid license shall constitute a separate violation of
this chapter.
§ 271-9. Application for license.
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file a written, sworn
application signed by the individual if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, by the president if a corporation, and by the highest two
officers if any association, society or other form of organization, with
the Township Clerk, showing:
(1) The name or names of the person or persons having the
management or supervision of the applicant's business during the
time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the Township;
the local address or addresses of such person or persons while
engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of
such person or persons; the capacity in which the person or
persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise);
the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose
account the business will be carried on, if any, and, if a corporation,
under the laws of what state the same is incorporated.
(2) The place or places in the Township where it is proposed to carry
on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is
proposed that the business shall be conducted. In furtherance
hereof, the applicant shall be required to submit a sketch depicting
the exact location on the property wherein the activities will be
conducted and the distance from said location to the right-of-way
line.
(a) In the event that during the life of the license the applicant
desires to amend the location on the property wherein the
activities will be conducted, the applicant shall be required to
submit an amended sketch depicting the new location and
obtain approval thereof, with all distances from said location to
the right-of-way line. [Added 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1671]
(3) The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of
the applicant, where the applicant, within the six months preceding
the date of the application, conducted a transient business, stating
§ 271-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-9
1:1171
§ 271-10. Investigation; records of license; restrictions. [Amended
10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of
any building or office in which such business was conducted.
(4) A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods,
wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant
in the Township; the invoice and quality of such goods, wares and
merchandise, whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock
in possession or from stock in possession and by sample, at auction,
by direct sale or by direct sale and taking orders for future delivery;
where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured
or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the
time the application is filed.
(5) A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising
done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; and, if
required by the Township Clerk, copies of all such advertising,
whether handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise,
shall be attached to the application as exhibits thereto.
(6) Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a
crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor.
(7) Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act
as such representative.
(8) Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of the
applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business
as the Chief of Police may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this
chapter in the protection of the public good.
(9) 184 In the case of application for a license as a mobile retail food
establishment, the application shall clearly state if any cooking is
done in or on the mobile equipment or vehicle. If any grease-laden
vapor cooking operations are conducted, the cooking equipment
shall be protected by an automatic fire suppression system and
manual fire extinguishers as required by the Fire Prevention
Department. [Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165]
B. All such applications shall be filed at least 30 days from the scheduled
date of the activity for which an application is sought.
184. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), regarding application for a license by nonprofit
vendors, added 11-12-1998 by Ord. No. 3017, was repealed 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection A(10) as A(9).
§ 271-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 271-10
1:1172
A. The Township Clerk shall forward the application to the following
departments:
(1) Mobile retail food establishment or other peddling or solicitation of
food items: Police Department, Health Department.
(2) Door-to-door peddling or solicitation: Police Department.
(3) Canister drive with no tables, displays or other such equipment
associated therewith: Police Department.
(4) Peddling or solicitation from a temporary location within or
adjacent to another building and/or business with the use of tables,
displays or other such equipment associated therewith: Police
Department, Zoning Officer, and Division of Fire Prevention.
[Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591]
B. Investigation.
(1) The police shall make investigation of such person and such
person's business responsibility and character deemed necessary
for the protection of the public good. Further, the police shall
examine such place or places to determine whether such place or
places are likely to create traffic congestion or traffic hazards as a
result of the location thereof or as a result of pedestrians or
operators of motor vehicles utilizing such place or places.
(2) The Health Officer shall make investigation of the application to
determine whether any applicable state statutes, regulations or
municipal ordinances or regulations pertain to the operation and
determine compliance of said operation with such statutes,
regulations, and/or ordinances.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall examine such application to determine
compliance with any applicable provision of Chapter 112, Land
Development, as well as compliance with applicable provisions of
this Code.
(4) The Division of Fire Prevention shall examine such application to
determine compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and
regulations pertaining to firesafety.
C. No license shall be issued to any transient merchant, or mobile retail
food establishment where the location of any activity or activities
forming a part of the applicant's business shall be closer than 25 feet to
the right-of-way line of any street in the Township of Franklin.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1671; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3815]
D. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and
business responsibility are found to be satisfactory or if it is determined
that such place or places do not create a traffic safety hazard, the Chief
of Police shall so certify in writing to the Township Clerk. Further, as a
§ 271-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-10
1:1173
§ 271-11. License fee. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
Licensees under this chapter shall pay a fee of $350, which fee shall be paid
upon the application being made.
§ 271-12. Display of license or badge; tampering. [Amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons
applying for the license desire to do business in more than one place within
the Township, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business.
Every person who is required to hold a license under this chapter shall carry
the same when engaged in the business for which the license is issued. Any
alterations, erasers or mutilations shall void the license.
§ 271-13. Expiration and renewal of license. [Amended 9-24-1991
by Ord. No. 1671; 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162; 2-14-2006 by Ord.
No. 3591; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3815]
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter to a transient
merchant or solicitor shall be valid only for a four-day period. Each
additional four-day period shall be the subject of a separate license, and
no applicant shall be issued more than four licenses in any one calendar
year. The fee for the four four-day periods in a calendar year, however, shall
be the annual fee set forth in § 271-11. All other licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire each December 31.
result of such investigation, the Health Officer shall determine that the
activity is not regulated by any applicable state statute, regulation or
local ordinance regulating health matters or, if so regulated, that the
activity complies with all applicable statutes, regulations or ordinances,
he shall so certify in writing to the Township Clerk. Finally, if, as a
result of such investigation, the Zoning Officer shall determine that
the proposed activity complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter
112, Land Development, and this chapter of this Code, he shall so
certify, in writing, to the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk, upon
receipt of all such written certifications, shall then issue a license. The
Township Clerk shall keep a full record in his/her office of all licenses
issued. Such records shall contain the number of the license, the date
the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried
on, the amount of the license fee, the expiration date of such license,
the place where said business may be carried on under said license
and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on
same.
E. Any license issued herein for door-to-door solicitation shall prohibit
such activity before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
[Amended 6-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1644]
§ 271-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 271-14
1:1174
§ 271-14. Revocation or denial of license; appeal. [Amended
10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
§ 271-15. Record of violations.
The Township Clerk shall deposit the license number with the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall report to the Township Clerk any complaints
against any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter. The
Township Clerk shall keep a record of all such licenses and of such
complaints and violations.
§ 271-16. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 271-17. Collection, preparation and maintenance of
nonsolicitation list. [Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 4259-18]
A. The applications for and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may
be denied or revoked by the Township Clerk or her designee for any of
the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license.
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. An appeal from any such denial or revocation may be made to the
Township Manager within 10 days of the date of the denial or
revocation. The Township Manager shall forthwith review the
application record and evidence presented on behalf of the aggrieved
party. The Township Manager shall render his decision within two days
after completion of the hearing.
A. The Office of the Township Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a
list of addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant
has notified the Township Clerk that peddlers and solicitors, as defined
in this chapter, are not permitted on the premises. Any person wishing
to have their address included on the nonsolicitation list must complete
and file the appropriate form with the Township Clerk, which shall be
§ 271-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-17
1:1175
Chapter 278
QUARRYING AND BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 192.
Soil removal and deposit — See Ch. 206.
§ 278-1. Annual permit required. [Amended 1-28-1997 by Ord. No.
1993]
All owners, lessees, operators, managers, person, persons or corporations
having control of any sand bank, pit or quarry within the Township shall
obtain from the office of the Township Clerk a pit and quarry permit on or
before the first day of February of every fifth year. The provisions of this
section shall become effective upon issuance of a permit on February 1,
1997.
§ 278-2. Application materials; fee; permit issuance.
made available by the Township Clerk. Once included on the
nonsolicitation list, an address will remain on the list until revoked.
B. The Township Clerk shall submit the nonsolicitation list to the Chief of
Police on a quarterly basis. The nonsolicitation list shall also be
provided to all persons submitting registration forms to the Township
Clerk under this chapter. The applicant shall thereafter be prohibited
from peddling or soliciting at any address on the nonsolicitation list.
C. At quarterly intervals throughout the year, the Township Clerk shall
update the nonsolicitation list. The updated list shall then be forwarded
to the Chief of Police and any applicants known to the Township Clerk
who are engaged in peddling or soliciting.
A. Before receiving such permit, the applicant shall make an application
on forms to be provided by the Township Clerk. Such application shall
be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; the name,
residence and business address of each partner, if a partnership, or,
if a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such
corporation was organized and, if a foreign corporation, whether
authorized to do business in New Jersey, the names of directors,
principal officers and local representatives, their residence and
business addresses.
§ 271-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 278-2
1:1176
§ 278-3. Permit revocation.
After 10 days' notice and opportunity to be heard, the Township Council may
revoke or suspend any permit issued hereunder if it finds that the permittee
is violating the terms of this chapter or any state law.
§ 278-4. Restrictions on noise, dust and smoke.
(2) A legal description of the premises where the business is to be
conducted and a map of the premises prepared by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor, showing the tract involved and public
roads contiguous thereto. Such map shall be filed with the
Township Clerk or shall be made available at the quarry offices in
the Township for inspection by the Township Engineer.
(3) Information showing the ownership of the tract involved and the
written consent of the owner thereof if the applicant is not the
owner.
(4) Plans showing the places on the tract where quarrying will be
conducted, all entrances or exits to the tract and fences or gates
erected or to be erected. Such plans shall be filed with the
Township Clerk or shall be made available at the quarry offices in
the Township for inspection by the Township Engineer.
(5) The hours during which the quarry will be operated.
(6) Proof of liability insurance coverage in amounts of not less than
$100,000 for each person injured, $300,000 for each accident
causing personal injuries and $100,000 for property damage for
each accident.
B. The fee for each permit shall be $2,200. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord.
No. 1944]
C. After the license application has been approved by the Township
Engineer as conforming hereto, the Township Council shall approve the
issuance of a permit to operate the quarry. Such permit shall be
renewed every five years on February 1 of such year. Any license issued
shall expire on January 31 of the fifth following year. [Amended
1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1993]
(1) The licensee shall annually, prior to February 1 of each year, submit
to the Township Clerk a written certification that all information
contained in the approved license remains effective and unchanged
and an annual affirmation fee of $250.
(2) Should there be a change in the information provided by the
approved license, licensee shall submit a revised application as set
forth in Subsection A for review by the Township Council.
§ 278-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-4
1:1177
§ 278-5. Construction and operation requirements.
A. Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or permit to be
made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by
him in the Township any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the
human voice, machinery or by other means or methods which are
physically annoying to persons or which are harsh or unusual in their
use, time and place and which might be injurious to the lives, health,
peace and comfort of inhabitants of adjacent property in the
municipality. Compliance with this subsection shall be determined by
adherence to any state regulations pertaining thereto. The
determination shall be based upon inspection by the Engineer or the
Health Officer of the Township after proper investigation.
B. Dust, smoke, etc. It shall be unlawful for any quarry operator in the
Township to cause undue dust, smoke or smog or cause particles to
enter the air that in any way shall be injurious to the persons in the
community or which shall cause pollution to the air or water of the
municipality. Determination of undue pollution of the air or water of the
Township shall be the responsibility of the Health Officer based on
standards established under N.J.S.A. 34:6-98.1 et seq. or by regulations
promulgated thereunder.
A. Roads to be treated. The roads or rights-of-way within the licensed
premises which do not have permanent pavement shall be treated with
road oil at least every 10 days or less as determined to be necessary by
the Township Engineer.
B. Deposits. In no case shall any stone or other products of quarrying be
deposited in any manner on any adjacent properties or on any of the
roads in the Township, unless the owners of such property shall consent
thereto.
C. Fence. A fence shall be erected around the quarrying area which is
contiguous to a public road or to an R-7, R-10, R-20 or R-40 Residential
Zone, whether such area is being used presently or whether it has been
used for such purposes in the past. Such fence shall be woven wire of
the chain link type at least six feet high, and any entrance or exit
through the fence shall be by means of gates of equal height. Such
gates shall be locked shut when not in actual use. The fence shall have
three strands of barbed wire placed on top of the same. On the balance
of the property of the permittee, there shall be erected a temporary
fence of at least three strands of barbed wire which shall be approved
by the Township Engineer.
D. Signs. Signs shall be maintained at all entrances or exits indicating the
name and address of the licensee and that the business being
conducted is a licensed quarry operation.
§ 278-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 278-5
1:1178
§ 278-6. Inspections. [Amended 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1993]
All quarry operations under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be inspected at least twice annually by the Township Engineer or the
Township Health Officer. The person making such inspection shall file a
written report of the same with the Township Clerk. Access to premises for
the purposes of such inspection shall be freely given by the permittee after
the inspector presents identification. All of the aforesaid inspections may be
made by a representative of the state at the Township's discretion.
§ 278-7. Reclamation plan. [Added 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 1269;
amended 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1274; 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1331;
4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 1679; 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1993]
E. Blasting. All blasting in a residential area shall be done with the use of
steel matting in order to reduce the throw of the material being blasted,
which matting shall cover the complete area of blasting.
F. Explosives. All explosives shall be handled in accordance with state
regulations.
G. Stockpiles. Where conveyors discharge material, the average size of
which is less than one inch in diameter, onto stockpiles of such
materials, the following shall be observed and adhered to:
(1) The free-fall of the material being stockpiled from the conveyor to
the highest point of the stockpile shall not exceed a distance of six
feet.
(2) A high-pressure mist water spray shall be directed on the material
as it falls from the conveyor to the stockpile so as to reduce the
possibilities of dust.
H. Lateral support. The licensed operation shall not adversely affect the
lateral support of abutting land or other properties.
A. Prior to the issuance of an initial license or the renewal of license every
five years thereafter, a reclamation plan shall be submitted. The
licensee shall annually, prior to February 1 of each year, submit to the
Township Clerk a written certificate that the previously approved
reclamation plan remains effective and unchanged. Should there be a
change in the previously approved reclamation plan, an amended
reclamation plan shall be filed by the licensee in full conformance with
this section. The reclamation plan shall not only show the ultimate use
of the site and the plans therefor, but shall also indicate measures
which will be taken during the period for which the permit sought will
be effected to progressively fulfill the provisions of the overall
reclamation plan. The initial plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Board which shall conduct a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be
transcribed by a certified shorthand reporter. The Planning Board shall
thereafter adopt a resolution containing findings of fact and conclusions
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-7
1:1179
of law and recommending approval, approval with conditions or
disapproval. This resolution shall be forwarded to the Township
Council. The Council shall, within 45 days after receipt of said
resolution, make a final determination on the reclamation plan after a
de novo hearing based upon the transcript before the Planning Board.
The Council shall have the right to supplement the record below by
additional testimony or evidence; and, further, the Council shall have
the right to delete, amend or supplement the findings of fact and/or
conclusions of law set forth by the Planning Board, in accordance with
the record before the Council. The initial plan shall detail all work to
be performed in the reclamation process, including a specification as
to the year in which the plan shall be completed, and shall specify a
reasonable proportion of the work to be completed in each year such
that there shall not be an undue concentration of work performed in
the final years of the plan. Such plan may be subject to amendment
or revision from time to time as additional relevant information and
circumstances will justify the same. The reclamation plan shall
demonstrate the foregoing by including at least the following
information:
(1) A legal description of the premises where the business is to be
conducted and a map or maps of the premises prepared by a
professional engineer and land surveyor licensed in the State of
New Jersey, which shall depict and show the entire tract involved,
and shall have permanent concrete or metal markers of sufficient
number and location such that the boundaries of the property and
any municipal boundary line traversing the property or any portion
thereof are reasonably ascertainable. Where the quarry property
abuts a county, municipal and/or state right-of-way or easily
ascertainable and stable natural terrain feature, no monuments
shall be required along the same. The plan shall also depict all
roads or buildings on the tract or within 200 feet thereof; existing
and proposed final contours of the land involved and the existing
contours of adjoining lands within 200 feet of the area in which
quarrying takes place (contours to be created by the quarrying
operation shall be shown at two-foot intervals for grades up to 10%,
five-foot intervals for grades between 10% and 20%, ten-foot
intervals for grades between 20% and 40%, and twenty-foot
intervals for grades in excess of 40%); and all wooded areas,
brooks, streams, bodies of water, floodways, flood hazard areas and
stream encroachment boundaries on the tract involved and within
200 feet thereof.
(2) Provisions for restoration of all slopes to a grade not to exceed the
angle of repose for the material(s) of which it is comprised; except,
however, where slopes exist as of the date of this chapter which are
of such degree that it is impractical to rehabilitate the same to such
a grade or the Department of Labor of the State of New Jersey or
such other state or federal agency having jurisdiction over any
aspect of the reclamation of sand banks, pits or quarries authorizes
§ 278-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 278-7
1:1180
slopes in excess of the angle of repose of the material of which
the slope is comprised and it is impractical to reclaim the same to
such a grade. The reclamation plan shall provide for such slopes
to remain as they are, provided that reasonable safety and erosion
controls are incorporated into said plan.
(3) Provisions indicating that rock quarry faces created after the
effective date of this chapter shall be sloped at no more than 30° off
the vertical and shall be benched at heights not exceeding 130 feet
with a horizontal distance of not less than 25 feet between benches;
except, however, where the Department of Labor of the State of
New Jersey or such other state or federal agency having
jurisdiction over any aspect of the reclamation of rock quarries
authorizes benches at heights in excess of 130 feet, then the same
shall govern.
(4) Where quarrying requires the removal of topsoil, provisions for
setting aside and retaining on the premises all such soil so as to be
available for distribution over those portions of the premises which
the ultimate reclamation plan indicates require such soil. The
reclamation plan shall provide that when soil is required to be
distributed, it shall be to a minimum depth of six inches or such
greater depth as may be required so as to support vegetation.
Where final contours of rock quarry faces are of such slope as to
make the placement of topsoil impractical, the reclamation plan
shall provide that all such slopes shall be planted with rootable
plant ground cover material in sufficient number and of sufficient
size to minimize erosion.
(5) Provisions for simultaneous quarrying and reclamation, in
accordance with the proposed plan.
(6) Provisions showing adequate drainage during quarrying or mining
operations and during and after the implementation of the
reclamation plan.
(7) Provisions showing adequate lateral support for slopes and grades
abutting streets and neighboring lands during quarrying or mining
operations and during and after the implementation of the
reclamation plan.
(8) Provisions for a fence erected around the quarrying area to assure
nonaccess thereto by unauthorized persons. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prohibit the erection of said fencing
around the entire perimeter of the property of the applicant in lieu
of only the quarrying area. The fence shall be woven wire of the
chain link type. The fabric shall be nine-gauge aluminum-coated
steel with two-inch mesh. It shall be six feet high with three strands
of twelve-gauge galvanized barbed wire placed on top. The post
shall be galvanized steel pipe eight feet eight inches long and two
inches in diameter with a cap on the top. The corner post shall be
§ 278-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-7
1:1181
eight feet eight inches long and 2 1/2 inches in diameter with a
cap on the top. The post shall be placed in holes two feet one
inch deep with a ten-inch diameter, and the hole shall be filled
with Class D concrete. The spacing of the posts shall be 10 feet
apart. The fence shall be accessible around its entire perimeter
along the interior for purposes of inspection. The fence shall be
maintained in such a manner that it is free from vegetation, such
as honeysuckle, multiflora roses and other types of vegetation
indigenous to the area. The fence may be erected over a period
of years not exceeding two years in as nearly equal increments
as reasonably possible, provided that the owner shall post a
performance guaranty in the form of either cash, certified check or
letter of credit in an amount equal to the uncompleted portion of
the fence. Said performance guaranty shall be posted at the time of
the approval of the initial plan.
(9) Provisions for final completion of all reclamation within a one-year
period of time after termination of quarrying operations, whether
for the entire quarry or any portion thereof, excepting where any
reclamation plan shall require water accumulation, the
accommodation of such water shall not be subject to the one-year
provision hereof. In such event, the method of accumulation shall
be set forth in the plan before the Planning Board.
(10) An itemized estimate of costs for all reclamation work to be
completed in the ensuing year.
(11) Provisions demonstrating that the use to which the sand bank, pit
or quarry is to be put after all quarrying or mining operations have
terminated shall be consistent with the Master Plan and the
surrounding properties.
(12) Such other information as may be reasonable and necessary.
B. Complete applications must be filed at least 150 days prior to the
expiration of any previously existing permit, and the Planning Board
shall act within 60 days after filing of a complete application. Failure to
approve or disapprove within said time shall result in an automatic
approval.
C. Upon each application for renewal of any permit after approval of the
initial reclamation plan required herein, the applicant shall be required
to update the reclamation plan so as to:
(1) Indicate only those changes or differences which have taken place
or have occurred since its last application.
(2) Set forth those changes in performance or maintenance guaranties
required by actual performance or changed conditions.
(3) Set forth all rehabilitation, screening and similar operations which
have been completed during the past year.
§ 278-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 278-7
1:1182
§ 278-8. Submission of security deposit. [Added 3-11-1986 by Ord.
No. 1269; amended 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1331]
Prior to the issuance of any license or the renewal of any license, in addition
to compliance with the provisions of § 278-7 hereof and all other applicable
ordinances, the applicant shall submit security in the form of cash, certified
check or letter of credit to assure completion of all reclamation activities
which are to be undertaken during the period for which the permit is to be
issued, in accordance with the following standards:
(4) Post security, as hereinafter defined, sufficient to cover the cost of
the reclamation work required by the initially approved
reclamation plan or any amendments thereto to be performed
during the ensuing year and maintenance of reclamation
improvements during said ensuing year.
(5) In the event of a dispute as to the amount of the security or the
reclamation work and maintenance required by the approved
rehabilitation plan for the ensuing year, the applicant may resort to
the appeal procedures set out in § 278-8 below.
D. Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be deemed to require
reclamation of or place restriction on the mining or quarrying of any
portions of a sand bank, pit or quarry which the reclamation plan for
that facility provides will be below any water elevation which may exist
in connection with the ultimate use to which that facility may be put as
reflected in said reclamation plan, except as regards benching, which
requirements shall be adhered to.
A. The form and amount of the security shall be subject to approval by the
Township Attorney and Township Engineer, and it shall be of an amount
sufficient to guarantee the completion of fencing, screening and such
portion of the reclamation plan intended to be completed during the
ensuing year.
B. Periodic inspections may be made to evaluate performance of the
applicant with respect to rehabilitation procedures.
C. At the request of the applicant, the amount of the security may be
adjusted, provided that the basis therefor is substantiated by said
applicant and approved by the Township Council after receipt of a
report from the Township Engineer and Township Attorney.
D. In the event of a dispute between the applicant and the Township
Engineer concerning the amount of the required security, appeal may
be had by the applicant to the Township Council. Notice of appeal must
be filed with the Township Clerk within 30 days of receipt by the
applicant of a written statement from the Township Engineer setting
out a required performance guaranty in a specific amount. During the
course of any appeal, the Council shall hear evidence regarding the
costs of the reclamation activities to be undertaken during the period
§ 278-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-8
1:1183
§ 278-9. Investigating and processing fee; renewal escrow account.
[Added 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 1269; amended 5-13-1986 by Ord. No.
1274; 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1331]
A fee of $3,500 shall accompany each initial application to cover the cost
incurred in investigating and processing the application. Upon the filing of
each application for renewal, the applicant shall post the sum of $3,500,
which shall be placed in an escrow account by the Township. Within 45
days after the decision by the Council, the Director of Land Use and Chief
Financial Officer of the Township shall cause to be delivered to the applicant
a statement itemizing the costs incurred by the Township in investigating
and processing the application. In the event that the costs so specified shall
exceed the sum so deposited, the applicant shall, within 30 days, remit the
deficiency to the Township. It shall be a condition of any renewal under this
section within said 30 days. Said condition shall further provide that failure
to so pay shall void the license.
§ 278-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 278-11. Hydraulic fracturing prohibited. [Added 3-25-2014 by
Ord. No. 4054-14]
The drilling for and the extraction of natural gas and the exploration,
beyond the reconnaissance phase ("Reconnaissance" is defined as per
N.J.S.A. 13:1M-18.), for natural gas by hydraulic fracturing is prohibited
within Franklin Township.
Chapter 284
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
for which the permit is sought and shall make a determination thereon.
The Council's determination shall be appealable, as any other municipal
action is, through a prerogative writ action in the Superior Court of
New Jersey.
E. If cash security is posted pursuant to Subsection A above, such cash
security shall be treated as if it were subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1, except that the Township will not retain any of the interest
accruing on the deposit but rather shall include the administrative
expenses, if any, incurred in receiving and depositing the funds as part
of the application fee provided in § 278-9.
§ 278-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 278-11
1:1184
ARTICLE I
Mandatory Residential Program
§ 284-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3728]
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ALUMINUM — All aluminum beverage containers.
BATTERIES — Dry cell batteries such as, but not limited to, radio, toy, watch
and/or calculator batteries.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper cartons, sheets, spacer material or
any other container consisting of two layers of brown paper separated by an
inner rippled core.
GLASS — All glass bottles and jars of any color, thoroughly rinsed with caps
and closures removed.
NEWSPAPERS — All paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters
of public interest. The term "newspapers" shall also include inserts that
come with the newspapers, such as comics, colored store or grocery
advertisements, TV and magazine sections and glossy coupons.
MIXED PAPER — All magazines, glossy inserts, computer paper, colored
paper, catalogs, store fliers with mailing labels, hardcover books with hard
covers removed, junk mail, writing or school paper, envelopes, paperback
books and copy paper.
PLASTIC — Plastic bottles or jugs bearing a "No. 1" through "No. 7"
in a recycling triangle, thoroughly rinsed with caps, lids or closures
removed.[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
RECYCLABLES — The following mandatory items to be separate from waste
from all residential properties: aluminum cans; asphalt; concrete; consumer
batteries; corrugated cardboard; electronics; glass containers; leaves;
mixed paper; motor oil; newspaper; plastic containers (No. 1 through No.
7 plastic bottles); steel and bimetal cans; telephone books; and wood
waste.[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — All single-family and multiple-family dwellings
or structures in the Township of Franklin, including but not limited to
garden and high-rise apartments, townhouses, condominiums and
apartments.
STEEL AND BIMETAL CANS — Tin-plated and bimetal food and beverage
cans.185
185. Editor's Note: The former definition of "textiles," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15.
§ 284-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-2
1:1185
§ 284-2. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
paper products, including but not limited to newspapers; glass; and
aluminum within the Township of Franklin.
§ 284-3. Separation and placement for removal.
The occupant or owner of any residential dwelling or structure within the
Township of Franklin shall place for disposal, removal or collection the
following named items in conformity with the following regulations:
§ 284-4. Collection.
A. Newspapers shall be bundled with twine and shall not exceed 12 inches
in height and shall be placed on top of occupant's/owner's recycling
bucket. Junk mail, magazines, catalogs, phone books and paperbacks
shall be placed in brown paper bags and placed alongside of the
recycling bucket.
B. Glass bottles, jars, plastic bottles from soda, soft drinks, milk, laundry
detergent and water and aluminum, steel and bimetal cans shall be
contained in the occupant's/owner's recycling bucket.
C. Leaves shall be contained in thirty-gallon-capacity completely
biodegradable and recyclable two-ply wet strength paper bag
purchased elsewhere. [Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
D. Corrugated cardboard must be broken down into twenty-four-inch
square pieces, stacked and bundled with twine. No shirt cardboard or
cereal boxes.
E. Household batteries are collected along with recyclables in an effort to
properly dispose of these potential waste-stream contaminants. Small
dry-cell batteries (such as those from radios, toys, clocks and
calculators) must be sealed in plastic zip-top bags and placed inside the
occupant's/owner's recycling bucket.
A. The collection, removal and disposal of newspapers, batteries,
cardboard, glass, metal shall be supervised by the Township of Franklin
in accordance with an agreement with Somerset County or its
designated agent, who shall establish the time, method and routes of
service. Recycling buckets required herein and newspapers shall be
placed prior to collection between the curb and sidewalk where they
shall be readily accessible to the collector. Recycling buckets and
newspapers shall be placed outside after 6:00 p.m. on the day
immediately preceding the day of collection but not later than 7:00 a.m.
on the day of collection.
B. All leaves shall be placed in the thirty-gallon biodegradable recycling
bags. During the months of October, November and December, the bags
shall be placed by the occupant or owner of any residential dwelling or
§ 284-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 284-4
1:1186
structure at the curbside on days designated and specified by the
Department of Public Works. At all other times during the year other
than the months of October, November and December, the owner or
occupant of a residential dwelling or structure shall deliver the leaves
in the thirty-gallon biodegradable recycling bags to the Public Works
Center at a location to be designated by the Director of Public Works.
Leaf bags shall not be filled to weigh more than 25 pounds each.
[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
§ 284-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-4
1:1187

ARTICLE II
Convenience Center
[Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3066; 6-28-2001 by Ord. No. 3226;
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 3285; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3591; 3-24-2009
by Ord. No. 3821; 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3962; 9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
4075-14]
§ 284-5. Definitions. [Amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 4310-20]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARGO VAN — A vehicle that has space for two passengers and the
remaining area is used to haul cargo.
MINI-VAN — A vehicle with rear seating row(s), with reconfigurable seats
in two or three rows.
PASSENGER CAR — A vehicle with two or four doors which has a separate
trunk.
PASSENGER VAN — A vehicle designed, modified or otherwise capable of
being configured to carry not less than eight passengers and no more than
15 passengers, including the driver.
PICKUP TRUCK — A vehicle with no rear seat behind the driver’s seat
except that:
SUV (SPORT UTILITY VEHICLE), CROSSOVER VEHICLE AND STATION
WAGON — A vehicle with a factory-installed rear bench seat, upright and in
place, directly behind the driver’s seat, and has a cargo area.
§ 284-6. Pass required.
No person shall be allowed to deposit any material at the Township of
Franklin Convenience Center without a vehicle-specific pass issued by the
Director of Public Works or his designee permitting such disposal.
§ 284-7. Issuance of pass.
A pass shall be issued only to residents of the Township for vehicles with
general registration plates—no commercial vehicles are allowed—and shall
be issued by the Director of Public Works or his designee only after receipt
of the fees as set forth in § 284-9.
Pickup trucks may have a body no longer than eight feet, and trailesr
may have a body no longer than eight feet.
A.
All pickup trucks loaded more than twice the height of the body
sidewalls will be changed for two trips.
B.
§ 284-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-8
1:1189
§ 284-8. Pass requirements.
A pass must be obtained from the Director of Public Works or his designee
prior to entry into the Township Convenience Center and must be presented
to the Township employees operating said center along with an ID with a
Township resident address.
§ 284-8.1. Days and hours of operation.
The Township Manager will establish the days and hours of operation of the
Township Convenience Center.
§ 284-9. Fees and charges for admission of materials; waiver.
[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15; 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
4159-16]
Residents can only purchase vehicle-specific passes during the week at
either the Public Works Building or the Township Clerk's office in the
Municipal Building.
A. Costs. [Amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 4310-20]
(1) Single admission pass (per trip).
Type Fee
Single admission trip for resident's
passenger car
$15
Single admission trip for resident's
SUV/mini van/crossover/station
wagon
$35
Single admission trip for resident's
passenger van/cargo van
$65
Single admission trip for resident's
pickup truck
$75
Single admission trip for resident's
trailer (no longer than eight feet)
$75 (plus vehicle fee if
vehicle has materials)
(2) Multi-pass discount.
Type Fee
Resident's passenger car $75 for six admissions
Resident's SUV $175 for six admissions
Resident's mini-van/passenger van/
cargo van
$325 for six admissions
Resident's pickup truck $375 for six admissions
Resident's trailer (no longer than
eight feet)
$375 for six admissions (plus
vehicle fee if vehicle has
materials)
§ 284-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 284-9
1:1190
§ 284-10. Materials for which no admission fee is charged.
[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15; 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
4159-16]
There will be no admission charge for the following items:
Six admissions passes shall have no time limit. Only one sixadmission
pass may be obtained in any calendar year.
B. Extra costs. Residents can only purchase during the week at either the
Public Works Building or the Township Clerk's office in the Municipal
Building.
(1) Tires: $7 each. Limit four tires of any type per vehicle.
(2) Curbside pickup only:
(a) Refrigerator, freezer, air conditioner, or any appliance with
Freon refrigerant: $25 each.
(b) Dryer, washer, dishwasher, kitchen stove or hot-water heater:
$10 each.
(3) Refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners or other appliances
containing refrigerants brought to the Township Convenience
Center: $15 each (with a certification that the Freon refrigerant
has been properly removed).
C. All curbside pickup items must display the appropriate Franklin
Township stickers to be picked up.
D. Fee waiver for resident members of Volunteer Fire Company and
Rescue Squad. Any Township resident who is a member of a Volunteer
Fire Company or First Aid Squad that serves the Township of Franklin
and has met LOSAP eligibility requirements as set by the Township or
local fire districts, as of January of each year, shall have $25 towards a
multi-pass discount sticker waived or $5 waived from each single-pass.
A maximum twenty-five-dollar waiver may be applied to any type of
single or multi-pass discount pass for that calendar year. Proof of
service shall be provided at time of purchase and upon entry to the
convenience center.
A. Commingled: glass bottles, aluminum, steel and bimetal cans.
B. Paper: newspaper, magazines, junk mail.
C. Cardboard (clean only).
D. Brush/branches up to four inches in diameter.
E. Leaf bags. (Leaf bags cannot be empty.) [Amended 6-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 4159-16]
F. Recyclable light metals.
§ 284-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-10
1:1191
§ 284-10.1. Materials not allowed.
The following items are not allowed at the Convenience Center:
§ 284-11. Materials from businesses.
Franklin Township businesses are welcome with recyclable items. The
Convenience Center will not accept trash or garbage from businesses, only
recyclable items.
§ 284-12. Exemptions.
G. Picking up mulch.
H. Motor oil. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
I. Household batteries. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
J. Recyclable electronics. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15;
amended 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4159-16]
A. Contractor debris, Sheetrock, tile, concrete, brick, asphalt, and rock.
B. Grass, stumps, trunks, below-ground tree parts.
C. Railroad ties or treated wood.
D. Household garbage or food wastes, cooking oil.
E. Hazardous materials, pesticides, oil paint, chemicals, driveway sealer,
etc.
F. Propane tanks.
G. Recyclable electronics. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 4159-16]
A. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority to
authorize exemptions from the provisions of this chapter if it is
demonstrated to him that the conditions of said exemption are clearly
justified and that the strict enforcement hereof would impose undue
hardship upon a resident of the Township.
B. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall submit a written
report to the Township Manager of all exemptions authorized setting
forth the reason for said exemptions. The Township Manager shall, on
an annual basis during the month of January, issue a report to the
Township Council on the number and circumstances of all exemptions
issued during the prior twelve-month period.
§ 284-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 284-12
1:1192
ARTICLE III
Mandatory Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Program
§ 284-13. Definitions. [Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3728]
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ALUMINUM — All aluminum beverage containers.
BATTERIES — Dry cell batteries such as, but not limited to, radio, toy, watch
and/or calculator batteries.
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, GOVERNMENT OR
OFFICE PARK ESTABLISHMENT OR PROPERTY — All commercial,
industrial, government, business or institutional establishments or
properties within the Township of Franklin other than residential
properties.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper cartons, sheets, spacer material or
any other container consisting of two layers of brown paper separated by an
inner rippled core.
GLASS — All glass bottles and jars of any color, thoroughly rinsed with caps
and closures removed.
NEWSPAPERS — All paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters
of public interest. The term "newspapers" shall also include inserts that
come with the newspapers, such as comics, colored store or grocery
advertisements, TV and magazine sections and glossy coupons.
MIXED PAPER — All magazines, glossy inserts, computer paper, colored
paper, catalogs, store fliers with mailing labels, hardcover books with hard
covers removed, junk mail, writing or school paper, envelopes, paperback
books and copy paper.
PLASTIC — Plastic bottles or jugs bearing a "No. 1" through "No. 7"
in a recycling triangle, thoroughly rinsed with caps, lids or closures
removed.[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
RECYCLABLES — The following mandatory items to be separate from waste
from all commercial, industrial, institutional, government and office park
properties: aluminum cans; antifreeze; computer printout/white ledger;
concrete; consumer batteries; corrugated cardboard; glass containers;
heavy iron; lead-acid batteries; leaves and brush; magazines and junk mail;
mercury-containing devices; mixed office paper; newspaper; plastic
containers (No. 1 through No. 7 plastic bottles); scrap automobiles; steel
and bimetal cans; stumps, logs and tree parts; telephone books; textiles;
used consumer electronics; used motor oil; white goods and light iron; and
wood waste.[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15]
STEEL AND BIMETAL CANS — Tin-plated and bimetal food and beverage
cans.186
§ 284-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-14
1:1193
§ 284-14. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
paper products, glass and aluminum by commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments within the Township of Franklin.
§ 284-15. Separation and removal.
§ 284-16. Waste audit and reduction plan.
A. Any owner/operator or occupant of any commercial, professional or
institutional establishment must recycle all white office paper, as well
as all newspapers, aluminum cans and glass bottles.
B. Material is to be separated and bagged individually by type of paper,
with the exception of corrugated cardboard which must be bundled.
C. It is the responsibility of each commercial, professional or institutional
establishment to either deliver recycled materials to designated
recycling centers or to privately contract for collection services.
(1) Designated recycling centers are located at the Public Works
Convenience Center, 12 Berry Street. [Amended 2-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 3591; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3821187]
(2) Commercial, professional or institutional establishments which
elect to enter into private recycling arrangements must be able to
provide proof of said arrangement.
(3) The Township shall be empowered to review the recycling activities
of commercial, professional or institutional establishments on
demand in order to verify compliance.
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments are required
to prepare waste audits and waste reduction plans according to the
following schedule:
(1) For any establishment with 500 or more employees, a waste audit
and reduction plan must be prepared and submitted by December
31, 1993;
(2) For any establishment with 250 to 500 employees, a waste audit
and reduction plan must be prepared and submitted by December
31, 1994;
(3) For any establishment with 100 to 250 employees, a waste audit
and reduction plan must be prepared and submitted by December
31, 1995.
186. Editor's Note: The former definition of "textiles," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4101-15.
187. Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that it becomes effective 4-30-2009 and will
terminate on 4-30-2010.
§ 284-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 284-16
1:1194
§ 284-17. Recycling plan.
All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments with 100 or more
employees must submit a plan to the Township of Franklin, County of
Somerset, which outlines how source separation and recycling shall be
accomplished within the establishment. The plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
B. The waste reduction plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) The plan must indicate how the use of heavy metals will be
eliminated from products and packaging.
(2) The plan must indicate how the use of double packaging, except
where required for the integrity, health and safety of the product,
will be eliminated.
A. The manner in which the designated recyclables will be source
separated from the waste stream.
B. The name of the market vendor for each designated recyclable
commodity.
§ 284-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-17
1:1195

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 284-18. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Public
Works or his designee and/or the Recycling Coordinator who shall
investigate alleged violations.
§ 284-19. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person unauthorized by the
Township of Franklin to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such items during the twenty-four-hour period commencing at 6:00
p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection. Any and each
such collection in violation thereof from one or more residences during
said twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 284-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty.
§ 284-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-20
1:1197
Chapter 287
REHABILITATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Rental dwellings — See Ch. 290.
§ 287-1. Abandoned property criteria.
A. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one of
the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the Township Manager, or his
designee (both together throughout this chapter referred to simply as
the "Township Manager"), that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the Township Manager and no rehabilitation has taken place
during that same six-month period; or
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of a determination by the Township Manager pursuant to this
section; or
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination by the
Township Manager pursuant to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the
Township Manager in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 and may
also be subject to the Township of Franklin habitability hearing
process, pursuant to Chapter 94 of the Township Code, for one or
more of the following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
§ 284-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-1
1:1198
§ 287-2. Establishment of abandoned property list.188
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure; or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:l9-78 et seq. so
long as two-thirds or more of the total net square footage of the building
was previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
the time of the determination of abandonment by the Township
Manager.
A. The Township Manager shall identify abandoned property within the
Township of Franklin for the purpose of establishing an abandoned
property list. The abandoned property list shall include, for each
abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot number, the name
of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot. The
Township Manager may add properties to the abandoned property list
at anytime, and may delete properties at any time when he or she finds
that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Township of Franklin has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate which has been
placed on the abandoned property list may be removed if the owner of
the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the property
within 30 days after the property is placed on the list; provided,
however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure
188. Editor's Note: Ordinance Number 3849, adopted 10-13-2009, established the abandoned
property list for the Township of Franklin. This ordinance provided that the Public Officer
or his or her designee is directed to identify abandoned properties within the
municipality; place them on the list; and provide such notices and carry out such other
tasks as are required to effectuate an abandoned property list. Refer to Ord. No. 3849 for
details.
§ 287-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-2
1:1199
proceedings within six months after the property was first placed on
the list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned property list in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The Township Manager shall establish the abandoned property list and
any additions or deletions thereto by authorizing the publication of the
list in the official newspaper of the Township of Franklin, which
publication shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after
publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property
included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify
property determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record,
if known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The
Township Manager, in consultation with the tax collector, shall also
send out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization that receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the
owner of record is not known for a particular property and cannot be
ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the tax collector,
notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in
the manner as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall
indicate the factual basis for the Township Manager's finding that the
property is abandoned property as that term is defined herein and in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and shall specify the information relied upon in
making such finding. In all cases a copy of the mailed or posted notice
shall also be filed by the Township Manager in the office of the
Somerset County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect
as a formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned
with the name of the Township of Franklin as "plaintiff" and the name of
the property owner as "defendant," as though an action had been
commenced by the Township against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
Township Manager within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the Township Manager shall
have 40 days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the Township Manager
shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a
request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice, the
Township Manager shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the
matter. Any property included on the list shall be presumed to be
abandoned property unless the owner, through the submission of an
affidavit or certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned
property, can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included
on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by
supporting documentation such as, but not limited to, photographs,
repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for
§ 287-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-2
1:1200
§ 287-3. Additions to abandoned property list.
appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property
as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The Township
Manager shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the
hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the property owner of the
decision and the reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Township Manager pursuant to Subsection D of this
section by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary trial proceeding in the Superior Court, Somerset County.
Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of
decision mailed by the Township Manager. The sole ground for appeal
and new hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in
question is not an abandoned property as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the Court may
extend the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The Township Manager shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined by him or on appeal
not to be abandoned and may, in his discretion, remove properties from
said list whenever he deems such removal appropriate under the
circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
of Franklin shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect
to properties on the list, at any time after at least one property has been
placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for appeal
with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an appeal
brought by the property owner of that first property.
H. The Township may also, in addition to and irrespective of the actions
and limitations established by this chapter, continue to move forward
with the habitability hearing process established separately by Chapter
94 of the Township Code, whether or not the property involved in that
process has also been placed on the abandoned property list.
A. Any interested party may submit a written request to the Township
Manager asserting that any property within the Township of Franklin
should be included on the abandoned property list. The written request
must specify the street address and block and lot number of the
property to be included, and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30
days of receipt of any such request, the Township Manager shall
provide a written response to the party, either indicating that the
property will be added to the list or, if not, the reasons for not adding
the property. For the purposes of this section, the term "interested
parties" shall include any resident of the Township of Franklin, any
§ 287-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-3
1:1201
§ 287-4. Removal of property from abandoned properties list.
owner or operator of a business within the Township of Franklin or any
organization representing the interests of residents, business owners
or otherwise engaged in furthering the revitalization and improvement
of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
B. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the Township Manager
shall provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such
hearing. The party shall provide the Township Manager with notice at
least 10 days before the hearing of its intention to participate, and the
nature of the testimony or other information that it proposes to submit
at the hearing.
A. An owner may request removal of his or her property from the
Abandoned Properties list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by
paying all taxes and Township liens due, including interest and
penalties, and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the Township
Manager, stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost
of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of both the Township Manager
and Township Council that the conditions rendering the property
abandoned have been remediated in full; provided, however, that
where the Township Manager finds that the owner is actively
engaged in remediating the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned, as evidenced by
significant rehabilitation activity on the property, the Township
Manager may grant an extension of time of not more than 120 days
for the owner to complete all work, during which time no further
proceedings will be taken against the owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
§ 287-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-4
1:1202
§ 287-5. Sale of restricted tax liens.
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the
Township which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which
has accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating
the property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other Township liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list, or, if
an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax Sale
Law, N.J.S.A 54:5-l et seq., on or after the 90th day following the
expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The Township of Franklin may, at its option, require that the sale of the
tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax
sale certificate held by the Township be subject to the express condition
that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude
any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and to post a
bond in favor of the Township to guarantee the rehabilitation or repair
of the property. The Township Manager may waive a requirement to
post a bond imposed by the Township for any purchaser, assignee or
transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides documentation
acceptable to the Township Manager that the purchaser, assignee or
transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-80. The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond
shall be added to the amount required to be paid by the owner for
redemption of the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of
the tax sale certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the
property shall be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the tax
collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of
monies expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at the
delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the Township of Franklin, shall be
permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of
appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation or
repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
§ 287-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-5
1:1203
§ 287-6. Special tax sale and criteria for bidders.
indemnification agreement, holding the Township of Franklin harmless,
has been filed with the Township Manager.
C. If the Township of Franklin acquires the tax sale certificate for a
property on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written
notice to the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the
filing of the notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:l9-55, the Township shall be
permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that
caused the property to be included on the abandoned property list. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day period
the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the Township in writing that
the owner or mortgagee has elected to perform the remediation itself.
When the owner or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself,
it shall be required to post bond in favor of the Township of Franklin in
order to ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the bond
shall be determined by the Township Manager.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the Township of Franklin, as so
certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the
remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and
right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after
the filing of any lien by the Township, except for Township taxes, liens
and assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:l0-23.11 et seq., together
with any interest thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and
recorded as a lien by the entity incurring the cost with the Somerset
County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this chapter
shall be considered a public purpose and public use for which the power
of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
A. The Township of Franklin may hold special tax sales with respect to
those properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which
are also on the abandoned property list.
B. The Township Manager, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on properties at the
sale, which may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with Township's plans and
regulations; commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or
otherwise reuse the property, consistent with Township's plans and
regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
§ 287-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-6
1:1204
§ 287-7. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
(3) Such other criteria as the Township Manager, with the advice and
consent of the Township Council, may determine are necessary to
ensure that the properties to be sold will be rehabilitated or
otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the public interest.
C. The Township Manager, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, may establish minimum bid requirements for a special tax sale
that are less than the full amount of the taxes, interest and penalties
due, to help ensure that the properties will be rehabilitated or
otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with the public interest.
D. The Township Manager, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, may combine properties in said special tax sale into bid
packages, and require that bidders place a single bid on each package,
rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that are submitted.
E. The Township Manager, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, may sell said properties subject to provision that, if the
purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been set forth as a
condition of sale or misrepresents any material qualification that has
been established as a condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto,
then the properties and any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser
shall revert to the Township, and any amount paid by the purchaser at
the special tax sale shall be forfeited to the Township.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the Township may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the Township pursuant to this section and his or her
interest in the property or properties reverts to the Township, the
Township may subsequently designate the entity previously designated
as an eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties, and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis
of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and
conditions of the special tax sale.
G. The Township of Franklin shall provide notice of a special tax sale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms
of sale established by the Township pursuant to this section. Nothing
shall prohibit the Township from holding a special tax sale on the same
day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the Township of Franklin acquires a
tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property list at tax
sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of
redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months following
the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
§ 287-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-7
1:1205
§ 287-8. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
B. When the Township of Franklin is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an
action to foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remedied in
full.
A. If an entity other than the Township of Franklin has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate on a property
that has not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that
property shall not be added to the abandoned property list under the
following limited circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Township taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either Subsection a or b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86,
as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure proceedings in a
timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed abandoned only if
it meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the Township Manager or
the tax collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of an "abandoned
property" according to the criteria established in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and
N.J.S.A. 55:19-82.
§ 287-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-8
1:1206
§ 287-9. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Township from addressing
concerns regarding the condition of the property through the Township
of Franklin habitability hearing process, established by Chapter 94 of
the Township Code, irrespective of any ongoing foreclosure
proceedings.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Township of
Franklin may be brought by the Township in the Superior Court,
Somerset County. If the Court shall find that the property is abandoned
and that the owner or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a
rehabilitation plan, then the Court may authorize the Township to take
possession and control of the property and to develop its own
rehabilitation plan for the property.
B. Where the Township has been granted possession and control, the
Township may commence and maintain those further proceedings for
the conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part
thereof, that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost
and expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control
and possession of the property as permitted by N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the Township, obtain appropriate construction permits
or, in the alternative, submit formal applications for funding the cost of
rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies providing such funding
within the initial six-month period shall be deemed clear evidence that
the owner has failed to take any action to further the rehabilitation of
the property.
D. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the Township Manager or
the Court to be the projected cost of rehabilitation.
E. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
Court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
§ 287-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-9
1:1207
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
F. Where the Court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the Township Manager to act as
monitor of compliance and progress. If the owner fails to carry out any
step in the approved plan, then the Township may apply to the Court to
have the posted bond forfeited, to transfer possession of the building to
the Township to complete the rehabilitation plan, and to grant
authorization to use the bond proceeds for the rehabilitation. The
owner or other party in interest shall provide bimonthly reports to the
Township Manager on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation
and reuse of the property.
G. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan
and posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. Their plan must be submitted within 60 days following the
Court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the
mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause
shown. If the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's
plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation.
H. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Court and the Township Manager on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
If the mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material step
in the approved plan, then the Township Manager shall notify the Court,
which may order the posted bond forfeit, grant the Township possession
of the property, and authorize the Township to use the proceeds of the
bond for rehabilitation of the property.
I. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including Court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement; or, in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
§ 287-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-9
1:1208
§ 287-10. Township rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
J. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the Township may submit a plan to the Court which
conforms with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall
designate whether the Township or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall
undertake the rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-90.
A. The Township Manager, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, may designate a qualified rehabilitation entity for the purpose
of exercising the Township's rights, where that designation will further
the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with Township's
plans and objectives.
B. Regardless of whether the Township exercises its rights directly or the
Township Manager designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant
to this section, while in possession of a property, the Township shall
maintain, safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property.
Notwithstanding the Township's possession of the property, the owner
of the property shall not be relieved of any civil or criminal liability or
any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the owner.
C. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Township of
Franklin to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security
interests with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than
municipal liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court must find
as follows:
(1) The Township sought to obtain the necessary financing from the
senior lienholder, which declined to provide such financing on
reasonable terms;
(2) The Township sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the
senior lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
Court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Somerset
County.
D. Where the Township has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to
act on its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Township Manager on its activities and
progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The Township
or qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall provide such
reports to the Court as the Court determines to be necessary. If the
Court finds that the Township or its designee has failed to take diligent
action toward rehabilitation of the property within one year from the
grant of possession, then the Court may request the Township to
§ 287-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-10
1:1209
§ 287-11. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
§ 287-12. Procedure for Township to place liens, obtain title and
sell property.
designate another qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights,
or if the Township fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession
and return possession and control of the property to its owner.
E. The Township of Franklin shall file a notice of completion with the
Court, and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage
holder or lienholder, at such time as the Township has determined that
no more than six months remain to the anticipated date on which
rehabilitation will be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of
the Township Manager, attesting that the rehabilitation is anticipated to
be completed within six months, and a statement setting forth the
actions as it plans to undertake consistent with the plan.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the Court's
removal of possession, but no later than 30 days after the Township of
Franklin has filed a notice of completion with the Court or, in the event
the notice of completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of
possession, within 30 days after the Township has filed said notice.
B. The Court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the Township or affect any of the terms or conditions
under which the Township has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the Township has filed a
notice of completion or, in any event, within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition, the Court
may grant the Township title or authorize the Township to sell the
property, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
A. The Township Manager, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien
on the property to cover any costs of the Township in connection with
any proceeding under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. incurred prior to the
grant by the Court of an order of possession, which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a Township lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the
rights and status of a Township lien pursuant thereto.
§ 287-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 287-12
1:1210
§ 287-13. Powers of Construction Code Official not affected.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed as restricting or otherwise
abrogating the enforcement and other powers of the Township's
Construction Code Official under the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, including without limitation N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq. (collectively, the "Code"). The provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as consistent with the enforcement and other powers of
the Township's Construction Code Official under the Code.
Chapter 290
RENTAL DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 81.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Rent control — See Ch. 294.
B. Where the Township seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall
approve, and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court.
C. The Court may authorize the Township of Franklin to sell the building
free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all
such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to the
proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, except that municipal
liens shall be paid at settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the
property shall be distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. Upon approval by the Court, the Township shall sell the property on
such terms and at such price as the Court shall approve, and may place
the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying Court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et
seq. shall be available to the Township with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the Township has established an abandoned
property list and whether or not the property at issue has been included
on any such list.
§ 287-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-13
1:1211

ARTICLE I
Eviction for Nonpayment of Rent; Fire-Damaged Property
[Adopted 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 1365]
§ 290-1. Notification of Director of Community Resources and
Services.189
Any owner, agent or assignee of a housing unit containing four or more
dwelling units who shall secure a judgment for possession of leased
premises pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-57 shall immediately, upon receiving
said judgment for possession and in no case less than 24 hours thereafter,
notify the Director of Community Resources and Services of the Township
of Franklin of the receipt of such judgment for possession.
§ 290-2. Fire-damaged property; responsibility of landlord to assist
in relocation. [Added 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1512]
§ 290-3. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. Whenever any premises leased by a tenant from a landlord is partially
destroyed by fire, not the fault of the tenant, and the premises is not
habitable, if the landlord has vacant premises in the same complex that
is comparable in size to the premises the tenant was renting, the
landlord shall lease said vacant premises to the tenant whose premises
was partially destroyed at the same rental the tenant was paying for the
damaged premises until the tenant's original premises has been
repaired.
B. If the landlord does not have comparable premises in the same
complex, the landlord shall made available for lease to the tenant any
noncomparable vacant premises, if such exist, at the fair market value
subject to the provisions of any Rent Control Ordinances.190
C. Exempt from the provisions of this article are housing complexes of two
units or less in which the owner thereof resides.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 294, Rent Control.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3
1:1213
Chapter 294
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rent Leveling Board — See Ch. 13, Art. XVII.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 81.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 210.
Eviction for nonpayment of rent — See Ch.
290, Art. I.
§ 290-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 290-3
1:1214
ARTICLE I
Rent Leveling Board
[Adopted 9-13-1973 by Ord. No. 647; amended in its entirety
12-15-1983 by Ord. No. 1155 (Ch. 193, Art. I, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 294-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by
relevant Township ordinance; also occupied or unoccupied and offered for
rent.
DWELLING — Any building or structure rented or offered for rent to two or
more tenants or family units and containing kitchen, sleeping and sanitary
facilities within the dwelling unit.[Amended 10-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1672]
DWELLING UNIT — Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged,
designed or used as living quarters for one family only.
FAMILY UNIT — Any individual or more persons living together in a
dwelling unit.
HOUSING SPACE — That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent
for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit, together
with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the
property.
PRICE INDEX — The consumer price index (all items) for the Metropolitan
New York City area, published periodically by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, United States Department of Labor.
REHABILITATED DWELLING — Dwellings offered for rent in newly
rehabilitated condition for the first time after September 13, 1973, if the
cost of rehabilitation exceeds 1 1/2 of either the undepreciated cost or the
fair market value of the dwelling prior to rehabilitation.
RENTAL INCOME — The payable rent charged and received for the housing
space or dwelling over the previous twelve-month period, exclusive of any
of the following: all real property taxes and any costs for utilities if the
same are provided by the landlord, and any increase for major capital
improvements as permitted by §§ 294-13 and 294-14.[Amended 4-11-1989
by Ord. No. 1478]
UTILITIES — The minimum rate charged by the Township for water and
sewer.
§ 294-2. Exemptions. [Amended 10-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1672]
Exempt from this article are motels, hotels and similar type buildings; any
building or structure or portion thereof rented for commercial use; single-
§ 294-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-2
1:1215
family dwellings; and two-family dwellings in which the owner resides in
one unit. Rehabilitated dwellings rented for the first time are exempted,
and the initial rent can be determined by the landlord. All subsequent
rents will be subject to the provisions of this article. Also exempt from this
article are housing units which have been constructed and occupied on or
after January 1, 1982. In this respect, the word "occupied" shall mean the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said unit.
§ 294-3. Procedures for increases.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and tenant to whom this
article is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the following
provisions. At the termination of a lease of a periodic tenant, no
landlord may request or receive any increase in the rental income and
additional charges for that dwelling or housing space from any tenant,
new or continuing, which is greater than a combination of the following:
(1) Any increased cost to the landlord for utilities.
(2) An amount not to exceed 3 1/2% of the rental income for each
twelve-month period for which the premises has been rented in all
instances where, under said rental, the landlord supplies the heat
at no charge to the tenant and an amount not to exceed 3% of the
rental income for each twelve-month period for which the premises
has been rented in all instances where the heat is paid for by the
tenant, either directly or through an additional charge by the
landlord. [Amended 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1342; 8-8-1989 by
Ord. No. 1511; 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2005]
B. The landlord shall notify the Rent Leveling Administrator by certified
mail, return receipt requested, in writing, at least 60 days prior to the
effective date of the proposed increase, setting forth therein in detail
the calculations involved in computing the increase. A copy of said
notice shall be mailed to the tenant's residence by regular mail and by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Delivery is considered to have
been made upon the date of the initial certified mailing. A tenant may
be notified by other than certified mail only if the landlord or his
representative shall serve the tenant personally, or by leaving at the
usual place of abode of the tenant with a member of the household of 14
years of age or more, the notice provided for herein, and the landlord or
his representative shall certify such service by affidavit and return said
affidavit in his records. [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2005;
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
C. Upon receipt of said notice and where the increase sought hereunder is
due to increased cost for utilities, the Administrator shall schedule a
hearing on said increase, and the landlord shall post in the lobby in
each building, or if no lobby is present in a conspicuous place in or
about the premises, a notice of said hearing date at least five days prior
to the proposed date of the hearing. Any increases sought based upon
the increase permitted by the terms of Subsection A(2) of this section
§ 294-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-3
1:1216
shall not require a public hearing. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3813]
D. No landlord may request or receive any increase in rental income or
additional charges or surcharges except as provided by this article and
until such time as the landlord shall have obtained approval, in writing,
from the Rent Leveling Administrator for said increase, except where
said increase is pursuant to Subsection A(2) hereof, in which case no
such written approval from the Rent Leveling Administrator shall be
required. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
E. For a periodic tenant whose lease term shall be less than one year, said
tenant shall not suffer or be caused to pay any rent increase in the next
twelve-month period which exceeds the increase permitted herein for
the preceding twelve-month period.
F. Vacancy decontrol.
(1) Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases
under any other provision of this article, upon the voluntary,
uncoerced vacation of any apartment for which rent increases are
controlled by this article, the landlord shall have the right to fix the
rent for such vacated apartment at such a sum as he deems
appropriate.
(2) In the case of a tenant moving to different premises within the
same complex, the maximum permissible increase that said tenant
shall be permitted to suffer shall be as set forth in Subsection A
hereof. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
(a) In order for the landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol
rent increase, the landlord shall first be required to file a
written statement with the Rent Leveling Administrator, signed
by the vacating tenant, certifying to the Board that the
landlord has not, in any way, harassed or pressured the tenant
into vacating the housing space unit and that the vacation of
such unit was a voluntary act on the part of the tenant. Such
noncoercion certification shall not be required in order for the
landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol increase if:
[1] The increase does not exceed the total of all permissible
increases authorized by any other provisions of this
article;
[2] The tenant has moved from the unit without notice to the
landlord;
[3] The unit has been vacated pursuant to a judicially
mandated eviction; or
[4] The tenant has refused to sign such certification and the
landlord has certified that he has provided the tenant with:
§ 294-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-3
1:1217
§ 294-4. Unauthorized increases.
Any rental income increase at a time other than the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental income increase in
excess of that authorized by the provisions of this article shall be void.
§ 294-5. Notification of increases to tenant.
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant in detail of
the calculations involved in computing the increase and shall include the
allowable rental increase, the amount of rent before and after the proposed
increase and the effective date of the proposed increase. The failure of the
[a] Notice in the lease or notice at the inception of the
lease or notice by personal service within 30 days of
the passage of the vacancy decontrol provisions of the
tenant's rights under the vacancy decontrol provisions
of this article; and
[b] Notice to the tenant of the tenant's rights under the
vacancy decontrol provisions of this article when the
tenant notifies the landlord that he is vacating the
dwelling unit or 60 days prior to the termination of the
lease, whichever is earlier.
(b) The aforesaid notices shall prominently advise the tenant that
if he alleges harassment or pressure, he should notify the
Franklin Township Rent Leveling Administrator, and a hearing
will be held on the allegation. A hearing pursuant to
Subsection F(2)(a)[4] above shall be held before the Rent
Leveling Administrator upon at least seven days' notice to the
public and the vacating tenant. The decontrol provisions of this
section shall only apply to dwelling units which are physically
vacated subsequent to the effective date of this section.
G. Upon vacation of any apartment hereafter, the landlord shall file a
statement with the Rent Leveling Administrator certifying to the Board:
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
(1) The apartment and building numbers of such dwelling unit.
(2) The rent paid by the vacating tenant.
(3) The maximum rent increase which would be permissible under the
other provisions of this article.
(4) The rent agreed to by the new tenant for such apartment.
(5) That the vacation of such apartment was the voluntary act of the
vacating tenant and that such vacation was not the result of
landlord harassment or pressure upon such vacating tenant.
§ 294-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-5
1:1218
landlord to provide the tenant with this information shall make any increase
void, and the tenant shall recover any increase paid.
§ 294-6. Tax surcharge from increase in property tax.
A landlord may seek a tax surcharge from a tenant because of an increase in
municipal property taxes. The tax surcharge shall not exceed that amount
authorized by the following provisions:
§ 294-7. Rent reduction from decrease in property tax.
A tenant shall be entitled to a rent reduction from a landlord because of
decrease in the municipal property taxes. The tax reduction shall not exceed
that amount authorized by the following provisions:
A. The landlord shall divide the increase in the present property tax over
the property tax of the previous year by the number of square feet in
the dwelling to obtain the tax increase per square foot. The tenant shall
not be liable for a tax surcharge exceeding the tax increase per square
foot multiplied by the total square feet occupied by the tenant.
B. Any landlord seeking a tax surcharge shall notify the tenant of the
calculations involved in computing the tax surcharge, including the
present property tax for the dwelling, the property tax for the dwelling
for the previous year, the total number of square feet in the dwelling,
the tax increase per square foot, the number of square feet occupied by
the tenant, the maximum allowable surcharge and the effective date of
the proposed increase. The failure of the landlord to provide a tenant
with this information shall make any increase void, and the tenant shall
recover any increase paid.
C. The tax surcharge for which each tenant is liable shall be paid in 12
monthly installments.
D. The tax surcharge shall not be considered rent for purposes of
computing cost-of-living rental increase.
E. In the event of a tax appeal, the portion of a tenant's tax surcharge not
being paid by the landlord to the government will be held in a separate
interest-bearing account. In the event that the appeal is successful and
taxes are reduced, the tenant shall receive the reduction, plus accrued
interest as applied to its tax portion, after deducting all reasonable
expenses incurred by the landlord in prosecuting such appeal. Payment
to the tenant will be made in the form of a credit against the next
monthly rental or a check payable to the tenant.
A. The landlord shall divide the tax decrease in the present property tax
over the property tax of the previous year by the number of square feet
in the dwelling to obtain the tax decrease per square foot. The tenant
shall not be entitled to a reduction because of a tax decrease exceeding
the tax decrease per square foot multiplied by the number of square
§ 294-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-7
1:1219
§ 294-8. Rent Leveling Board established; composition;
Chairperson; appointments; terms; services of attorney and
secretary; compensation.
feet occupied by the tenant. The tax decrease each tenant is entitled to
shall be a credit to rent in 12 monthly installments.
B. Any tenant entitled to a rent decrease because of a reduction of
municipal property taxes shall be notified by the landlord of the
calculations involved in computing the reduction, including the present
property tax for the dwelling, the property tax for the dwelling for the
previous year, the total number of square feet in the dwelling, the tax
decrease per square foot, the number of square feet occupied by the
tenant, the amount of rent decrease each tenant is entitled to and the
effective date of the proposed decrease.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of
Franklin.
B. The Board shall consist of five members and two alternate members.
The Township Council shall also appoint a Council Liaison. Not more
than one of the members shall be a landlord, or, if no landlord shall be
willing to be so appointed, then, in such event, the Council may appoint
a person who is employed in some capacity by a landlord. Further, not
more than one tenant shall serve as a regular member of said Board.
[Amended 5-24-1984 by Ord. No. 1169; 3-9-2010 by Ord. No.
3868]
C. The Chairperson shall be chosen by the membership from among the
members.
D. All members shall be appointed by the Township Council.
E. Terms.
(1) The initial terms shall be as follows:
(a) Two members shall be appointed to three-year terms.
(b) Two members shall be appointed to two-year terms.
(c) One member shall be appointed to a one-year term.
(2) The alternate members shall be appointed for terms of one year.
(3) Any subsequent appointment shall be for a three-year term, except
for alternate members, who shall serve for one-year terms.
(4) Members shall serve their respective terms and until their
successors are thereafter appointed and qualified. [Added
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
(5) The Council Liaison shall be appointed for a one-year term. [Added
3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3868]
§ 294-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-8
1:1220
§ 294-8.1. Rent Leveling Board Administrator established. [Added
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
There is hereby established a Rent Leveling Administrator within the
Township of Franklin. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall be appointed
by the Town Manager, to serve in this position and, under the direction of
the Rent Leveling Board, shall have the powers set forth in this chapter,
including but not limited to the following:
F. No member shall hold any other elective office or position in the
Township.
G. The Board shall have the services of an attorney, who shall be appointed
by the Township Council for a one-year term ending June 30 of each
year, and the services of a secretary.
H. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but the
salary of the attorney shall be fixed by resolution of the Township
Council.
A. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants and to
bring together tenants and landlords in informal conferences and
suggest resolutions of conflicts between them, in order to help them
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. To remedy violations of this chapter by ordering rebates and increases
and bringing appropriate legal charges as provided in this chapter.
C. To accept, process and render decisions regarding:
(1) Complaints from tenants of illegal rental increases.
(2) Applications from landlords for rental increases.
(a) Any rebate ordered by the Rent Leveling Administrator shall be
considered a penalty against the landlord if said rebate is not
made to the tenant within 30 days of the service of a final
determination by the Administrator. The Administrator may
authorize a reduction in rent until such time as the
overpayment is reimbursed. The tenant may bring an action in
the Municipal Court for the collection of this penalty after the
time allowed.
(b) In case of failure by a tenant to pay rents as determined by the
Administrator or the Board, the landlord may resort to the
appropriate legal remedies for nonpayment of rent.
D. Obtain, keep and maintain all available records, data and information
necessary to the enforcement, construction and application of this
article.
E. Exercise all powers necessary and appropriate, to the maximum extent
permitted by law, to carry out and execute the purposes of this article.
§ 294-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-8.1
1:1221
§ 294-9. Powers of Board. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this article. However,
the Board shall have no jurisdiction to consider any matter not expressly set
forth in this article. The powers of the Board shall include but shall not be
limited to the following:
§ 294-10. Hearings. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
The hearings of the Rent Leveling Board shall be opened to the public
and shall not be held before 7:00 p.m. prevailing time. Upon receipt of an
appeal for a hearing regarding a decision of the Rent Leveling Adminstrator
pursuant to this article, the Secretary of the Board shall furnish copies
thereof to each Board member and set a hearing date. The appellant shall
give 10 days' written notice of such hearing to all interested parties,
including all landlords and tenants affected by said appeal and shall file
proof of service of notice with the Board. Said hearing will be conducted
at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting or at a special date to be fixed
by the Board. The Chairman of the Rent Leveling Board or, in his absence,
the Acting Chairman shall have the power to issue subpoenas to any parties
in dispute for the attendance of witnesses and the production of records
and may administer oaths and take testimony with regard to any dispute
brought before and heard by the Board. Failure to respond to a subpoena
issued or the failure to produce records when so demanded shall constitute
a violation of the provisions of this article. The Rent Leveling Board shall
hold a hearing within 30 days of the receipt of notice required herein from a
landlord or tenant. The Board shall render its decision within 30 days after
the close of all such hearings. The decision of the Rent Leveling Board shall
be final.
§ 294-11. Appeal to Administrator. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3813]
Any tenant may appeal to the Rent Leveling Administrator any computation
by the landlord under the provisions of this article.
§ 294-12. Enforcement agencies. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3813]
The power of enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested
in the Rent Leveling Administrator, and the Department of Community
F. Decisions of the Rent Leveling Administrator shall be final unless,
within 30 days of the decision, an aggrieved party appeals to the Rent
Leveling Board.
A. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for reduced
rentals as hereinafter provided.
§ 294-8.1 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-12
1:1222
Development shall be responsible for the administration and coordination
with the Rent Leveling Board.
§ 294-13. Hardship rent increase.
§ 294-14. Capital improvement surcharge.
A. A landlord may apply to the Rent Leveling Administrator for an increase
in rent due to hardship, and the Rent Leveling Administrator may
cause, on such application and after notice to tenants and a hearing as
provided in § 294-3C hereof, to grant a rent increase upon and to the
extent of a showing by the landlord that the net operating income (total
income less operating expenses exclusive of depreciation and debt
service) from the building is less than a fair net operating income. The
net operating income shall not be considered less than fair if it is 35%
or more of the annual income. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
B. The adjustment under this section shall be in such amount as is
necessary to bring the net operating income from the building to a fair
net operating income as defined hereinabove. Any increase granted
pursuant to this section shall be considered rent for the purpose of
computing permitted rental increases under this article. Any increase
granted hereunder shall be divided by the total square feet of the
dwelling to determine the increase per square foot, and the tenant shall
be liable for an amount equal to the cost per square foot multiplied by
the total square feet occupied by the tenant.
C. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall complete all hearings and render
its determination within 75 days of the filing of an application
hereunder by a landlord. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
D. As part of such application, the landlord shall be required to present to
the Administrator an audit report showing all income and expenses for
the dwelling or housing space on which the landlord seeks such
increase, certified to by a certified public accountant. In addition
thereto, if the landlord shall maintain rent cards, such cards shall be
made available to the Administrator for examination and review.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
A. A landlord may seek a capital improvement surcharge for any
completed major capital improvement. The landlord shall notify such
tenant of the total cost of the completed capital improvement, the
number of years of useful life of the improvement as claimed by the
landlord for purpose of depreciation for income tax purposes, the
average annual cost of the improvement, the need for such
improvement, the benefit to the tenant and the effective date of the
proposed increase.
B. In calculating the capital improvement surcharge, the cost of the
capital improvement shall be divided by the number of years of useful
§ 294-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-14
1:1223
§ 294-15. Landlord to maintain standards.
§ 294-16. Voiding of lease. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
In the event that a tenant cannot meet his monthly rental during a term
of any lease entered into after September 13, 1973, because of an adverse
change in his financial condition, he may appeal to the Rent Leveling
Administrator to have his lease voided at the discretion of the Administrator
and have 50% of any deposit or escrow refunded.
§ 294-17. Initial rent for new or rehabilitated housing space.
The owner of a newly constructed housing space, rehabilitated dwelling or
dwelling being rented for the first time after adoption of this article shall
not be restricted in the initial rent he charges. Any subsequent re-rental or
rental increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 294-18. Waiver of provisions.
Any provision of a lease or other agreement whereby any provision of this
article is waived shall be deemed against public policy and shall be void.
life of such improvement to determine the average annual cost of such
improvement. The landlord shall divide the average annual cost of such
improvement by the total square feet of the dwelling to determine
the capital improvement surcharge per square foot, if applicable. The
tenant shall not be liable for a capital improvement surcharge
exceeding the surcharge increase per square foot multiplied by the
total square feet occupied by the tenant, if applicable. The capital
improvement surcharge applicable to each tenant shall not exceed 10%
of his rental, unless such improvement is mandated by local ordinance,
and shall be payable in 12 monthly installments.
C. Any capital improvement surcharge of any hardship rental increase, as
provided in this article, shall not be considered rent for the purposes of
computing cost-of-living rental increases unless so specified by the Rent
Leveling Administrator. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
A. During the term of this article, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings or equipment
in the housing space and dwellings as he provided or was required to do
by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into.
B. A tenant or tenants who are not receiving substantially the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings or equipment
may have the Rent Leveling Board determine the reasonable rental
value of the housing space or dwelling in view of this deficiency after
first notifying the landlord of their intention to do so.
§ 294-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-19
1:1224
§ 294-19. Inspection of landlord's supporting documentation.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
Any tenant may question a rent increase or increase of sums other than
rental and has the right to see the landlord's supporting documentation.
This right also extends to the Rent Leveling Administrator.
§ 294-20. Retaliatory action against tenant.
A landlord shall not take retaliatory action against any tenant who exercises
any rights conferred on him under this article. "Retaliatory action" means
action taken by the landlord, including undue or unusual inconvenience,
violations of privacy, harassment, reduction in quality or quantity of services
or any form of threat or coercion. This information must be contained in
all increase notices. Failure of the landlord to provide this information may
make such notice void.
§ 294-21. Recovery of delayed increases. [Amended 2-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 3813]
A landlord who makes proper notice of an increase to a tenant and is
subsequently delayed by the Rent Leveling Administrator or governing body
from effecting such increase on the date stipulated in the notice shall be
entitled to recover the sum he was entitled to as if the increase became
effective as stipulated in the notice.
§ 294-22. Recovery of void increases.
A tenant who has paid an increase that is subsequently determined to be
void shall be entitled to recover such sums paid. Such sum can be returned
as a credit to the tenant's rent or paid by check.
§ 294-23. Decisions of Department of Housing and Urban
Development. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
In the event that the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
pursuant to any regulations duly adopted by said Department, shall
determine that this decision of the Rent Leveling Administrator jeopardizes
the Department's economic interest in a project and thereby asserts
exclusive jurisdiction over the regulation of rents of such project, the
Department and/or landlord shall submit to the Rent Leveling Administrator
copies of all financial data supplied to the Department by the landlord and
upon which date such decision of the Department was based.
§ 294-24. Violations and penalties; lien for unpaid fines. [Amended
3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2005]
A. A violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500 and for each subsequent offense in any calendar
year by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 294-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-24
1:1225
§ 294-25. Construal.
This article, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
It shall not apply to housing units which have been constructed and
occupied on or after January 1, 1982.
§ 294-26. Duration; recommendations for revision. [Amended
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1478; 2-13-1990 by Ord. No. 1547;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1929; 4-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1950;
12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 3170; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3813]
This article is to take effect in accordance with the applicable law and shall
remain in full force and effect until December 31, 2005. On September 30 of
each year, the Rent Leveling Administrator shall forward a written report to
the Township Council with recommendations for revisions and/or extension
of this article, including recommendations for revision to the provisions of
§ 294-3A. At that time, the Township Council shall review said report and
take such action as it deems appropriate.
§ 294-27. Excess increases.
Any rent increases as imposed after June 30, 1976, in excess of the increase
as permitted under the terms of this article are hereby declared to be null
and void as of the effective date of this article.
§ 294-28. Enclosure of tenant's possessions during eviction.
During the course of the lawful eviction of any tenant of any dwelling unit
from such dwelling unit, no landlord shall cause, suffer or permit, either
himself or by the actions of any servant and/or employee or any person
effectuating an order of eviction, the personal property, including but not
limited to furniture, clothing and appliances, of any tenant being so evicted
to be placed or caused to be placed in an area not enclosed by a structure
for loading on a vehicle or vehicles which are present at the dwelling unit
at such time of removal and available for said property to be immediately
loaded therein.
B. If after 30 days' notice to the landlord, which notice shall be given to the
landlord by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the owner, any fine shall remain unpaid, the
fine so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the property and
shall become and form part of the taxes then next to be assessed upon
the property and shall be collected and enforced according to law.
§ 294-24 FRANKLIN CODE § 294-28
1:1226
ARTICLE II
Protected Tenancy
[Adopted 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. 1385 (Ch. 193, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 294-29. Application fees.
The fees to be charged for the making and processing of applications for
protected tenancy status under the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected
Tenancy Act191 shall be as follows:
A. To be paid by owner:
(1) Filing fee per unit: $30.
(2) Processing fee per application per unit: $30.
B. To be paid by party contesting determination and requesting
administrative hearing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.7:
(1) Administrative hearing fee per unit: $100.
(2) Cost of sound recording and reproduction thereof to be paid by
applicant in accordance with rates applicable to municipal courts.
C. If either party requests a certified shorthand reporter, such party shall
be responsible to secure and pay for such service.
191. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 294-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-29
1:1227
Chapter 298
RIGHT OF ENTRY
§ 298-1. Authority to enter and inspect premises.
§ 298-2. Procedure for administrative inspections; inspection
warrants.
The following procedure for the Township, its agents and employees seeking
to gain access to the premises to be inspected shall be as follows:
A. The Township, its agents and employees are authorized, with the
express consent of the owner, occupant or operator, to periodically
enter, examine and survey all premises in the Township, during usual
business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential purposes, for
the purpose of performing their duties of safeguarding the health and
safety of the persons occupying the same and of the general public;
provided, however, that such entries are made in such a manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
Such inspections shall be made if the public official has reason to
believe that any provision of this Code constituting an immediate threat
to public health, safety or welfare is being violated or if the inspection is
part of a regular program of inspection authorized by this Code or state
law.
B. An inspection of the premises used for nonresidential purposes may be
made at other times if the premises are not available during the
foregoing hours for inspection, or if there is reason to believe that
violations are occurring on the premises which can be determined and
proved by inspection only during nonprescribed hours, or there is
reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate
threat to health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without
delay.
A. The authorized public official or duly appointed inspector seeking
access to the premises shall initially communicate verbally with the
owner, occupant or operator of the premises and request permission to
access the premises.
B. If permission to access cannot be obtained verbally, the enforcing
public official shall send a letter to the owner, occupant or operator of
said premises at the address disclosed by the Township's tax records,
certified mail, return receipt requested, and advise of a date and time at
which the official or officials will seek entry; said date shall be at least
10 days after the date of the aforementioned letter.
C. In the event that the owner, occupant or operator fails to respond or
fails to respond affirmatively to Subsection B of this section, the
Township Manager may direct the enforcing public official or officials to
apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for a search warrant
§ 294-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 298-2
1:1228
§ 298-3. Emergency warrantless inspections authorized.
Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Township,
its agents or employees have reason to believe that a condition exists which
poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall
only take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate
the condition.
§ 298-4. Violations and penalties.
Where any authorized public official or duly appointed inspector is refused
entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner,
occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this Code and subject to penalties as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
pursuant to the Rules of Court. Said application will be made with the
assistance of the Township Attorney, and will be made not later than 20
days after the date of the letter issued by the enforcing public official
set forth in Subsection B of this section. The application for a search
warrant shall be based upon the sworn testimony or certification of
the enforcing public official, setting forth factually the actual conditions
and circumstances that provide probable cause to believe that a
nuisance or violation of the Township Code or state law exists on
the premises. Probable cause permitting the issuance of the aforesaid
search warrant may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) The passage of time;
(2) The nature of the building or buildings;
(3) The condition of the entire property;
(4) A valid public interest;
(5) Belief that a nuisance is maintained; or
(6) Belief that a violation of the Township Code is maintained,
constituting an immediate threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
D. If the Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the application, and
if he finds that probable cause for issuance of the search warrant exists,
he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to
and inspection of the particularly described building or all the buildings
in a particularly described area.
§ 298-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-4
1:1229
Chapter 300
SMOKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 134.
§ 300-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — All structures owned and/or operated by the
Township of Franklin and/or occupied by Township employees and used for
the conduct of official business of the Township of Franklin.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
TOWNSHIP — Franklin Township.
TOWNSHIP FACILITIES — All parks and recreational facilities, including all
public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and parking lots publicly owned by
the Township of Franklin and all the property owned by the Township upon
which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where
individuals gather for recreational activities including all areas adjacent to
such facilities, including but not limited to any parking area, driveway, or
drive aisle.
§ 300-2. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited on all municipal property, both indoors and
outdoors, including the Municipal Building, Police Headquarters, the
Community/Senior Center, Community Resource and Services, the
Department of Public Works and in any other municipal building or
facility owned and operated by the Township of Franklin. No smoking
signs or the international No-Smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted at the entrance to each municipal building
facility. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain
letters or a symbol which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that
smoking is prohibited therein. The sign must also indicate the violators
are subject to a fine. The signs shall be written in English and Spanish
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55.
§ 298-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 300-2
1:1230
§ 300-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $250 for the first offense; $500 for the second
offense and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. In addition, any municipal
employee found in violation of this chapter may also be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with the Township's policies and
procedures governing discipline.
§ 300-4. Enforcement.
The provisions set forth under this chapter shall be enforced by the Franklin
Township Police Department.
Chapter 303
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 125.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 138.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 271.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities,
athletic fields, playgrounds, pool facility, and other recreational
facilities owned and operated by the Township of Franklin upon which
the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where
individuals gather for recreational and leisure activities, including all
areas adjacent to such facilities including but not limited to any parking
areas, driveway or drive aisle which has been designated with "No
Smoking" signs. No smoking signs or the international No-Smoking
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross
section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at the
entrance to each facility. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public
and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color with the
sign, indicating that smoking prohibited therein. The sign must also
indicate the violators are subject to a fine. The signs shall be written in
English and Spanish in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55.
C. The smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered, owned and
operated by the Township of Franklin.
§ 300-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4
1:1231

ARTICLE I
Christmas Sales
[Adopted 8-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1241 (Ch. 195, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 303-1. Title.
The short title by which this article shall be known is the "Christmas Sales
Ordinance."
§ 303-2. Permit required; permissible zones. [Amended 4-11-1995
by Ord. No. 1891]
The sale of trees, wreaths, sprays and other similar decorations used during
the Christmas season in A, RR5, RR3, CP, NB, OP, G-B, M-1 and M-2 Zones
within the Township, including authorization to utilize a temporary shed,
trailer or like structure during the period of sale to provide shelter for those
conducting the sale, shall require a temporary permit from the Township
Code Department, after a firesafety inspection of the proposed sale site.
Such sale in other zones of the Township is strictly prohibited.
§ 303-3. Exemptions.
Premises used throughout the year for the sale of trees, shrubbery, plants,
farm produce and other similar landscaping or agricultural products shall
not be subject to this article's permit requirement.
§ 303-4. Period of sales.
The maximum allowable time period for said sale shall be from November 1
to December 31 and from 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. on any given day therein.
§ 303-5. Proper storage of trees required.
No such permit shall be construed to relieve any applicant therefor of the
duty to properly store and maintain said trees in order to not endanger
property or interfere with the operation of the Police or Fire Department or
the egress of occupants of the premises in case of fire or to comply with any
applicable provisions of this Code.
§ 303-6. Signs. [Amended 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 1704]
Any sign used in conjunction with the sales regulated by this article shall
measure a maximum of four by eight feet (32 square feet), shall be limited
to eight feet in height and shall be no more than two in number. Any
such sign shall be located at least 10 feet back from the property line
of the premises used for such sale and shall not be erected within any
sight triangle and shall comply with all other requirements of applicable
ordinances not inconsistent herewith.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-7
1:1233
§ 303-7. Clearance of sight triangles required.
Any triangular area formed by two intersecting streets or highways,
measuring 100 feet from the point of intersection in the case of county roads
and state roads or 30 feet from the point of intersection in the case of local
roads (the greater of the required distances when two roads of different
distance requirements intersect), shall be free of visual obstructions
measuring more than three feet in height caused by Christmas sales as
defined in this article.
§ 303-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 303-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 303-8
1:1234
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Sales
[Adopted 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 1286 (Ch. 195, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 303-9. Applicability.
Subsequent to the adoption of this article, the outdoor display and/or sale
of goods on any public sidewalk, parking lot, private sidewalk or front yard
shall be in accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 303-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE SIDEWALK — A sidewalk which is not owned or operated by the
state, county or other political entity.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK — A sidewalk either owned or operated by the
Township of Franklin, State of New Jersey or other political entity.
§ 303-11. Enforcement.
This article and its provisions, including penalties, shall be enforced by the
Township of Franklin and any other enforcement agencies designated for
the enforcement of the ordinances and codes of the Township of Franklin.
§ 303-12. Hours of operation.
Sidewalk sales shall only be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
§ 303-13. Exemption.
Sidewalk sales shall not include sales of items in residential zones
commonly referred to as "garage sales."
§ 303-14. Limitations on sales.
Any sidewalk sales conducted in connection with a retail business operation
shall:
A. Be limited to sales of items from stores located within the Township of
Franklin only and not from stores located outside the municipality.
B. Be located, in the case of an individual store, immediately in front of
such store.
C. Be conducted, in the case of a shopping center sale, only immediately in
front of or in close proximity to such store.
§ 303-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-14
1:1235
§ 303-15. Prohibited sales.
The following described sales shall be prohibited to be conducted as
sidewalk sales:
§ 303-16. Obstruction of traffic.
No person shall obstruct the free and lawful passage of pedestrians and
vehicles on the streets and sidewalks of Franklin Township by placing
thereon any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles of trade or sale or
in any other manner whatsoever.
§ 303-17. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
D. Not cause any unreasonable interference with the flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise create a public health or safety hazard.
A. Flea markets other than flea markets conducted or operated by a notfor-
profit or religious corporation, which shall be defined as outdoor
sales not primarily associated with sales located within a permanent
indoor structure. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1649]
B. Sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. Sale of food and beverages.
D. Sale of pornographic materials.
§ 303-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 303-17
1:1236
ARTICLE III
Warehouse Sales
[Adopted 1-13-1987 by Ord. No. 1316 (Ch. 195, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 303-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WAREHOUSE — Any structure whose principal purpose is the storage
of merchandise or commodities for ultimate transportation to a separate
location for sale or other disposition.
WAREHOUSE SALE — The retail sale of any goods or commodities from any
warehouse to the public for the purpose of reducing inventory or sale of
seasonal stock.
§ 303-19. Number of sales limited; compliance required.
Any warehouse shall be permitted to conduct a warehouse sale at its
location not more frequently than four times during the calendar year upon
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 303-20. Application for permit; fee.
A. Prior to the conducting of any warehouse sale, the owner of any
property on which such warehouse is located and from which such sale
is to be conducted shall make application to the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Franklin for authorization to conduct such
sale. Such application shall be made not less than 10 business days in
advance of the date scheduled for the sale.
B. Such application shall include the following:
(1) A sketch depicting the subject premises and all parking facilities
designated for parking by the public as well as by employees of the
applicant.
(2) A detailed statement setting forth the method by which the
applicant shall provide for safe and adequate traffic controls during
such sale.
(3) A detailed statement setting forth the method by which the
applicant shall provide suitable public accommodations, including
but not limited to sanitary facilities.
(4) A detailed statement setting forth the method by which the
applicant will comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Fire Code.
C. All applications shall be accompanied by a permit application fee in the
amount of $500 for the initial application in any calendar year. There
§ 303-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-20
1:1237
§ 303-21. Application review.
Upon the receipt of a complete application, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall review such application within 10 business days and shall approve the
same if he shall determine that said sale meets the requirements of this
article and that adequate provision has been made for public health, safety
and welfare, including but not limited to adequate provisions for traffic
control, sanitary facilities and fire protection. In reviewing said application,
the Code Enforcement Officer may solicit the review of the application
by other municipal officials, including but not limited to the Director of
Planning, Fire Subcode Official, Engineer and Health Officer.
§ 303-22. Conditions of permit.
The warehouse sale shall not be conducted on any day other than Friday,
Saturday or Sunday nor earlier than the hour of 9:00 a.m. nor later than
the hour of 9:00 p.m. on such days. Additionally, no warehouse sale shall
be conducted outdoors Any permit shall be subject to such other conditions
or limitations as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this article.
§ 303-23. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
shall be no additional fees from an applicant for subsequent
applications in any calendar year, provided that such subsequent
applications are accompanied by a certification of the applicant
certifying that there has been no substantial change to the structure or
premises from that described in the initial application. In the absence
of such certification, each subsequent application in any calendar year
shall be accompanied by the aforesaid fee of $500.
§ 303-20 FRANKLIN CODE § 303-23
1:1238
Chapter 308
SCRAP METAL DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 156.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 271.
Sales — See Ch. 303.
§ 308-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public safety, health and
welfare of the residents of the Township and further to deter criminal
activity relating to the sale and purchase of stolen scrap metal by
establishing a uniform set of procedures requiring the maintenance of scrap
metal as purchased or otherwise obtained.
§ 308-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SCRAP METAL — Old or scrap copper, brass, aluminum, iron, steel and
other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
SCRAP METAL DEALER — An establishment or place of business within
Township limits which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping,
buying or selling scrap metal.
§ 308-3. Document retention requirement for seller of scrap metal
on basis of bulk value.
Any person or entity in the business of buying scrap metal within the limits
of the Township who buys, attempts to buy or offers to buy scrap metal on
the basis of bulk value from any person shall:
A. Issue to the seller and keep for his or her own records, for not less than
three years, a serialized receipt for each purchase of scrap metal
containing the following:
(1) The name and address of the buyer;
(2) The date of the transaction;
(3) The names of the scrap metal purchased;
(4) The weights of the scrap metal purchased;
(5) The price paid for the scrap metal at the standard measures of
weight and fineness prescribed by N.J.S.A. 51:1-3; and
§ 303-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-3
1:1239
§ 308-4. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
§ 308-5. Enforcement.
This chapter and its provisions, including penalties, shall be enforced by
the Township and any other enforcement agencies designated for the
enforcement of the ordinances and codes of the Township.
Chapter 325
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Parades — See Ch. 253.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
§ 325-1. License required; exception. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 4119-15]
(6) The name, address and signature of the seller of the scrap metals.
B. Obtain proof of identity from each person or entity who sells scrap
metals to said buyer and maintain a record of such proof of identity for
a period of not less than three years.
C. Retain any scrap metal in the form in which it was purchased for a
period of not less than two business days, minimum 48 hours.
D. Upon reasonable request, allow the inspection of the serialized receipts
for scrap metals provided for in Subsections A and B of this section by
any law enforcement officer of the Township.
E. A scrap metal dealer shall, before buying, attempting to buy or offering
to buy any scrap metals, register with the Police Department of the
Township and give the buyer's name and address.
A. No person or persons or parties whatsoever shall permit any outdoor
shows, concerts, circuses, carnivals, festivals, dances, theatrical
performances, exhibitions and public gatherings out of doors within the
Township of Franklin without having first obtained a license from the
Township of Franklin in the manner and upon the conditions hereinafter
set forth.
B. No person, group of persons, partnership, association or corporation or
any combination thereof shall maintain, conduct, promote or operate on
§ 308-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 325-1
1:1240
§ 325-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4137-16]
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any kind of affair which is:
§ 325-3. Payment of taxes, water payments, fines and fees due;
zoning requirements met.
any lands or premises within the Township, other than in established
theaters, auditoriums or other places licensed or permitted for public
occupancy as limited by law, any use thereof for the purposes of
entertaining the general public if a fee or admission is charged or
voluntary contributions solicited, except pursuant to a special event
permit issued therefor by the Township as hereinafter provided.
C. No owner, lessee, licensee or other person, partnership, association or
corporation having any right to or interest in any real property within
the jurisdiction of the Township shall license, rent, lease or otherwise
permit the use of such real property or any part thereof for the use of
any mass gathering if a fee or admission is charged or voluntary
contributions solicited other than in established theaters, auditoriums
or other places licensed for public occupancy as limited by law, except
pursuant to a special permit issued therefor by Township as hereinafter
provided.
D. The following shall be exempt from obtaining an outdoor special event
permit:
(1) Governmental units.
(2) Bona fide scholastic and interscholastic contest and officially
sponsored affairs.
A. Outdoors and open to the general public; and
Generates a parking or traffic flow situation that could unreasonably
interfere with the movement of normal traffic or emergency vehicles
or other organized groups having a similar common purposes or goal
proceeding in or upon any street, park or other public place in Franklin
Township; and
B.
Requires the expenditure of municipal resources or inspections from
the Fire Prevention Office, Construction Office, Department of Public
Works, Police Department, Health Department or Recreation
Department, including but not limited to bicycle race, bikathon, car
show, carnival or circus, ceremony, concerts, dances, exhibitions, fair,
farmer's market, festival, flea market, foot race, marathon or run,
public gatherings, theatrical performances or walkathon.
C.
A. Any person applying for a special event permit shall show that all taxes
and water payments due to date have been paid and all outstanding
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:1241
§ 325-4. Notices required.
§ 325-5. Application requirements. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 4119-15]
financial obligations have been met, including but not limited to fines
and fees due the Township.
B. Any person applying for a special event permit shall show that all
zoning requirements have been met for the premises on which said
special event is to be held and for the property to be used as associated
parking facilities.
A. Notice to abutting owners. The applicant shall send special notice by
certified mail to all owners of abutting property within 200 feet of the
site of the special event and the parking area of the time and place of
said special event 10 days prior to scheduled Township Council meeting
where special event permit application is to be approved. The applicant
shall bear the cost of the certified mail. The list of abutting property
owners within 200 feet of the site shall be obtained from the Zoning
Department and/or Assessor's office.
B. Notice to affected persons/businesses for road closure. Notify all
persons and businesses affected by said road closing. Said notice shall
be in writing and served upon the person/business in person or by
certified mail at least 10 days prior to Township Council meeting where
special event permit application is scheduled to be approved. Affidavit
of service to said affected persons/businesses shall be prepared by the
applicant and filed with the Township Clerk prior to the Township
Council meeting where special event permit application is scheduled to
be approved.
A. An application for license hereunder shall be signed by the person,
persons or parties responsible and shall be filed with the Township
Clerk, accompanied by the fee payable hereunder. Such application
shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk not less than 60 days
prior to the date for which the license is desired. Failure to submit the
application at least 60 days prior to the event may constitute cause for
denial of the event. Applications shall be made in writing on the
prescribed form and include all checklist items. The Township Council
shall act upon the application 15 days prior to the date for which the
license is desired. The applicant shall set forth in the application for
license the following information: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No.
4137-16]
(1) The name and address of the person or persons, or, in the case of a
corporation, the names and addresses of the president, director or
trustee, responsible for conducting the outdoor special event for
purpose sought to be licensed.
§ 325-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 325-5
1:1242
(2) A statement explaining the activity to be carried out and the
admission fee to be charged.
(3) The proposed location, dates and hours of such special event.
(4) A statement of the expected minimum and maximum number of
persons (spectators) intended to use the property(ies) at one time
and collectively and the number of persons to be engaged
(workers/volunteers) in the outdoor event.
(5) The number of automobiles, motorcycles and other vehicles
intended to use the property(ies) at one time and collectively.
(6) A description and plan drawn to scale of the location wherein said
outdoor special event is to be carried on or conducted and activities
proposed to be conducted at said event.
(7) A detailed description of the various amusement devices intended
to be conducted or operated during the period for which the license
is sought, and any license issued upon such application shall be
only for amusement devices so described in said application.
(8) A plan drawn to scale showing the layout of any parking area for
motor vehicles, including the means of ingress and egress to such
parking area, and a statement as to the number of acres or square
feet of the area to be devoted to this purpose. The number of
parking spaces and the number of cars per acre shall be
determined by the Chief of Police or his designee.
(9) For events involving carnival rides, copy of the ride vendor's New
Jersey DCA permit to operate.
(10) A statement specifying whether food or beverages are intended to
be prepared, served or distributed; if food or beverages are
intended to be prepared, served or distributed, a statement
specifying the method of preparation and distribution of such food
or beverages and the method of disposing of garbage, trash,
rubbish or any other refuse arising therefrom. If food or beverages
are to be prepared, served or distributed, a plan drawn to scale
must be attached to the application showing the buildings or other
structure from which the food and beverages shall be prepared,
served or distributed.
Please note: A temporary food license from the Health Department
and/or a Type I permit from the Office of Fire Prevention may be
required.
(11) A statement specifying whether any private security guard or offduty
Franklin Township police officers will be engaged and, if so,
the number of and duties to be performed by such persons,
including the hours to be worked and areas of responsibility and
provide the name of all armed personnel. The required number of
§ 325-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5
1:1243
off-duty Franklin Township police officers or security guards shall
be determined by the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief
of Police shall prescribe rules for the conduct of armed security
including but not limited to the manner in which same shall be
identified.
(12) A statement specifying the precautions to be utilized for fire
protection, including a plan drawn to scale specifying the location
of fire lanes and water supply for fire control.
(13) A statement specifying tents and canopies to be utilized for the
special event, including:
(a) A description of what the tent will be used for and the dates
and hours when the tent will be occupied.
(b) A plan drawn to scale showing the tent location, all structures,
parking areas and the location of any proposed cooking or
heating appliances (plan must show dimensions of tent and
distance to any other structure and property lines).
(c) A floor plan showing the interior layout of the tent, including
all tables or chairs, exit locations, exit signs, emergency light
locations and fire extinguisher locations.
(d) If any electrical appliances are proposed, they must be shown/
listed and the plan must indicate the electrical supply for these
appliances.
(e) A certificate of flame resistant showing the tent conforms to
NFPA 701.
Please note: If a tent is proposed and is either more than
900 square feet or any one side is greater than 30 feet,
a construction permit is required from Construction Code
Enforcement. A canopy (no side) or a tent less than 900
square feet and all sides less than 30 feet does not require
a construction permit from Construction Code Enforcement.
Both tents and canopies may require a Type 16 permit from
Fire Prevention.
(14) A statement showing that adequate toilet facilities for the capacity
of the special event will be provided in compliance with the State
Sanitary Code.
B. One site plan (plan drawn to scale) can be submitted that includes the
requirements listed in this section in Subsections A(6), (7), (8), (10),
(12) and (13)(b). The requirements for Subsection A(13)(c) must be
submitted on its own site plan.
C. The application shall be signed by the applicant or applicants and shall
be verified under oath.
§ 325-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 325-5
1:1244
§ 325-6. Hours.
Any outdoor special event in the Township of Franklin shall commence no
earlier than 9:00 a.m. and shall conclude no later than 11:00 p.m. of the
same day.
§ 325-7. Closing of premises; sleeping.
Both the premises where the special event is held and the parking area shall
be closed as expeditiously as possible after the conclusion of any special
event, and no sleeping will be permitted on the grounds or in vehicles
in either area without proper sanitary sewer and approval by the Health
Department.
§ 325-8. Investigation.
Upon filing of the application, the Clerk shall refer a copy of the application
promptly to the Technical Review Committee (TRC), which includes, but
is not limited to the following departments: Township Clerk, Township
Engineer/DPW; Fire Prevention; Police; Health; Parks/Recreation and
Community Development (Code Enforcement & Planning/Zoning) for
investigation of the matters in the application. A written report shall be
made to the Township Clerk of the result of such investigations by such
D. A fee of $25 shall be paid upon the filing of the application, to be applied
by the Township towards its expense in investigating the application,
which said fee shall not be refunded whether a license is issued or
denied.
E. In addition to the application described herein, the applicant is also
responsible for obtaining all other applicable permits, including, but not
limited to: [Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4137-16]
(1) Construction Code permits: tents, generators, mechanical
equipment and platforms.
(2) Health Department permits: temporary food permits and animals.
(3) Municipal Clerk permits: alcoholic beverage, solicitor, games of
chance, parade, banner, road closing.
(4) Fire Prevention permits: air-filled amusements, fireworks/
pyrotechnics, any open-flame activity and rides.
(5) Recreation permits: parks.
(6) Zoning permits: temporary signs.
F. Incomplete application for special events and other associated permits,
including failure to provide all required documentation, will result in
the application being deemed incomplete and returned to the applicant.
[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4137-16]
§ 325-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-8
1:1245
officer or agent of each department within 30 days from the filing of the
application.
§ 325-9. Issuance of license.
§ 325-10. License fees.
§ 325-11. Maintenance escrow.
The applicant shall deposit with the Township Clerk a cash deposit, money
order, certified check or treasurer's check in the amount of $300 to
guarantee the maintenance of the municipally owned premises on which
the applied-for activities are to be conducted. If, at the end of such activity,
the Health Inspector of the Township decides that the premises have not
been returned to the condition they were in as of the time that the appliedfor
activity commenced, he shall be authorized to return the premises to
such condition and to pay for having the same done out of the deposit left
with the Township Clerk for such purposes. After the premises have been
A. All licenses for special events shall be issued by the Township Clerk in
the name of the Township but only when the Township Clerk shall have
been first authorized to issue such license by a resolution adopted by
the Township Council.
B. The license shall set forth and describe, with particularly, the location
where the event sought to be licensed hereunder shall take place and
the period of time during which it may continue.
C. The license herein authorized shall not be issued or take effect until all
fees have been paid to the Township as provided herein.
D. Any license authorized to be issued hereunder shall be issued subject to
all provisions of this chapter.
A. Upon a resolution being adopted by the Township Council, a license
shall issue as aforesaid upon the applicant's first paying to the
Township Clerk a license fee as follows: [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3909]
(1) Per day: $125.
(2) Per day for carnivals, circuses and large special events: $200.
B. For nonprofit organizations, a letter requesting waiver of license fee or
notation requesting waiver on application for Council consideration.
C. Fees for carnivals, circuses and large special events will not be waived
because of the amount of staff time required to review and make
inspections.
D. All applications submitted less than 60 days prior to an event will be
assessed a late fee of $25. [Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 4137-16]
§ 325-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 325-11
1:1246
restored to their original condition, the balance of any moneys remaining
shall be returned by the Township Clerk to the applicant.
§ 325-12. Liability insurance.
The applicant shall furnish evidence of a public liability insurance policy, in
an amount not less than $500,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for any
one accident, which shall be in force and effect at the time such structure
is to be occupied or during which the carnival, circus, traveling show or
special event will be operating.
§ 325-13. Off-duty police escrow.
Submission of off-duty police escrow in an amount to be determined by the
Franklin Township Police Department:
§ 325-14. Inspection of premises.
An inspection of the premises to be used is to be made by the Chief of
Police or other Township official to ensure that adequate off-street parking
is available and to check on other public safety factors.
§ 325-15. Insurance certificate.
§ 325-16. Responsibilities of licensee.
A. Payment to off-duty police officers for services provided shall be made
by the Finance Department from said escrow deposit. Should escrow
funds be found insufficient, the applicant shall deposit additional funds
with the Finance Department to cover the remaining cost of off-duty
police protection.
B. Any unused monies deposited for off-duty police protection shall be
returned by the Township Clerk to the person or organization making
the deposit upon approval of the Chief of Police.
A. If the application involves the closing of a public road, the applicant
shall provide an insurance certificate to cover the event and the closing
of the aforesaid public roadway in conjunction therewith in the amount
of $1,000,000. Said policy shall name the Township of Franklin as
additional insured and a certification of same shall be filed with the
Township Clerk at least seven days prior to the event.
B. If the application involves a carnival, circus, traveling show or special
event, the applicant shall provide an insurance certificate in
conjunction therewith in the amount of $500,000 for any one person
and $1,000,000 for any one accident. Said policy shall name the
Township of Franklin as additional insured and a certification of same
shall be filed with the Township Clerk at least seven days prior to the
event.
§ 325-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-16
1:1247
§ 325-17. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. No person or party licensed hereunder shall allow, suffer or permit any
exhibition, performance or gathering of persons for any unlawful
purpose or to be conducted in any unlawful, disorderly, obscene or lewd
manner.
B. The licensee shall maintain at its own expense one or more persons or
agents responsible for the proper conduct of the event licensed, who
shall remain upon the premises licensed at all times during the period
in which the license shall be in effect.
A. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter shall be violated,
the Township Council, through its authorized officers or agents, may
terminate or suspend any license issued hereunder. Such suspension or
revocation shall be determined as follows:
(1) An authorized officer or agent authorized by the Township Council
shall cause a written notice of the alleged violation of this chapter
or of any other laws involved to be served upon the licensee or any
of the agents of the licensee upon the premises, together with a
notice of the time and place of hearing, to be held not less than 24
hours after service, directing the licensee to show cause before the
Township Manager or his designee why the license should not be
suspended or revoked.
(2) At the hearing, the Township Manager or his designee shall hear all
of the evidence offered by the Township and the licensee which is
material to the issue and shall make a prompt determination of its
findings. If the findings be in favor of the licensee, the charges will
be dismissed; but if the findings be against the licensee, the license
issued may be revoked entirely or suspended upon such conditions
as the Township Manager or his designee may direct. In the event
of full revocation, the event licensed shall be terminated
immediately and no further outdoor carnival, circus, traveling show
or special event shall be held under the license granted therefor
and any persons remaining upon the licensed premises may be
dispersed immediately by any peace officer of the Township and by
such other persons or agents as may be properly authorized by the
Township.
B. In the event that it shall reasonably appear to the Township Clerk of the
Township or any other official designated by the Township Council for
such purpose that the number of persons gathered or gathering upon or
for entry upon the licensed premises for any outdoor carnival, circus,
traveling show or special event licensed hereunder shall exceed the
allowable number of persons allowed on the licensed premises, the
Township Clerk or other authorized official may give notice to the
licensee immediately to withhold proceeding with the event licensed
and shall then inform the Township Council promptly of said action. The
§ 325-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 325-17
1:1248
§ 325-18. Concurrent remedies.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed or construed so as to prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy at law, concurrent or otherwise, available
to the Township of Franklin or other law enforcement authority to avoid or
prevent any violation or attempted violation of this chapter, such as but not
limited to an injunction or restraining order.
§ 325-19. Applicability of other laws.
This chapter is in addition to any other law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the subject matter herein and is not in limitation thereof.
§ 325-20. Right of waiver.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Township of
Franklin hereby reserves the right to waive any or all sections of this
chapter when it appears that the best interest of the Township of Franklin
shall be served by the waiving of said provisions. Any waiving of said
provisions shall not be considered a precedent which would affect
subsequent enforcement or nonenforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. In the event the Township of Franklin does waive any provision, it
shall be done by resolution at a regular or special meeting of the Township
Council.
§ 325-21. Confirmation of date by resolution. [Added 3-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 4137-16]
The date of the event shall be confirmed only upon passage of a resolution
by the Township Council.
Chapter 330
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 88.
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 192.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 201.
Soil removal and deposit — See Ch. 206.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
licensee may thereupon request a hearing before the Township Council
forthwith and said hearing shall be held as promptly as possible.
C. No licensee fee or portion thereof shall be refunded following
revocation or suspension of any license issued.
§ 325-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-21
1:1249

ARTICLE I
Scope and Purpose
§ 330-1. Scope of authority.
These regulations are adopted upon authority granted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), N.J.A.C. 7:8, and other
applicable laws and statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 330-2. Findings of fact.
A. It has been determined that:
(1) Water bodies, roadways, structures and other property within and
downstream of Franklin Township are at times subject to flooding.
(2) Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is
also a danger to the natural resources of the municipality and the
region.
(3) Land development projects and activities alter the hydrologic
response of watersheds resulting in increased stormwater runoff
rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel
erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition.
(4) Stormwater runoff produced by land development contributes to
increased quantities of water-borne pollutants.
(5) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, stream channel
erosion and non-point-source pollutants have occurred in the past
as a result of land development and have resulted in the
deterioration of the water resources of Franklin Township and
downstream municipalities.
(6) Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments
and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff, from future
development projects within Franklin Township have the potential
to adversely affect the municipality's streams and water resources
and the streams and water resources of downstream
municipalities.
(7) Improperly managed and treated runoff impacts the biota of the
Township's aquatic and wetland resources. This includes
threatened and endangered species as documented in the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under
N.J.S.A 13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150.
(8) Pollutants associated with stormwater runoff are responsible for
the eutrophication of the Township's lakes and ponds.
§ 330-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:1251
§ 330-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Franklin Township. These Stormwater
Management Regulations are hereby enacted for the general purpose of
assuring the proper balance between man's use of land and the preservation
of a safe and beneficial environment; more specifically, to encourage the
use of nonstructural or low-impact techniques involving flood control,
groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction before relying on structural
best management practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated
with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans. This is all to be accomplished through the approval
of stormwater management plans pursuant to the provisions of these
regulations, with the goals being:
(9) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and non-point-source pollution can
be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development projects.
(10) The State of New Jersey's Surface Water Quality Standards
(N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq.) establish surface water quality standards
and antidegradation policies applicable to all surface waters of the
state, and these standards and antidegradation policies provide
reasonable guidance to New Jersey municipalities for the
regulation of stormwater runoff for purposes of protecting surface
water resources from degradation.
B. It is therefore determined that it is in the best public interest to
regulate the discharge of stormwater runoff from land development
projects and other construction activities, as provided in this chapter, in
order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff and
volumes and to control and minimize soil erosion and non-point-source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
A. To reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life and
property;
B. To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from any
new land development;
C. To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and
bridges, dams and other structures;
D. To preserve and maintain base flow conditions of streams and rivers;
E. To maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, dams and other structures;
F. To induce water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable
conditions exist;
G. To prevent an increase in non-point-source pollution;
§ 330-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-3
1:1252
§ 330-4. Applicability.
§ 330-5. Minor development design standards.
H. To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;
I. To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and stream
bed stability;
J. To reduce erosion from any development or construction project;
K. To minimize the increase in pollutants in runoff due to land
development, which otherwise would degrade the quality of water and
may render it both unfit for human consumption and detrimental to
biological life;
L. To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by
means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and
runoff pollution;
M. To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint-
source pollution, wherever possible, from lands that were
developed without stormwater management controls meeting the
purposes and standards of this chapter; and
N. To minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval.
A. Sections 330-5 and 330-6 shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for minor developments (as defined in § 330-7).
B. Sections 330-6 through 330-29 and 330-30A and E shall be applicable to
all site plans and subdivisions for the following major developments (as
defined in § 330-7) that require preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision review:
(1) Nonresidential major developments; and
(2) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1
et seq.
C. This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Franklin Township.
D. Sections 330-28 and 330-30B, C and D shall be applicable to all existing
and proposed stormwater management facilities within the Township
(as defined in § 330-7).
A. Design standards shall be designed to include the following stormwater
management measures:
§ 330-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:1253
§ 330-6. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance
requirements.
(1) Water quality. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be
installed in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey.
(2) Rate/volume control. Seepage pits (dry wells) or other infiltration
measures (i.e., rain gardens) shall be provided with a capacity of
three inches of runoff for each square foot of new impervious area.
Stone used in the infiltration devices shall be 2 1/2 inches of clean
stone, and a design void ratio of 33% shall be used. The infiltration
measures shall be designed with an overflow to the surface which
shall be stabilized and directed to an existing stormwater
conveyance system or in a manner to keep the overflow on the
developed property. If the new impervious surface is not roof area,
an equivalent area of existing roof may be directed to the
infiltration system. This shall be permitted where the existing roof
is not already directed to infiltration devices.
B. Waivers and exceptions.
(1) Standards for relief. Waivers from strict compliance with the design
standards shall only be granted upon showing that meeting the
standards would result in an exceptional hardship on the applicant
or that the benefits to the public good of the deviation from the
standards would substantially outweigh any detriments of the
deviation. A hardship will not be considered to exist if reasonable
reductions in the scope of the project would eliminate the
noncompliance.
(2) Mitigation. If the reviewing agency for the project determines that
a waiver is appropriate, the applicant must execute a mitigation
plan. The scope of the mitigation plan shall be commensurate with
the size of the project and the magnitude of the relief required. The
mitigation project may be taken from the list of projects in the
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan or another project
identified by the applicant. All mitigation projects are subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer. A monetary contribution to the
Township may be made in lieu of the work identified in the
mitigation plan, subject to the approval of the reviewing agency.
(3) Reviewing agency. All applications subject to the review of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall be reviewed by those
Boards concurrently with subdivision or site plan review.
Applications not subject to Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
review shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer.
A. Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
§ 330-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-6
1:1254
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
B. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law,
except that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more-restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
§ 330-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-6
1:1255

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 330-7. Definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, or in the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), in the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.3 et seq.), in the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act (N.J.S.A. 40:44D-1 et seq.) or in New Jersey's Stormwater
Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2 et seq.), the State Flood Control
Facilities Act (N.J.S.A. 58:16A et seq.), or the NJDEP Flood Hazard Area
Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq.), words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have
in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream flow that is not due to storm
runoff and is supported by groundwater seepage into a channel.
BMP — Best management practice.
CHANNEL — Any natural or man-made waterway or course through
which a constant or intermittent flow of water is conveyed.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management basin or alternative
structure designed to temporarily detain stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading, or other means and control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution, to maintain the integrity of the
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage,
and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.
§ 330-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-7
1:1257
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater runoff,
sediments or dissolved materials drain into a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
DRY WELL — A below-grade stormwater retention structure that is
open at the base, allowing water to percolate to the underlying soils.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Any development that creates less than
1,000 square feet of new impervious area and disturbs less than 2,500
square feet of land. Further, an exempt development shall not meet the
definition of "minor development."
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and flood fringe areas as
determined by the Department of Environmental Protection under the
State Flood Control Facilities Act, N.J.S.A 58:16A.
FLOODPLAIN — The area inundated by the regulatory flood, including
the watercourse that creates it.
FLOODWAY — The channel and portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel which are reasonably required to and discharge the regulatory
flood. For this chapter, the term "floodway" refers to both the delineated
floodway on state-adopted studies and the area between the
encroachment lines located on both sides of a nondelineated
watercourse.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — An area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation;" provided,
however, that in designating a wetland, the delineator shall use the
three-parameter approach (that is, hydrology, soils and vegetation)
enumerated in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands. "Freshwater wetland" has been defined here
using the same definition as the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) utilizes in its Technical Manual for
Land Use Regulation Program (LURP).
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the
purpose of this rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that results in the
creation of 1,000 square feet or more of new impervious area or one
that disturbs more than 2,500 square feet of land area. Further, a minor
§ 330-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-7
1:1258
development shall not meet the definition of "major development" in
N.J.A.C. 7:8.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — A contamination of groundwater,
waterways, and oceans that results from everyday activities, such as
fertilizing the lawn, walking pets, changing motor oil and littering. With
each rainfall, pollutants generated by these activities are washed into
storm drains that flow into our waterways and ocean. They also can
soak into the ground, contaminating the groundwater below.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that allows surface water to
infiltrate to the underlying soils, which may include paving materials
(including pervious interlocking concrete paving blocks), concrete grid
pavers, perforated brick pavers, and compacted gravel.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical waste, biological material, medical waste,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue
discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface
waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant"
includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
POROUS ASPHALT — Asphalt or concrete that eliminates the fine
aggregate typically used in conventional asphalt, creating voids which
yield a higher rate of infiltration.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground,
resulting from precipitation.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Per the NJDEP, "TSS" means the total
nonfilterable residue as determined by analytical procedures set forth
§ 330-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-7
1:1259
in the Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes
(USEPA Office of Technology Transfer, Washington D.C., March 1983).
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed areas or
portions of areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
§ 330-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-7
1:1260
ARTICLE III
Proposed Stormwater Management Standards
§ 330-8. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
This section contains minimum design and performance standards to
control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater
recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major
development.
A. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control
are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
B. The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at
Article IV, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the site and its stormwater management measures maintain
100% of the average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction
to post-construction for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects
within an "urban redevelopment area" or to projects to which the
following stormwater shall not be recharged:
(a) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are
loaded/unloaded, stored or applied; areas where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous materials
are expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities," as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where
recharge would be inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial
action work plans or landfill closure plans; and areas with high
risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(b) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material." "Source
material" means any material(s) or machinery located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to
processing, manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
§ 330-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-8
1:1261
could be a source of pollutants in an industrial stormwater
discharge to groundwater. Source materials include, but are
not limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that are
related to processing, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(3) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water table so as to
cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference with
the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and
other subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
C. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and calculations in Article IV,
complete one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for
stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs
for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events do not
exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm event;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there
is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction condition, in the
peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood
damage at the site or anywhere downstream. This analysis shall
include the analysis of impact of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning or land
use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction
peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the
preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to
the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributed to the
portion of the site on which the proposed development or project is
to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood
damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsection C(1), (2) and (3) above shall only be
§ 330-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-8
1:1262
§ 330-9. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
Multiple stormwater management measures may satisfy water quality
control and infiltration performance requirements of this chapter, in most
circumstances. Furthermore, most stormwater management measures will
attain both water quality and infiltration requirements. Compliance with
the provisions of this chapter will be based on a project-wide summation
of runoff characteristics. The applicant shall show how the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the project will satisfy the
performance requirements of this chapter.
applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase
flood damages below the point of discharge,
(5) Any applicant for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" in § 330-7 shall be submitted to
the Somerset-Union County Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Somerset-Union County Soil Conservation
District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion
control. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural
development" means land uses normally associated with the
production of food, fiber and the sale or boarding of livestock. Such
uses do not include the development of land for the processing or
sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related
products.
A. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids in stormwater runoff by
80% of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an
annual average. Stormwater management measures shall only be
required for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The requirement to
reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under
the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under an NJPDES
permit for this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of the rain from the water quality design storm,
as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take
into account the implementation of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
§ 330-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-9
1:1263
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
B. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs
in Table 2. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates
and methods to the Franklin Township Engineer. A copy of an approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
C. If more than one BMP in a series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A+B-(AxB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP.
§ 330-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-9
1:1264
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% - 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 330-21
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% - 80%
Wet pond 50% - 90%
D. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from
the subareas converges on site, in which case the removal rate can be
demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted average.
E. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to
the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the
anticipated load from the developed site in stormwater runoff
generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction
of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall
include nonstructural measures and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performances in §§ 330-8 and
330-9.
F. In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-14,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
G. Special water resource protection areas are established along all
waters designated "Category One" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and the perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One
waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps, County Soil Surveys,
or as referenced in the Franklin Township Stream Corridor Protection
Ordinance, § 112-226 et seq., within the associated HUC 14 drainage
area. These areas are established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance, and
exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as follows:
(1) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
(a) A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection area
shall be provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards of from the center line of the waterway where the
§ 330-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-9
1:1265
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural successions.
(b) Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under Subsection G(1)(a) above shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred (i.e., agricultural use, lawn area inlet, or parking
area). The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall
the remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet, as measured perpendicular to
the top of the bank of the waterway or from the center line of
the waterway where the bank is not defined. All
encroachments under this subsection shall be subject to review
and approval by the Department.
(2) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(3) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the
stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water resource
protection area, provided that:
(a) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of
the Category One streamway;
(b) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section
shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS post-construction
removal rate;
(c) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact in the
receiving waterway;
(d) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrated that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be maintained
to the maximum extent practicable;
(e) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate NJDEP staff and the Somerset-Union County Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary stabilization
measures; and
§ 330-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-9
1:1266
§ 330-10. Technical standards.
(f) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be subject
to review and approval by all appropriate NJDEP departments.
(4) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional
stormwater management planning committee as an element of a
regional stormwater management plan or as part of the Franklin
Township Municipal Stormwater Management Plan. If a stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 330-9G has
been approved by the Department of Environmental Protection,
then the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special
waterways resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor for a waterway subject to § 330-9G
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area as defined
in § 330-9(G)(1)(a) above. In no case shall a stream corridor
protection plan allow reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet, as measured perpendicular to
the waterway subject to this subsection.
(5) Section 330-9G does not apply to the construction of one individual
single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a
lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on or before
February 2, 2004, provided that the construction begins on or
before February 2, 2009.
A. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take
into account the existing site conditions, including, for example,
environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes;
depth to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solutionprone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
B. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure
proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the
outlet structure, as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with oneinch
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design
storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width
of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one inch and a
maximum spacing between bars of six inches. The trash racks shall also
comply with the safety standards of this chapter in § 330-29.
C. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion-resistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the R.S.I.S.
at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this
requirement. All materials used in the construction of storm sewers,
§ 330-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-10
1:1267
bridges and other drainage structures shall be in accordance with
current specifications of NJDOT for road and bridge construction, as
prepared by the New Jersey Department of Transportation, and any
supplements, addenda and modifications thereto, unless otherwise
specified by the reviewing municipal agency. Modifications or changes
of these specifications may be requested by the applicant but may
be implemented only with the knowledge and written consent of the
Township Engineer after review and discussion.
D. Pipe sizes shall be determined by acceptable drainage design
procedures, provided that the pipe size in a surface water drainage
system shall be no less than 15 inches in diameter. Design engineers
may use a twelve-inch-diameter pipe as a cross-drain to a single inlet.
E. Drainage inlets shall be located at all intersections, with inlets on both
sides of a street at intervals of not more than 400 feet or such shorter
distances as required to prevent the flow of surface water from
exceeding six cubic feet per second at the drainage inlet. Access
manholes shall be placed at maximum four-hundred-foot intervals
throughout the system and at pipe junctions where there are no
drainage inlets.
F. Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it
will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not
create ponding in paved areas. Area inlets in parking lots should be
limited to three cubic feet per second. Gutters or paved swales shall be
used whenever, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, they are
necessary to avoid erosion.
G. Lots shall be graded so as to drain surface water away from foundation
walls. The grade away from foundation walls shall fall a minimum of six
inches within the first 10 feet (IRC 2000, NJ Edition, Section R401.3).
Unless relief is granted by the reviewing agency, lawn areas shall be
graded at a minimum two-percent grade in order to secure proper
drainage. Additionally, drainage shall be provided in a manner which
will prevent the collection of stormwater in pools or other unauthorized
concentrations of flow, and water shall not flow across adjacent
property lines at greater than predevelopment rates.
H. Approval of drainage structures shall be obtained from the appropriate
municipal, county, state and federal agencies. Where required, each
applicant shall make application to NJDEP, the Somerset County
Engineering Department and the Township Engineer. Final approval
shall not be effective until letters of approval from the proper
governmental authorities shall be furnished to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, with a copy of each letter forwarded to the Township
Engineer.
I. Applicants shall meet all provisions of the Franklin Township Stream
Corridor Preservation Ordinance, § 112-226 et seq. All new lots in
§ 330-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-10
1:1268
major and minor subdivisions and all building locations in site plans
shall be designed to provide sufficient areas outside of stream corridor
preservation areas and within required setbacks to accommodate a
structure for which it is being created as well as any normal accessory
uses appurtenant thereto which would require disturbance. Any
development or use requiring approval under § 112-230 of the Franklin
Township Stream Corridor Preservation Ordinance shall require either
site plan review or subdivision review pursuant to Chapter 112, Article
XXII or XXIII, which shall be applicable and shall be in addition to the
requirements for submission listed in § 112-232. Nothing in this section
shall relieve an applicant from complying with other requirements
that are applicable to the development. An approved application for
development or use on a lot which contains a stream corridor or portion
of a stream corridor shall provide a conservation easement delineated
by metes and bounds for the continued protection of the stream
corridor. Conservation easements shall be established by deed if no
subdivision map is being filed, or by plat filed with the County
Recording Officer in compliance with the Map Filing Law. All easements
shall be delineated by monuments. Appropriate monuments shall be set
by a licensed land surveyor.
J. Surface drainage of each lot will be reviewed to assure that stormwater
flows will not cascade from one lot to another in a manner that would be
detrimental to the use of an adjoining lot. This may require surface
water controls such as swales, surface drainage inlets and appropriate
easements.
§ 330-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-10
1:1269

ARTICLE IV
Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge
§ 330-11. Stormwater runoff calculations.
A. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following
methods:
(1) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly
known as the "U.S. Soil Conservation Service") methodology. This
methodology is particularly useful for comparing pre- and postdevelopment
peak rates, volumes and hydrographs. The key
component of the NRCS runoff equation is the NRCS Curve
Number (CN), which is based on soil permeability, surface cover,
hydrologic condition and antecedent moisture. Watershed or
drainage area time of concentration is the key component of the
dimensionless unit hydrograph. Several runoff computation
methods use the overall NRCS methodology. The most common are:
(a) June 1986, Technical Release No. 55 -- Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds (TR-55);
(b) April 2002, WINTR-55, Small Watershed Hydrology computer
program;
(c) Technical Release 20 -- Computer Program for Project
Formulation; Hydrology (R-20), published by the NRCS;
(d) Hec-1 Flood Hydrograph Package published by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers' hydrologic Engineering
Center; and
(e) HEC-MS Hydrologic Modeling System published by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers' Hydrologic Engineering
Center.
(2) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
B. In computing pre-project-construction runoff, all significant land
features, such as ponds, depressions, or hedgerows, which increase the
ponding factors shall be accounted for.
C. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately
compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To
calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious
area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release-55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be
employed.
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-12
1:1271
§ 330-12. Groundwater recharge calculations.
§ 330-13. Design storms.
A. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated
herein by reference, as amended and supplemented. Information can be
found in the New Jersey Best Management Practices Manual at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/.
A. To fully comply with the NJDEP stormwater management rules,
stormwater runoff must be computed for three types of rainfall or storm
events. These storms are associated with the groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity requirement in the rules.
(1) Groundwater recharge design storm. Groundwater recharge
requirements are met through the analysis of a series of rainfall
events derived from long-term New Jersey data. These events can
also be expressed by an equivalent groundwater recharge design
storm that represents the largest rainfall that must be controlled by
a groundwater recharge facility. Proposed major land
developments are required to comply with one of the two following
groundwater recharge requirements:
(a) The site and its stormwater management measures maintain
100% of the average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
(b) The increase of stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to post-construction for the two-year storm is
infiltrated.
(2) Stormwater quality design storm. This is the rainfall event used to
analyze and design structural and nonstructural stormwater
quality measures. As described in the Stormwater Management
Rules, the NJDEP stormwater quality design storm has a total
rainfall depth of 1.25 inches and a total duration of two hours.
(3) Stormwater quantity design storm. As described in the Stormwater
Management Rules, the three storm frequencies of primary
concern for stormwater quantity control are two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year events.
§ 330-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-13
1:1272
ARTICLE V
Requirements for Selected Stormwater Management Measures
Considerations will be given to other innovative BMPs not listed in this
chapter; however, the applicant will be required, when proposing the use
of alternative BMPs, to provide the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
with detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities that the
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge
and water quality established by this chapter. Any vegetation used in the
creation of BMPs shall be noninvasive, nonexotic species.
§ 330-14. Detention/retention basins for stream flooding and
erosion control.
A. The standards for detention/retention basins shall be as follows:
(1) Detention and /or retention basins shall be designed to capture and
retain all stormwater runoff from the site's impervious surfaces
during the water quality storms and from all smaller storms. The
runoff shall then be slowly released in accordance with the
requirements presented in § 330-11.
(2) Most water quality control and infiltration measures will also
provide some benefit in runoff peak control. Where water quality
control or infiltration measures are instituted, appropriate
adjustments to the post-development peak runoff may be
incorporated by the introduction of modified runoff coefficients.
Procedures used by the applicant to adjust runoff coefficients to
take credit for the detention properties of miscellaneous
stormwater control measures (i.e., measures not specifically
designed for providing runoff peak control) must be approved by
the Township Engineer.
(3) The applicant shall provide plans and calculations which show that
the discharge attributable to the proposed project will not cause
erosion along the flow path between the outfall and the receiving
water body.
(4) Soil erosion and sediment control shall be provided in accordance
with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., administered by the Soil Conservation
Service, Somerset County District.
(5) If detention basins or other detention facilities are provided
through which water passes at times other than following rainfall,
the Township Engineer shall be consulted concerning design
criteria. It will be necessary for detention requirements to be met,
despite the necessity of passing certain low flows. This applies to
all on-stream or on-line detention basins.
§ 330-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-14
1:1273
(6) Detention basins located in freshwater wetlands may be allowed
only in accordance with the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act,
N.J.S.A. 13.9B-1 et seq., and any rules adopted pursuant thereto.
(7) Any detention facility that impounds water through the use of any
artificial dike, levee or other barrier and raises the water level five
feet or more above the usual mean low-water height when
measured from the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency
spillway crest is classified as a dam and subject to the New Jersey
Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20. All such dams must be
designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with state
standards.
§ 330-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-14
1:1274
ARTICLE VI
Mitigation Measures
If the natural or existing physical characteristics of the project site preclude
achievement of any of the performance standards of this chapter, the
municipality may grant a variance from strict compliance with the
performance standards set forth in this chapter, provided that acceptable
mitigation measures are provided.
§ 330-15. Mitigation requirements.
A. In order to grant a variance or exemption from the design and
performance standards in N.J.A.C. 7:5, a mitigation plan that identifies
what measures are necessary to offset the deficit created by granting
the variance or exemption is required. The mitigation plan shall ensure
that mitigation is completed within the drainage area and for the
performance standard for which the variance or exemption was
granted, per N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.6. The applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township professionals that the immediately
downstream waterways will not be subject to:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other instream
structures;
(2) Deterioration of the biological functions of streams, as well as for
drainage and other purposes;
(3) Stream bank or stream bed erosion or siltation; and
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property.
B. Furthermore, where partial compliance with a specific provisions of this
chapter is possible, the Township Engineer will direct the applicant to
satisfy a reduced performance criterion. Mitigation measures will be
required to compensate for the unfulfilled provision.
C. In all cases, however, those provisions that are not precluded by the
site's physical characteristics shall be met. Mitigation measures may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The mitigation project shall be implemented in the same drainage
area as the proposed development and provide additional
protection from stormwater runoff quality and quantity from
previously developed property that does not currently meet the
design and performance standards outlined in the Municipal
Stormwater Management Plan;
(2) The developer must ensure the long-term maintenance of the
project as set forth in this chapter;
§ 330-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-15
1:1275
(3) The developer can select one or more of the projects listed in the
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan listed under "mitigation
plans and mitigation project criteria"; and
(4) If a suitable site cannot be located in the same drainage area as the
proposed development, the municipality may allow the applicant to
either construct or provide funding for a stormwater mitigation
project. The projects are listed in the Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan under "mitigation plans and mitigation project
criteria." Included shall be the costs associated with purchasing the
property or easement for mitigation and the costs associated with
the long-term maintenance requirements of the mitigation
measure.
§ 330-15 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-15
1:1276
ARTICLE VII
Requirements for Selected Stormwater Management Measures
The applicant must have a maintenance plan and, if privately owned, be
protected by easement, deed restriction, ordinance, or other legal measures
to prevent its neglect, adverse alteration, and removal. These measures
include but are not limited to the following requirements.
§ 330-16. Extended detention basins.
A detention basin is a facility constructed through filling and/or excavation
that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff. An extended
detention basin is normally designed as a multistage facility that provides
runoff storage and attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity
management.
§ 330-17. Wet ponds.
A. Detention basins shall not be located within the floodway of any
watercourse.
B. The construction of detention basins in floodplains should be avoided;
but where this is unavoidable, a special examination to determine
adequacy of a proposed detention facility during extreme storm events
shall be required. This examination is required to determine what
effects, if any, the tailwaters created by the floodplain have on the
outflow from and effective storage within the detention facility. All
designs of basins in floodplains, therefore, should be based upon an
accurate and thorough determination of tailwater effects resulting from
runoff from the site and the watershed contributing to the floodplain.
C. All extended detention basins shall achieve a forty- to sixty-percent TSS
removal rate; a minimum of 10% of this runoff volume must remain in
the basin for 24 hours after the peak basin water surface and maximum
runoff storage volume is achieved.
D. The minimum outlet diameter, width or height is 2.5 inches. If this
minimum outlet size does not allow for the detention times required in
this chapter, then alternative techniques for the removal of TSS prior to
discharge into the basin shall be provided.
E. The species of native, noninvasive, nonexotic vegetation used in the
basin shall be approved by Franklin Township and the Somerset —
Union County Soil Conservation District; and when structural measures
are proposed, they shall comply with the requirement of the R.S.I.S.
5:21-7.1 et seq.
F. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
detention basins.
§ 330-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-17
1:1277
A. Such basins shall not be located within the floodway of any
watercourse.
B. The basic design parameter for a wet pond is the ratio of its permanent
pool volume to the volume of runoff entering the pool. This runoff is
used to determine the pond's TSS removal rate.
C. The pool shall be shallow enough to avoid thermal stratification and
deep enough to minimize algal bloom and resuspension of decomposing
organics and other previously deposited materials.
D. An applicant, when proposing the use of a wet pond, shall submit data
which document that the wet pond will not be subject to excessive
stagnation during periods of nominal inflow. If the wet pond will
become stagnant, the applicant may be required to provide some form
of aeration or circulation to eliminate such conditions and associated
negative water quality and public health consequences.
E. The length-to-width ratio should be as large as possible to simulate
conditions found in plug flow reaction kinetics. Under ideal plug flow
conditions, a plug or pulse runoff enters a pond and is treated by
chemical reactions as well as the physical processes of dispersion and
settlement as the pulse travels the length of the wet pond. Therefore,
the pond's length-to-width ratio should be at least 3:1 to maximize these
treatment processes. In cases where it is impractical to construct wet
ponds with these lengths, internal baffles or berms may be added within
the pond to increase the travel length and residence time.
F. Where feasible, natural means, such as utilizing native fish stock, shall
be used to control mosquitoes.
G. There shall be no adverse effect to the receiving watercourse resulting
from differences in temperature between the discharge and the waters
in the receiving watercourse.
H. The riser structure should be equipped with a bottom drainpipe, sized
to drain the permanent pool within 40 hours, so that sediments may be
removed mechanically when necessary. The drainpipe should be
controlled by a lockable valve that is readily accessible from the top of
the outlet structure. All wet ponds must be able to safely convey system
overflows to downstream drainage systems. The capacity of the
overflow must be sufficient to provide safe, stable discharge of
stormwater in the event of an overflow. Wet ponds that are classified as
dams under the NJDEP Dam Safety Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:20 must also
meet the overflow requirements of these standards.
I. The hydraulic design of the outlet structure, outlet pipe, and emergency
spillway in a wet pond must consider any significant tailwater effects of
downstream waterways or facilities. This includes instances where the
permanent pool level is below the flood hazard area design flood
elevation of the receiving stream.
§ 330-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-17
1:1278
§ 330-18. Constructed stormwater wetlands.
§ 330-19. Infiltration facilities.
J. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
wet ponds.
A. A least 1/2 of the perimeter of the water area shall be graded to form a
shallow bench for emergent wetland plant species.
B. The surface area of the artificial wetlands shall be at least 3% of the
total area contributing flow into the artificial wetland.
C. Monoculture planting should be avoided due to increased risk of loss
from pests and disease. When possible, field-collected plants should be
used in lieu of nursery plants. Plants collected from the field have
already adapted and are acclimated to the region. If nursery plants are
used, they should be obtained locally, or from an area with similar
climatic conditions as the eco-region of the artificial wetland.
D. At least two hardy and rapid-colonizing indigenous primary wetlands
species shall be planted. Alternating plant species with varying root
depths have a greater opportunity of pollutant removal. Up to three
less-aggressively colonizing secondary wetlands species shall be
randomly distributed in clumps around the perimeter of the marsh.
E. At least 25% of the total surface area of a basin designed exclusively to
act as a shallow marsh shall be open water with a depth of at least two
feet in order to provide habitat for waterfowl and other marsh birds.
F. Artificial wetlands should not be located within natural wetlands areas
since they will not typically have the same full range of ecological
functions.
G. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
artificial wetlands.
A. Surface and subsurface infiltration facilities. An infiltration basin is a
facility constructed within highly permeable soils that provides
temporary storage of stormwater runoff. An infiltration basin does not
normally have a structural outlet to discharge runoff from the
stormwater quality design storm.
(1) An infiltration basin must be designed to treat the total runoff
volume generated by the basin's maximum design storm. This may
be either the groundwater recharge or stormwater quality design
storm, depending upon the basin's use.
(2) Precautions shall be taken to prevent both subgrade soil
compaction and sediment contamination.
§ 330-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-19
1:1279
§ 330-20. Pervious paving systems.
(3) An infiltration basin must also fully drain this runoff volume within
72 hours. Runoff storage for greater times can render the basin
ineffective and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor, and both
water quality and mosquito breeding conditions. The bottom of the
infiltration basin must be at least two feet above the seasonal highwater
table or bedrock. The maximum depth of impoundment shall
be two feet.
(4) A six-inch layer of sand must be placed on the bottom of an
infiltration basin. This sand layer can intercept silt, sediment, and
debris that could otherwise clog the top layer of the soil below the
basin. The sand layer must meet the specifications of a K5 soil (as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A) and be certified by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of New Jersey.
(5) The design of the infiltration facility shall be based on infiltration
rates measured using procedures outlined the design standards
presented in N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
(6) A subsurface infiltration basin is located entirely below the ground
surface. It may consist of a vault, perforated pipe, and/or stone bed.
However, due to greater difficulty removing silt, sediment, and
debris, all runoff to subsurface infiltration basins must be
pretreated. This pretreatment must remove 80% of the TSS in the
runoff from the basin's maximum design storm.
A. Pervious paving systems are paved areas that produce less stormwater
runoff than areas paved with conventional paving. The reduction is
achieved primarily through the infiltration of a greater portion of the
rain falling on the area than would occur with conventional paving.
Pervious paving systems are divided into three general types:
(1) Porous paving: porous asphalt or concrete paving constructed over
a runoff storage bed of uniformly graded broken stone. Adopted
TSS removal rate 80%.
(2) Permeable pavers with storage bed: impervious concrete pavers
with surface voids constructed over a runoff storage bed of
uniformly graded broken stone. Adopted TSS removal rate 80%.
(3) Permeable pavers without storage bed: impervious concrete pavers
with surface voids constructed over structural bed of sand and
crushed stone. This system is for volume reduction only.
B. The applicant shall undertake a strict maintenance schedule, including,
but not limited to, vacuum sweeping at least four times a year. A highpressure
hosing should follow this. All dislodged sediment and other
particulate matter must be removed and properly disposed.
§ 330-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-20
1:1280
§ 330-21. Manufactured treatment devices.
A manufactured treatment device is a prefabricated stormwater treatment
structure utilizing settling, filtration, absorptive/adsorptive materials,
vortex separation, vegetative components, and/or other appropriate
technology to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff.
C. Due to the reduced shear strength of the surface course, all pervious
paving systems are limited to areas of relatively infrequent use by light
vehicles. This includes parking lot spaces and secondary aisles, singlefamily
residential driveways, sidewalks and walkways, golf cart paths,
and overflow parking areas. The areas shall be marked by a sign
restricting traffic to only passenger vehicles.
D. Sand, grit or cinders should not be used on pervious paving courses for
snow or ice removal.
E. All porous paving and permeable pavers with storage bed systems must
be able to safely convey system overflows to downstream drainage
systems. The capacity of the overflow must be consistent with the
remainder of the site's drainage system and sufficient to provide safe,
stable discharge of stormwater in the event of an overflow. The
downstream drainage system must have sufficient capacity to convey
the overflow from the pervious paving system.
F. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
pervious pavement.
A. The applicant shall submit design calculations and performance curves
for all devices.
B. Manufactured treatment devices shall be used to treat mostly
impervious surfaces. No large tracts of pervious surfaces should be
routed into the device.
C. All manufactured treatment devices must be able to safely overflow or
bypass flows in excess of the stormwater quality design storm to
downstream drainage systems. The capacity of the overflow or bypass
must be consistent with the remainder of the site's drainage system. All
such flows must be conveyed in such a manner that trapped material,
including floatables, is not resuspended and released. The designer
must also check the capacity of the downstream conveyance system to
ensure the adequacy of the overflow or bypass. All manufactured
treatment devices must also have similar provisions.
D. The hydraulic design of all manufactured treatment devices must
consider any significant tailwater effects of downstream waterways or
facilities. This includes instances where the lowest invert in the outlet
or overflow structure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation of
the receiving stream.
§ 330-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-21
1:1281
§ 330-22. Drywells.
Drywells are subsurface facilities that receive and temporarily store
stormwater runoff from roofs of surrounding structures. Drywells are used
to reduce the increased volume of stormwater due to building construction.
A drywell cannot be used directly to comply with the suspended solids
and nutrient removal requirements contained in the NJDEP Stormwater
Management Rules 7:8.
E. The NJDEP Division of Science, Research and Technology (DSRT) is
responsible for certifying pollutant removal rates for all manufactured
treatment devices. The final certification process must be based upon
one of the following:
(1) Verification of the device's pollutant removal rates by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology (NJCAT) in
accordance with the New Jersey Energy and Environmental
Technology Verification Program at N.J. S.A. 13:D-134 et seq. This
verification must be conducted in accordance with the protocol
"Stormwater Best Management Practices Demonstration Tier II
Protocol for Interstate Reciprocity" as developed under the
Environmental Council of States (ECOS) and Technology
Acceptance and Reciprocity Partnership (TARP).
(2) Verification of the device's pollution removal rates by another TARP
state, or another state or government agency that is recognized by
New Jersey through a formal reciprocity agreement, provided that
such verification is conducted in accordance with the protocol
"Stormwater Best Management Practices Demonstration Tier II
Protocol for Interstate Reciprocity."
(3) Verification of the device's pollutant removal rates by other thirdparty
testing organizations (i.e., NSF), provided that such
verification is conducted in accordance with the protocol
"Stormwater Best Management Practices Demonstration Tier II
Protocol for Interstate Reciprocity."
F. All manufactured treatment devices must be able to safely overflow or
bypass flows in excess of the stormwater quality design storm to
downstream drainage systems.
G. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
manufactured treatment devices.
A. Design parameters for a drywell are its storage volume and subsoil
permeability rate.
B. Drywells shall be designed to treat the total runoff volume generated by
the drywell's maximum design storm. This may be either the
groundwater recharge or stormwater quality design storm, depending
on the proposed use.
§ 330-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-22
1:1282
§ 330-23. Sand filters.
Sand filters consist of a forebay and underdrained soil bed. It can be either
a surface or a subsurface facility. Sand filters use solids, settling, filtering
and adsorption processes to reduce pollutant concentration in stormwaters.
The adopted TSS removal rate for this measure is 80%.
C. They must fully drain runoff volume within 72 hours.
D. The bottom of a drywell shall be two feet above the seasonal high-water
table or bedrock and be as level as possible to uniformly disperse runoff
infiltration over subgrade soils.
E. Subgrade soils shall not be compacted.
F. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
drywells.
A. Sand filters usually consist of:
(1) Forbay zone;
(2) Sand bed zone;
(3) Sand bed underdrain; and
(4) Overflow.
B. Basic design parameters are surface areas, the temporary storage
volumes in their forebays and sand bed zones and the thickness and
infiltration rate of the sand beds.
C. The thickness of the sand bed shall provide adequate pollutant removal,
while the bed's permeability or infiltration rate must be sufficient to
drain the stored runoff within 72 hours.
D. The gravel layer serves as bedding material for underdrain pipes. It
shall have sufficient thickness to provide a minimum of two inches of
gravel above and below the pipes.
E. The gravel layer shall consist of .5 inch to 1.5 inches of clean broken
stone or pea gravel.
F. Underdrain piping shall be rigid Schedule 40 PVC. Perforated pipe shall
have a minimum of three-eighths-inch-diameter perforations at sixinches
on center with four perforations per annular row.
G. Cleanouts shall be located at the upstream and downstream storm ends
of the perforated section of the underdrain and extend to or above the
surface of the sand bed.
§ 330-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:1283
§ 330-24. Vegetative filters.
Vegetative filters are an area designed to remove suspended solids and
other pollutants from stormwater runoff flowing through a length of
vegetation called a "vegetated filter strip."
§ 330-25. Bioretention systems.
Bioretention systems consist of a soil bed planted with native vegetation
located above an underdrained sand layer. It can be configured as a
bioretention basin or swale. Stormwater runoff entering the bioretention
system is filtered first through the vegetation and then the sand/soil mixture
before being conveyed downstream by the underdrain system. The adopted
TSS remove rate is 90%.
H. Underdrain piping shall be connected to a downstream storm sewer,
manhole, catch basin, channel, swale, or ground surface at a location
that is not subject to blockage.
I. The hydraulic design of the underdrain and overflow systems, as well as
any stormwater quantity control outlets, must consider any significant
tailwater effects of downstream waterways or facilities. This includes
instances where the lowest invert in the outlet or overflow structure is
below the flood hazard area design flood elevation of a receiving
stream.
J. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
sand filter systems.
A. All runoff to a vegetative filter strip must enter and flow through the
strip as sheet flow.
B. TSS removal rate depends on the vegetated cover of the filter strip.
Refer to the New Jersey Stormwater Management Best Practices
Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, Table 9.10-1, for removal
rates.
C. Prior design parameters for a vegetative filter strip are its slope, type of
vegetative cover and type of soils in the drainage area.
D. Vegetation in a filter strip can range from turf and native grasses to
herbaceous and woody vegetation, all of which can either be planted or
indigenous.
E. All use of fertilizers, mechanical treatments, pesticides and other
means to assure optimum vegetation health must not compromise the
intended purpose of the vegetative filter.
F. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
vegetative filter systems.
§ 330-23 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-25
1:1284
A. Runoff inflow shall be overland flow to prevent disturbance to the
vegetation and soil bed.
B. Concentrated inflow from a drainage pipe or swale must include
adequate erosion protection and energy-dissipation measures.
C. The seasonal high-water table shall be evaluated to ensure that the
seasonal high-water table is at least one foot below the bottom of the
bioretention basin's underdrain system during nondrought conditions
or two feet below the bottom of the system's soil planting bed for a
system without an underdrain.
D. Basic design parameters are the system's storage volume, the
thickness, character and permeability rate of its planting soil bed, and
the hydraulic capacity of its underdrain.
E. The bed's permeability rate must be sufficient to drain the stored runoff
within 72 hours.
F. Bioretention systems shall be designed to treat the runoff volume
generated by the stormwater quality design storm.
G. The maximum water depth during treatment of the stormwater quality
design storm shall be 12 inches in a basin and 18 inches in a swale.
H. The minimum diameter of any outlet or overflow orifice is 2.5 inches.
I. The permeability rate shall be determined by field or laboratory testing.
J. The total depth or thickness of the planting soil bed shall be a minimum
of three feet. Planting soil bed shall consist of:
(1) Eighty-five to ninety-five percent sands (no more than 25% fine or
very fine sand);
(2) A maximum of 15% silt and clay (2% to 5% clay content); and
(3) The entire mix amended with 3% to 7% organics.
K. The gravel layer serves as bedding material for underdrain pipes. It
shall have sufficient thickness to provide a minimum of three inches of
gravel above and below the pipes.
L. The gravel layer shall consist of .5 inch to 1.5 inches of clean broken
stone or pea gravel.
M. Underdrain piping shall be rigid Schedule 40 PVC laid at a minimum
slope of 0.50%.
N. Cleanouts shall be located at the upstream and downstream storm ends
of the perforated section of the underdrain and extend to or above the
surface of the planting soil bed.
O. The hydraulic design of the underdrain and overflow systems, as well as
any stormwater quantity control outlets, must consider any significant
§ 330-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-25
1:1285
tailwater effects of downstream waterways or facilities. This includes
instances where the lowest invert in the outlet or overflow structure
is below the flood hazard area design flood elevation of a receiving
stream.
P. All bioretention systems must be able to safely convey system overflows
to downstream drainage systems. The capacity of the overflow must be
sufficient to provide safe, stable discharge of stormwater in the event of
an overflow. Bioretention systems that are classified as dams under the
NJDEP Dam Safety Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:20 must also meet the
overflow requirements of these standards.
Q. The applicant must have a maintenance plan and, if privately owned, be
protected by easement, deed restriction, ordinance, or other legal
measures to prevent its neglect, adverse alteration, and removal.
R. Refer to the design standards presented in the NJDEP Best
Management Practices Manual dated April 2004, or latest revision, for
bioretention systems.
§ 330-25 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-25
1:1286
ARTICLE VIII
Retrofit of Existing Stormwater Management Measures
§ 330-25.1. Retrofit of existing stormwater management measures.
A. "Retrofitting" can be defined as expanding, modifying, or otherwise
upgrading an existing stormwater management measure. As such,
retrofitting stormwater management measures can reduce some of the
adverse groundwater recharge and stormwater quality and quantity
impacts caused by existing land developments. Many existing
stormwater management measures can be dramatically improved and
downstream water bodies protected through effective retrofitting.
B. Effective retrofitting of existing stormwater management facilities can
correct site nuisances, maintenance problems, and aesthetic concerns.
C. A retrofit must not increase health and safety risks in any way.
D. In many retrofit situations, it may not be possible to upgrade the
stormwater management measure to meet all current groundwater
recharge and stormwater quality and quantity standards; in this case,
mitigation will be required. Performance improvements for a range of
retrofits must be evaluated to determine which one represents the
optimum combination of effectiveness, viability, and cost. As a result,
the final retrofit selected for an existing stormwater measure will have
to be based on its relative rather than absolute effectiveness. In such
relative determinations, both the costs and benefits of the evaluated
retrofits become more influential factors then when an absolute
performance standard is used.
E. If a stormwater management measure is retrofit and the pollutant
removal capability is increased, it will also increase the rate and total
volume of sediment, trash, debris and other stormwater pollutants that
accumulate in the measure. Additionally, the chemical or biological
compositions of the sediment may be of significantly lower quality, and
potentially either more hazardous or toxic, than the sediment
previously captured. Finally, the retrofit may increase the number and/
or complexity of components in an existing stormwater management
measure. Thus, increased staffing, improved equipment, and morespecialized
training may be required to properly maintain the new
retrofitted system. The impacts of any increased inspections and/or
maintenance requirements should be determined and thoroughly
evaluated.
F. In addition to structural measures, nonstructural stormwater
management measures can be used to enhance the stormwater
management of an existing development site.
§ 330-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-25.1
1:1287

ARTICLE IX
Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan
§ 330-25.2. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
§ 330-26. Site development stormwater plan approval.
The applicant's plans for development shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official
from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official
shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board
(as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this
chapter. The NJDEP Stormwater Management Checklist/Summary shall be
completed and provided with the calculations.
§ 330-27. Checklist requirements.
A. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater plan
as part of the submission of the application for subdivision or site plan
approval.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards
set forth in this chapter.
C. The submission requirements set forth in the checklist in are in addition
to any other required development checklists. Failure to provide all
items will result in an application being deemed incomplete.
A. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. A topographic base map of the site shall be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
or greater, showing one-foot contour intervals. The map shall
indicate existing surface water drainage; marshlands and other
wetlands; pervious or vegetative surfaces; existing man-made
structures; roads; bearings; and distances of property lines; and
significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown.
The reviewing professionals may require upstream tributary
drainage system information as necessary.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs shall
be provided. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
§ 330-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-27
1:1289
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures shall be provided. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain
and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal
high-groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan
and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may
also be provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of this chapter are
being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is
being developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater
recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at
the source by land management and source controls wherever
possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information
shall be provided and illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, estimated land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and
dispose of surface water.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms as specified in Article III of this chapter.
Post-development pollution load should be computed using any
of the pollutant models as detailed in the most-recent NJDEP
BMP Manual.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. This soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs, soil pit profiles and soil
permeability tests. The number and location of required soil
borings, soil pits and tests shall be determined based on what
is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil
types present at the location of the control measure.
§ 330-27 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-27
1:1290
(7) Waiver of submission from requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Article IX of this chapter when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
§ 330-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-27
1:1291

ARTICLE X
Planning and Design Standards for Maintenance and Repair
§ 330-28. Planning and design standards for maintenance and
repair.
A. The goal for the planning and design of a stormwater management
facility is for its operation with the least practical amount of
maintenance. To accomplish this, the facility shall be developed to
eliminate avoidable maintenance tasks, minimize the long-term amount
of regular maintenance, facilitate the performance of required
maintenance tasks, and reduce the potential for extensive, difficult, and
costly remedial or emergency maintenance efforts.
B. Strong, durable, noncorrodible materials, components, and fasteners
shall be used to reduce required maintenance efforts. These include but
are not limited to: lightweight, noncorrodible metals such as aluminum
for trash racks, orifice plates, and access hatches; hardy, diseaseresistant
grasses for bottoms and side slopes as prescribed by the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Standards administered by the Somerset
- Union Soil Conservation District; reinforced concrete for outlet
structures and headwalls; and gabions for channel and outlet linings.
C. Detention facilities shall be designed to minimize propagation of
insects, particularly mosquitoes.
D. Detention facilities should be designed in a harmonious and attractive
manner.
E. Detention facility outlets shall be designed to function without manual,
electric or mechanical controls.
F. All stormwater management measures' components must be readily
accessible for inspection and maintenance. Therefore, trees, shrubs,
and underbrush must be trimmed or pruned as necessary to maintain
access to the stormwater management measure via roadways, paths
and ramps. This includes paths through perimeter vegetation to
permanent pools, aquatic benches, and safety ledges to allow for the
inspection and control of mosquito breeding. In addition, the exact
limits of inspection and maintenance easements and right-of-way
should be specified on stormwater management measure plans and
included in the maintenance plan.
G. Maintenance shall be required as part of all stormwater management
plans. Specific maintenance techniques and schedules shall be provided
for each type of system used on the site. If maintenance of the system
will be the responsibility of a person other than a state, county or
municipal agency, then the maintenance plan approved by the
municipality shall be recorded upon the deed of record for the property.
(1) The maintenance plan shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the party or parties responsible for long-term
§ 330-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-28
1:1293
maintenance. Documentation of their assumption of this
responsibility shall be submitted as part of the permit application.
The transfer of maintenance responsibility to individual property
owners in residential subdivisions is prohibited except through a
homeowners' association agreement.
(2) Written maintenance and repair records for all stormwater
management systems shall be maintained for at least five years by
the persons identified in Subsection G(1) above and shall be
provided to the Franklin Township Clerk's office on quarterly basis
as stated in § 330-30A.
(3) Maintenance of artificial wetlands shall include, but not be limited
to:
(a) Documented visual inspection of all components of the system
at least four times annually.
(b) Documented removal of silt, litter and other debris from all
catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes at least four times
annually, as well as after every storm exceeding one inch of
rainfall or upon noticeable buildup.
[1] Vegetated areas should also be inspected at least annually
for erosion and scour; and again annually for unwanted
growth, which should be removed with minimum
disruption to the remaining vegetation; and
[2] All use of fertilizers, mechanical treatments, pesticides
and other means to assure optimum vegetation health
should not compromise the intended purpose of the
artificial wetland. All vegetation deficiencies should be
addressed without the use of fertilizers and pesticides
whenever possible.
(4) Maintenance of detention basins shall include, but not be limited
to:
(a) Documented visual inspection of all components of the system
at least four times annually.
(b) Documented removal of silt, litter and other debris from all
catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes at least four times
annually, as well as after every storm exceeding one inch of
rainfall or upon noticeable buildup.
(c) Documented maintenance, including grass cutting, and
necessary replacement of all landscape vegetation within the
basin at least once a year.
H. Stormwater management facility components, such as valves, sluice
gates, pumps, fence gates, locks, and access hatches, should remain
functional at all times. Additionally, all mechanical components should
§ 330-28 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-28
1:1294
be operated at least once every three months to assure their continued
performance.
I. Structural damage to outlet and inlet structures, trash racks, and
headwalls from vandalism, flood events, or other causes must be
repaired promptly. Equipment, materials and personnel must be
available to perform these repairs on short notice. Only a licensed
professional engineer shall undertake the analysis of structural damage
and the design and performance of structural repairs.
§ 330-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-28
1:1295

ARTICLE XI
Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins
§ 330-29. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the
proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
A. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions:
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection A(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
§ 330-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-29
1:1297
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:8-6.3(a), a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
Refer to R.S.I.S. Section 7:8-6.3 for illustration of safety ledges
in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(4) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all constructed
stormwater wetlands with a permanent pool of water deeper than
three feet. Two ledges shall be constructed, each four to six feet in
width. The first or upper ledge shall be located between one and
1.5 feet above the normal standing water level. The second or
lower ledge shall be located approximately 2.5 feet below the
normal standing water level.
§ 330-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-29
1:1298
ARTICLE XII
Inspection and Subsequent Fines for Noncompliance
§ 330-30. Inspection and subsequent fines for noncompliance.
A. All best management practice facilities are to be maintained by the
property owner, homeowners' association or Franklin Township. Where
Franklin Township is named to be the party responsible to maintain the
facility, a developer's maintenance contribution shall be made.
(1) Calculations for maintenance contributions for traditional BMP'S
shall be based on Franklin Township's Development Ordinance
Schedule A worksheet.
(2) Calculations for maintenance contributions for nontraditional (as
determined by the Township Engineer) BMPs shall require an
engineer's cost estimate for maintenance required over a twentyfive-
year period. Cost estimate calculations shall be performed in
accordance with Franklin Township's Development Ordinance
Schedule A worksheet.
B. All stormwater management measures within the Township are subject
to the stormwater maintenance permit and periodic inspection. An
annual stormwater maintenance permit is required in January of each
year.
(1) Annual permit/inspection fees for each stormwater device:
(a) Drywell, under 1,000 cubic feet of storage: $0.
(b) Drywell, over 1,000 cubic feet of storage: $250.
(c) Vegetative swales: $250 for the first 100 linear feet and $50 for
each additional 100 linear feet.
(d) Infiltration basin (aboveground/below ground): $500/$750.
(e) Detention basin (aboveground/below ground): $500/$750.
(f) Wet pond: $750.
(g) Bioretention basin: $750.
(h) Porous pavement/pervious surface: $500.
(i) Constructed wetland: $750.
(j) Rain garden: $0.
(k) Manufactured treatment device: $500.
(2) Exemptions. The following detention basins constructed prior to
the passing of this chapter are exempt from fees: [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 4076-14]
§ 330-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-30
1:1299
(a) Block 9, Lot 43.10 (1 Horseshoe Court).
(b) Block 9, Lot 43.13 (7 Horseshoe Court).
(c) Block 489.02, Lot 1 (290 Cedar Avenue).
(d) Block 83, Lot 17.35-17.38 (5-11 South Grosser Place).
C. Recordkeeping, inspection and repair guidelines and noncompliance
penalties.
(1) Quarterly maintenance records shall be submitted to the Franklin
Township Municipal Clerk's office. The maintenance records for the
period:
(a) January 1 to March 31 must be reported no later than April 30.
(b) April 1 to June 30 must be reported no later than July 31.
(c) July 1 to September 30 must be reported no later than October
31.
(d) October 1 to December 31 must be reported no later than
January 31.
(2) Mechanically treated structures which utilize filters shall have on
record and be provided to the Township the requirements of the
replacement of the filters as per the manufacturer and the dates
the filters have been replaced.
(3) Inspections shall include and not be limited to:
(a) Detention basin outflow structures, escape provisions as
outlined in R.S.I.S 7:8-6.2, and all components;
(b) Vegetation;
(c) Trash racks and overflow grates;
(d) Embankment erosion; and
(e) Sediment removal and pond maintenance.
(4) The owner of the stormwater management measure shall complete
minor repairs of the facility within 30 days of date of notice.
(5) The owner of the stormwater management measure, immediately
upon notice, must complete repairs that may adversely affect the
public's health, safety and welfare.
(6) Each act of violation, and every day upon which any violation shall
occur or continues to occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
(7) Failure to obtain an annual stormwater maintenance permit: $100.
(8) Failure to provide quarterly maintenance records: $50.
§ 330-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-30
1:1300
(9) A person who has not complied with this chapter and who, after
notice, refuses to implement and maintain soil erosion control and
stormwater runoff control measures and facilities in conformance
with these regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both, plus the cost of prosecution.
D. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for
effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the
municipality or county may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill
the cost thereof to the responsible person.
E. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guaranty in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 330-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-30
1:1301
Chapter 333
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 115.
Uniform construction codes — Ch. 146.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 192.
Trees — See Ch . 222.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
§ 330-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 330-30
1:1302
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 11-9-1972 by Ord. No. 599 (Ch. 210, Art. I, of the 1990
Code); amended in its entirety 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 4279-19]
§ 333-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
DIRECTOR — The person in charge of the Department of Public Works or
his authorized deputy or representative.
EMERGENCY — An emergency or hardship shall include a water main
break, gas leak, sanitary sewer break, or any situation that may result in
harm to the public's health, safety, welfare or damage to public or private
property.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Any body corporate and politic created
pursuant to the laws of the state.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction of
and controlled by the State Public Utility Commission.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-of-way,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the Township.
SURFACE — All areas within the public right-of-way, including but not
limited to the paved area and the shoulder area.
§ 333-2. Operations by municipal utilities; notice to property
owners.
A. All street openings required by utilities owned or operated by the
Township shall be made and restored under the direction and
supervision of the Director. The permit, fee, insurance and bond
requirements of this article shall not be applicable to any openings
made by such municipally owned or operated utilities.
B. When the Township shall improve or pave any street, the Township
Clerk shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the
street about to be paved or improved and to all public utilities and
municipal authorities operating in the Township, and all such persons,
public utilities and municipal authorities shall make all connections as
well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the
street within 45 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be
extended if permission is requested, in writing, and approved by the
Township Clerk after consultation with the Director.
§ 333-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-3
1:1303
§ 333-3. Notification of emergency openings.
In all cases where emergency openings are necessary, the Township Police
Department shall be notified prior to such opening.
§ 333-4. Plan and statement of facilities of private utilities.
§ 333-5. Abandoned facilities.
§ 333-6. Determination of costs of work by Township; disputes.
The Director shall determine the cost of any work done or repairs made
by him or under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this article. In
the event that a permittee disputes the amount charged by the Director for
work or repairs made by the Township, the Township governing body shall
decide the amount due the Township.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or steam to or from the Township or its
inhabitants or for any other purposes shall file with the Director within
120 days after the effective date of this article a written statement
containing the names of the Township streets wherein the
aforementioned facilities owned by such person are located and an
overall plan indicating such facilities.
B. Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall forward to the Director an updated statement and the
plan required in Subsection A of this section.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street or the use thereof is abandoned, the
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Director a
statement, in writing, giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at the
time of abandonment, and the Director shall be notified thereof in
writing.
C. When the Township plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owners of such facilities shall be required to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Director, their removal is in the
best interest of the Township. If the owner shall refuse to remove such
facilities, the Township shall remove the abandoned facilities, and the
owner shall reimburse the Township for such removal.
§ 333-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-7
1:1304
§ 333-7. Schedule of charges.
The Director shall establish and maintain a schedule of charges for labor,
materials and such other expenses as may be incurred by the Township
in meeting the requirements of this article. In developing the schedule,
the Director shall be guided by the prevailing costs in the area for labor,
materials and equipment. The Director shall revise the schedule of charges
periodically to reflect any increase or decrease in costs used to establish
such charges. The schedule of charges shall be open to public inspection in
the office of the Director upon demand.
§ 333-8. Standards.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. No more than 250 feet, measured longitudinally, shall be opened in any
street at any one time, except by special permission of the Director.
C. All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damages to those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary. The applicant is required to contact the One-
Call Damage Prevention System in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 et
seq., and as it may be from time to time amended.
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
E. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
benchmark within the Township shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so first
obtained, in writing, from the Director. Permission shall be granted only
upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of the monument.
F. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Director.
G. Safety requirements. Every permittee shall place around the project
such barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Director, through the Police Department Traffic
Safety Bureau, to be necessary for the protection of the public.
Barricading and signs shall be in the regulations as set forth in the
United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, 2009 Edition, and any future revisions thereto. Copies of
this publication shall be made available in the office of the Director for
inspection by the public.
§ 333-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-8
1:1305
§ 333-9. Safety devices; tampering.
H. Access to private driveways shall be provided, except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
I. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so to cause as little inconvenience as possible to
public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or
dust nuisance, the Director may require the permittee to provide toe
boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and causes
inconveniences to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be
installed by the permittee as directed by the Director. If the street is not
wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the
adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least 1/2
the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line.
J. If the Director finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening
may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to the street or
where a number of cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one
another or where the equipment used may cause such damage, he may
require a negotiated contribution from the permittee for the
resurfacing in place of patching of such street if the total area of the
proposed patch of probably damaged area exceeds 25% of the total
pavement surfacing between curb faces or between concrete gutter
edges in any block. Such negotiations shall be carried on and
contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
K. In the case of utility work undertaken by a public or private utility,
which work involves placing new, or replacing or repairing of existing,
utility infrastructure, such as gas lines, waterlines, electrical lines, and
sewer lines, where the area to be trenched is greater than 50 linear feet
or as part of an overall project, upon completion or within a reasonable
amount of time as determined by the Department of Public Works, the
permittee shall two-inch mill and repave the entire pavement surface
from edge to edge, or curb to curb for the full length of the excavation,
extending 25 feet from the ends of the excavation, in accordance with
the Township specifications.
L. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
M. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made,
backfilled and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to
Township specifications.
N. The work of the final restoration, including both paving surface and
paving base, shall be performed by the permittee according to
Township specifications.
§ 333-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-9
1:1306
§ 333-10. Jurisdiction of Township.
In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Township or any of its officers or employees, and
no officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the police
power when it is necessary to protect life and property.
§ 333-11. Removal of earth or gravel washed onto street.
When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to be
removed from the street within 24 hours after deposit. In the event that the
earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the
Director shall cause such removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by
the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
§ 333-12. Reparations to parties injured by operations.
Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee may make the necessary repairs or relocation and file a
claim against the permittee with the Township for the cost of such repairs
or relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall be notified by the
Township in sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage or
relocation claims. The cost of such repair or relocation work may be held
by the Director from the deposit pending determination of liability for the
damage. Such determination shall be made either by agreement of the
parties or by resolution of a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event
that such agreement between the parties has not been obtained within two
years from the filing of the claim and that no court action has been started
to recover as a result of such claim, the disposition of such claim shall be
at the direction of the Director, with no liability attaching to him as a result
thereof.
§ 333-13. Notification of commencement of backfilling.
The Director must be notified by the permittee during the forty-eight-hour
period preceding beginning of backfilling of the date and approximate time
at which backfilling will be begun.
A. Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the safety devices
required by the Director, such devices shall be installed and maintained
by the Township. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee.
B. No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or extinguish
any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed or posted in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 333-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-14
1:1307
§ 333-14. Notification of completion of work.
The permittee shall notify the Director, in writing, upon completion of all
work accomplished under the provisions of the permit.
§ 333-15. Inspections.
§ 333-16. Correction of settlement.
If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one year
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, any expense
incurred by the Township in correcting such settlement shall be paid by the
permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the permittee submits proof
satisfactory to the Director that the settlement was not due to defective
backfilling.
§ 333-17. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the state or by the county.
§ 333-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 333-19. Permit for opening; exception.
A. The Director shall make such inspections as he may deem necessary of
all work authorized by a permit. The Director is empowered to provide a
full-time inspector, if necessary, to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this article.
B. All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be
included in the permit fee.
C. A certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Director to each
permittee no sooner than one year after the permanent restoration of
the excavation has been made, provided that the work authorized by
the permit has been performed according to the Township's
specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Director shall
make a final inspection of the restoration to determine whether
Township specifications have been adhered to.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any
regulations and specifications adopted hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Judge of the Township, be subject to the
penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. When in
default of payment of such fine and costs, such person shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notice, in writing,
shall have been served by the Director shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 333-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-19
1:1308
A. No person, persons or corporation, municipal or private, nor any utility
company, public or private, shall for any purpose open, tear up,
excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the surface
or subsurface within the limits of the right-of-way of any Township
street without first obtaining a permit from the Director. The permit or
copy thereof shall be available at the site during the duration of the
work and shall be presented for inspection upon request of the Director
or his authorized representative.
B. In the case of an emergency as defined in § 333-1 of the Township Code,
an opening can be made without a permit, provided that the permit
could not reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand.
The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the day on which the
office of the Director is open for business, and such permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
C. No permit shall be issued to open the pavement of any street that has
been constructed or reconstructed for a period of five years from the
date of completion of said construction except in the event of an
emergency, or where a specific hardship exists in the opinion of the
Director, Township Engineer, or the governing body of the Township.
D. No permit shall be issued to open the pavement of any street that has
been overlaid for a period of three years from the date of completion of
said overlay work except in the event of an emergency, or where a
specific hardship exists in the opinion of the Director, Township
Engineer, or the governing body of the Township.
E. Where a specific hardship exists, and a permit is issued to open a newly
constructed, reconstructed or overlaid street, restoration of the street
will be performed as specifically instructed by the Director. Restoration
under these circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
complete milling and/or overlay of the half width or full width of a
section of the street to the limits stipulated by the Director and
restriping of the street as required. Such restoration is to be specified
in writing as a condition of the permit.
(1) Exceptions shall be granted for utility emergencies, utility openings
that impact the safety and welfare of property owners, or if the
applicant is able to prove undue hardships. Undue hardships shall
be approved at the discretion of the Director.
(a) In the event that an exception is granted during the
moratorium, the applicant shall be responsible to limit the
disruption as much as possible, saw cut all excavations, and
restore the trench to its original condition, including, but not
limited to, the pavement, surface treatments, and striping. All
repair paving shall be completed utilizing infrared technology
within one week of the trench repair. A nonrefundable fee of
$2,500 will be charged to open a road within its moratorium.
The inspection fee would be $150, and the trench must be
§ 333-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-19
1:1309
§ 333-20. Duties of applicant; liability agreement.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
compacted in twelve-inch lifts. A refundable deposit and bond
would still be required in accordance with the permit.
(b) The distances in either direction of the opening will be
determined by the Director based on the proximity to other
roadways or utility concerns. In most cases, final pavement
restoration will encompass 25 feet in both directions of the
opening for a full width of the existing road. The Director may
allow resurfacing to the center line of the road only if the
opening is completed within one lane and does not involve
disturbance across the center line.
(c) Temporary and final pavement restoration shall be completed
in accordance with Township standards, and milling will entail
the full length and width that must be repaved.
(d) The restoration of the pavement shall be done no less than 60
days after the opening, and no more than 120 days after the
opening. This will allow for any settlement in the trench to take
place before the final pavement is placed. Exceptions to this
time frame may be allowed by the Director dependent upon the
time of year, which can affect the availability of paving
materials.
A. Provide notification to the One-Call Damage Prevention System as set
forth in statute N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 et seq. and as it may from time to time
be amended.
B. Provide proof to the Township at the time of application that the
applicant has provided notification to the One-Call Damage Prevention
System by supplying the confirmation number assigned by the system
to the Township or in such manner as the legislature may further set
forth.
C. Make written application for such permit with the Director on such
form as he shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the applicant
has paid and provided all fees, deposits, certificates and bonds required
by this article.
D. Furnish, in quadruple, a plan showing the work to be performed under
such permit. Two copies of such plan shall be returned to the applicant
at the time the permit is granted.
E. Agree to save the Township, its officers, employees and agents harmless
from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue by
reason of any work performed under such permit. The acceptance of
any permit under this article shall constitute such an agreement by the
applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
§ 333-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-21
1:1310
§ 333-21. Nontransferability.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 333-22. Commencement of work; extensions; renewal of permit.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be automatically terminated, unless the permittee applies to the
Director for an extension of time within which to commence work. If such
an extension is granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the
period of time specified in the extension. Permits which terminate within
30 days after the issuance or within any extension of time granted by the
Director may be renewed only upon the payment of an additional permit fee
as originally required.
§ 333-23. Expiration of permit; extension.
Every permit shall expire at the time stated in the permit. If the permittee
should not complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to
expiration of the permit, present, in writing, to the Director a request for
an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested
extension. If, in the opinion of the Director, such an extension is necessary
and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 333-24. Revocation.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Director after notice to the permittee
for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering life or property.
B. The permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before such permit is
revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or
§ 333-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-24
1:1311
§ 333-25. Permit fee.
Any person receiving a permit shall pay a permit fee of $50 plus the
following costs based on the size of the opening:
Size
(square feet) Cost Per Square Foot
0 to 100 $5
101 to 500 $3
501 to 1,000 $2
Over 1,001 $1
§ 333-26. Display of permit and plan.
Any person receiving a permit shall keep the original copy of the permit and
an approved copy of the plan at all times while such work is in progress at
the location for which such permit was granted and show such permit or
plan upon demand by the Township public works or police authorities.
§ 333-27. Restrictions.
by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to
be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Director shall do such work as may
be necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition
as before the opening was made. All expenses thereby incurred by the
Township shall be recovered from the deposit or bond the permittee has
made or filed with the Township.
A. In granting a permit, the Director may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a
manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
(3) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials.
(4) Requirements as to the laying of dust, cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(5) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
§ 333-24 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-27
1:1312
§ 333-28. Permit subject to rights of Township and other persons.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the Township or of any
other person to lawfully use the street for any purpose not consistent with
the permit.
§ 333-29. Notices of street openings.
§ 333-30. Bond.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Township
with an acceptable corporate surety bond, cash or certified check to
guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted
pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be 100% of the
estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term of the bond shall
begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon the receipt
by the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Director. If
the permittee anticipates requesting more than one permit per year as
required by this article, he may furnish one continuing corporate surety
bond in such amount as the Director deems necessary to guarantee faithful
B. No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that
specified in the permit, except that, upon approval by the Director,
additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in such
an amount as the Director shall deem appropriate and necessary to
complete the work. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the
permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be
approved pursuant to this section within the limit mentioned herein.
C. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the permittee
obtains written consent from the Director, through the Police
Department Traffic Safety Bureau, to do the work at an earlier or later
hour. Such permission shall be granted only in case of an emergency or
in the event that the work authorized by the permit is to be performed
in traffic-congested areas.
A. If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the applicant
shall notify the affected property owners and tenants of the proposed
work to be done.
B. If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface
installations in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the applicant shall
notify the owners of such facilities of the proposed work.
C. The Director shall notify, in writing, the Township Police and Fire
Departments of all street opening permits he grants. Such notification
shall state the nature of the work to be done, proposed beginning and
completion dates and the location of such projects.
§ 333-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-30
1:1313
performance. The amount of such bond minimum shall be in relation to the
cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout
the year. The Township may elect to waive the requirement insofar as it
pertains to a public utility company if such company files with the Township
its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Township, conditioned upon
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 333-31. Default of bond.
§ 333-32. Insurance.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Township
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of
the work, whether such performance is by himself, his subcontractor or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the
street and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the Director
in accordance with the nature of the risk involved, provided that the liability
insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $100,000 for
each person and $300,000 for each accident and for property damages
not less than $50,000, with an aggregate of $100,000 for all accidents.
A public utility company or municipal authority may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting such a certificate if it submits satisfactory evidence
that it is insured or has adequate provision for self-insurance, in accordance
with the requirements of this article. Public utilities and authorities may
submit annually such evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit.
§ 333-33. Prompt completion of work; penalties for noncompletion
in timely manner.
The permittee under this article shall prosecute with diligence and
expedition all excavation work covered by the permit and shall promptly
complete this work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near
as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date
A. Whenever the Director shall find that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice
thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond.
Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof
and the period of time deemed by the Director to be reasonably
necessary for the completion of the work.
B. After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing
therein, indemnify the Township for the cost of doing the work as set
forth in the notice.
§ 333-30 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-33
1:1314
specified in the excavation permit. In the event that the permittee begins
but does not complete the work by the completion date specified in the
permit, then a new application must be filed requesting an extension of the
time beyond the date specified for completion of the work. For each day
beyond the expiration date of the permit that the excavation in the street is
not completed and restored to its original condition, the permittee shall be
assessed the following penalties:
§ 333-34. through § 333-37. (Reserved)
A. Days one to three: $250 per day;
B. Days four to seven: $500 per day;
C. Days eight to 10: $750 per day;
D. Days 11 to 14: $1,000 per day; and
E. More than 14 days: $2,000 per day.
§ 333-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-34
1:1315

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 2-9-1967 by Ord. No. 358; amended in its entirety
11-9-1982 by Ord. No. 1112 (Ch. 210, Art. II, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 333-38. Removal from sidewalks. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 3162]
The owners, tenants and occupants and homeowners' association or
management company of improved or unimproved premises abutting upon
public streets and roads within the Township of Franklin shall remove all
snow and ice from the full width of sidewalks abutting their respective
premises within 12 hours of daylight after any snowfall or accumulation
of ice occurs. In the event that ice may be so frozen as to make removal
impracticable, the owners, tenants or occupants of the abutting premises
shall cause the sidewalk to be thoroughly covered with sand, ashes, sawdust
or rock salt within 12 hours of daylight after the accumulation of such ice.
§ 333-39. Removal from driveways; emergency vehicular
passageway; filing by owner.
A. The owner of any garden apartment development, apartment building,
homeowners' association or management company, nursing home,
office building or shopping center and the owner of any property within
the Township to which the public is invited for business purposes shall
remove all snow and ice from the driveways, parking areas, walkways,
steps and fire hydrants located upon such property within 12 hours of
daylight after any snowfall or accumulation of ice occurs. In the event
that ice may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, the owner
shall cause the walkways and steps to be thoroughly covered with sand,
ashes, sawdust or rock salt within 12 hours of daylight after the
accumulation of such ice. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
B. In the case of garden apartment developments, apartment buildings,
homeowners’ associations or management companies, the owner shall
at all times keep passable a vehicular passageway from each building in
the complex to the nearest public road sufficient for the entry and exit
of fire and rescue vehicles to service each such building. [Amended
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4166-16]
C. On or before October 1 each year, the owner shall file with the Chief of
Police the name, address and telephone number of the person the
owner holds responsible for keeping such emergency vehicular
passageway open at all times. If such person is not an employee of the
owner, the owner shall also file the name, address and telephone
number of himself or a person in his employ empowered to take action
in case the first person so listed fails to keep the emergency vehicular
passageway passable. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to
relieve the owner of any responsibility for ensuring compliance with
§ 333-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-39
1:1317
§ 333-40. Removal from handicapped parking spaces. [Added
3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1883; amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3162]
The owner of any garden apartment development, apartment building,
homeowners' association or management company, nursing home,
commercial/industrial building, shopping center or an association charged
with the maintenance and operation of any common open space; or the
owner of any property within the Township of Franklin to which the public is
invited for business purposes shall remove all snow and ice from designated
handicapped parking spaces and related access points to walkways so as
to accommodate handicapped persons within 12 hours of daylight after any
snowfall or accumulation of ice occurs.
§ 333-41. Placement of snow or ice on streets.
No person shall place any snow or ice upon any street, road or sidewalk
within the Township in any manner that will obstruct or impede vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or block access to any street, road or sidewalk.
§ 333-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 3162]
§ 333-43. Enforcement; complaints.
All members of the Township Police Department, all special officers and
members of the Township Department of Public Works are authorized to file
complaints for violations of this article.
this subsection nor to relieve him of any liability in a civil suit arising
from his failure to do so.
A. Any owner, tenant or occupant, homeowners' association or
management company who fails to comply with any requirement of this
article or who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, for each and every offense, and every day that a
violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. The maximum penalty stated in Subsection A is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
§ 333-39 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-43
1:1318
ARTICLE III
Street Improvements
[Adopted 6-13-1985 by Ord. No. 1234 (Ch. 210, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 333-44. Title.
The short title by which this article shall be known is the "Street
Improvement Ordinance."
§ 333-45. Street specifications. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1910]
A. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with official grades
established by the Township Engineer and shall conform to the
following specifications:
(1) Right-of-way and pavement width determinations.
Type of Road
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 to 100 50
Major collector 72 48
Collector/
nonresidential
66 42
Collector/residential 60 36
Local nonresidential 60 40
Local residential 50 30
(2) Pavement thickness design.
Type of Road
Subbase
(inches)
Stabilized
Base
(inches)
FABC
(inches)
Arterial 6 7 3
Major collector 6 6 3
Collector/
nonresidential
6 7 2
Collector/residential 6 6 2
Local, nonresidential 6 6 1 1/2
Local, residential 4 4 1 1/2
B. Street classifications for right-of-way and pavement width
determinations, as well as pavement thickness design, will be made by
§ 333-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-45
1:1319
§ 333-46. Trenches. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1910]
§ 333-47. Street signs.
Street signs of the type and design to be approved by the Planning Board
shall be installed at all street intersections.
§ 333-48. Construction details for pavement.
the Township Engineer based on anticipated traffic flow in conformance
with the Township Master Plan.
A. All trenches or ditches which cross an existing street or which are dug
for sewers, water mains, gas mains or other utilities, including the
house connections for these utilities, shall be filled with quarry process
stone. The stone shall be placed in layers not exceeding 12 inches in
depth and shall be sprinkled with water and mechanically compacted.
All soft spots and depressions in a surface which has been graded will
be removed and filled with stone of a size to be determined by the
Township Engineer. All trenches which are dug in a future street or
existing right-of-way on which no subbase or pavement has been
constructed shall be backfilled as indicated above or may be backfilled
with suitable on-site excavated material or imported fill.
B. Prior to using any on-site and/or imported soil materials, the contractor
or any individual or firm shall employ a recognized soils laboratory to
secure soil samples, perform the necessary laboratory analysis and
establish the compaction and other criteria necessary for the proper
placement of the backfill. A report of the laboratory findings, including
the compaction specifications, shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for review and approval prior to commencing any backfill
operations using on-site soil and/or imported soil materials.
C. During the backfilling operations, the contractor or any individual or
firm engaged in a backfilling operation shall employ a professional
engineer, licensed in the State of New Jersey, or his representative, who
is regularly engaged in the practice of geotechnical engineering and
who is trained in soil mechanics, to observe the placement of the
backfill. The soils engineer shall file daily reports with the Township
Engineer indicating the results of the compaction, and upon the
conclusion of the project, file a final certification indicating that the
backfill material has been placed and compacted in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the approved laboratory report.
A. Tack coat prior to resurfacing.
(1) After all surface restoration has been completed and manholes
reset, the street shall be swept clean of all loose stone, leaves, dirt,
etc. The existing paved surface shall be given an application of tack
coat material of cutback asphalt Grade RD-10, as specified by the
Asphalt Institute in Specifications for Asphalt Cements and Liquid
§ 333-45 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-48
1:1320
Asphalt SS-2, at the rate of 0.02 to 0.10 gallon per square yard
or as directed by the Township Engineer prior to placing the new
surface.
(2) Equipment for applying the tack coat shall be power-operated
pressure spraying or distributing equipment suitable for the
materials to be applied and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Subbase quarry stone. The amount of subbase quarry stone to be used
will be dependent upon the condition of the subbase as determined by
the subbase inspection made by the Township Engineer.
C. Temperature of longitudinal bituminous concrete joints. When a course
of bituminous concrete is abutted to a previously laid course, the
abutting surface of the latter shall be of a temperature of not less than
225° F. at the time the joint is made. If this is not achieved by making
the joint before the first-laid bituminous concrete is cooled, the
subdivider shall use one or more joint-heater devices. Such devices
shall be of the infrared type of approved equal and shall be constructed
so as to permit adjustment of heat intensity in accordance with
conditions prevailing at the time of use and shall heat the abutted
material uniformly to a temperature of not more than 215° F., treating
in the upper ranges of these specified temperatures when atmospheric
conditions are conducive to a more rapid cooling. All joint-heating
devices that apply a direct flame or have a harmful effect upon the
bituminous concrete will be prohibited.
D. Resurfacing adjacent to existing curbs or over existing concrete cutter.
(1) It is planned that resurfacing of streets with curb and gutter will be
over the gutter to the curb. The gutter area, as well as the existing
pavement, must be tack coated before the bituminous concrete is
laid.
(2) Where the concrete gutter is already overlayed with bituminous
material, it shall be carefully stripped to the existing concrete prior
to resurfacing.
(3) In case the existing gutter or curb is damaged during the stripping
or resurfacing operation, it shall be repaired or replaced by the
subdivider to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(4) Bituminous concrete will be laid as close to the curb as practical,
but sufficient room must be left so as to be able to feather the edge
down where it meets the curb in order that water will not drain into
the driveways.
E. Replacement of existing portland cement concrete base course.
(1) Concrete base course is only to be used where directed by the
Township Engineer and only on roads with existing concrete base
to replace existing defective or missing portions. It is to be placed
§ 333-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-48
1:1321
to a depth of one inch greater than the adjacent sections, and the
top is to be struck at the same level as the adjacent concrete base.
(2) All construction of existing concrete base course should conform to
the requirements of the NJSHDSS, dated 1961, Div. 3, Sec. 3.
F. Construction requirements of concrete mixes.
(1) Measuring. The method of measuring the materials for the
concrete or mortar, including water, shall be one which will ensure
separate and uniform proportions of each of the materials at all
times.
(2) Proportions. The concrete shall be mixed in the proportions which,
when the proper amount of water is added, will produce a minimum
compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch after 28
days when cured under field conditions. It shall have this minimum
ultimate compressive strength for each test, as determined by
testing six-by-twelve-inch cylinder samples of the concrete, in
accordance with the requirements of the latest revision of ASTM
Designation C-39, Standard Method of Test for Compressive
Strength of Molded Concrete Cylinders.
(3) Admixtures. Air-entraining agents shall be added to the mix at the
plant in sufficient quantities to produce air-entrainment of not less
than 4% nor more than 7%.
(4) Mixing. Unless otherwise authorized by the Township Engineer, all
concrete used will be transmit mix. Truck mixers shall be of the
revolving-drum type. When a truck mixer is used for mixing the
concrete, the drum shall be rotated at mixing speed for not less
than 50 nor more than 100 revolutions after all of the ingredients of
each batch are placed in the drum. When a truck mixer is used for
the complete mixing of concrete, the mixing operations shall begin
within 30 minutes after the cement has been intermingled with the
aggregates. The size of the batch shall not exceed the
manufacturer's rated capacity as shown on a metal rating plate
which shall be attached in a prominent place on the mixer. The
drum shall be completely emptied before receiving material for the
succeeding batch. Additional requirements shall conform to AASH0
Standard M-157.
(5) Consistency. The aggregates, portland cement and water, shall be
thoroughly mixed in accordance with these specifications to
produce a homogeneous mass which can be deposited in the forms
without segregation. The consistency of the mix shall be such that
the slump shall not exceed three inches.
(6) Retempering. The retempering of mortar or concrete which has
partially hardened, with or without additional materials or water, is
prohibited.
§ 333-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-48
1:1322
§ 333-49. Sidewalks and curbs.
Sidewalks and straight concrete curbs, curbs and gutters or Belgian block
curbs shall be installed as detailed below on both sides of all streets, unless
specifically excepted by the approving authority:
§ 333-50. Storm drainage.
(7) Delivery.
(a) Concrete shall be delivered to the site of the work with a
satisfactory degree of uniformity at the consistency specified.
It shall be hauled in a watertight container in which
segregation will not take place and from which the concrete
can be discharged freely.
(b) Concrete shall be delivered to the site of the work and
discharged from the hauling container within a period of 90
minutes after the introduction of the mixing water to the dry
materials unless otherwise specified by the Township Engineer.
A. Foundation.
(1) Subgrade. The finished subgrade shall be prepared as follows:
(a) All soft and spongy places shall be removed and all depressions
filled with suitable material, which shall be thoroughly
compacted in layers not exceeding six inches in thickness.
(b) All fills shall be made in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Engineer. The use of muck, quicksand, soft clay or spongy or
perishable material is prohibited.
(c) The sidewalk subgrade shall have a transverse slope of 1/4
inch per foot. The top of fills shall extend beyond the walk on
each side for at least one foot and shall have a maximum slope
of two horizontal to one vertical.
(2) Slab thickness The minimum thickness of sidewalk shall be five
inches, except that at driveway openings to dwellings the minimum
thickness of the sidewalk shall not be less than six inches.
A. The development of any property will normally result in an increase of
the stormwater runoff from the site. Provisions must be made for the
on-site detention of this additional runoff. The detention system shall be
so designed such that the total post-development rate of runoff from the
site does not exceed that rate which existed before development.
Current Somerset County Standards for the Design of Stormwater
Detention Facilities shall be used for all drainage areas five acres and
larger. For areas smaller than five acres, the Rational Method shall be
used. A one-hundred-year storm frequency shall be the design storm in
both cases.
§ 333-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-50
1:1323
B. Sufficient catch basins and drainage appurtenances, as approved by the
Township Engineer, must be provided to channel all surface runoff to
the detention facilities, except the design storm shall be a twenty-fiveyear
frequency.
C. All drainage facilities not located in the public right-of-way must be
encompassed by a drainage easement, which shall be dedicated to the
Township of Franklin or the County of Somerset, as approved by the
Township Engineer. The design and construction of all drainage
structures located within the public right-of-way or dedicated
easements shall be solely the responsibility of the applicant.
Maintenance of the completed system will be the responsibility of either
the Township of Franklin or Somerset County.
D. Copies of all design standards specified above are available from the
Township Engineer. Conditions peculiar to a particular site may require
deviations from the established standards but only upon the approval of
the Township Engineer.
E. The standards listed shall also govern the development of any property
which requires a site plan. However, dedicated easements will not be
required, and neither the Township of Franklin nor Somerset County
will be responsible for the future maintenance of any drainage facilities
unless specifically approved by the approving authority.
§ 333-50 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-50
1:1324
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1730 (Ch. 210, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 333-51. Responsibility to repair or replace sidewalks.
All sidewalks in streets, roads, and highways within the Township of
Franklin shall be kept in good repair. The owners, tenants and occupants
of improved or unimproved premises abutting upon public sidewalks within
the Township of Franklin shall repair and/or replace a sidewalk abutting the
property which shall become damaged, broken, uneven, or in any manner
disrupted so as to create a hazard to pedestrian traffic. (See § 222-18,
Notice to property owner for the removal of dangerous trees and/or shrubs.)
§ 333-52. Materials and manner of construction.
All sidewalk repairs shall be completed in accordance with this section or
as otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
§ 333-53. Enforcement.
The Director of the Department of Public Works or his designated agent
may order the owner of the property abutting a sidewalk which has been
determined by the Director or his designee to be in need of repair to
construct and/or repair such sidewalk at the owner's expense.
§ 333-54. Dangerous trees.
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public
place in the Township in such a way as to impede or interfere with vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or travel, or within 10 feet of a street or seven feet of
a sidewalk level, shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting or
of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction
shall cease.
A. Materials. Every repair of a sidewalk shall be made of the kind of
material and in the manner of construction existing in such sidewalk to
be repaired.
B. Grades. Where the grade of the street, road or highway or the section
thereof along which any construction or repair of sidewalks is proposed
to be made has been established by state law or regulations or pursuant
to § 333-49, such improvement shall be made to conform as nearly as
practicable to the grade so established.
C. Inspection. The Director of the Department of Public Works or his
designated agent or the Township Engineer may require that repair of
any sidewalk be under the inspection of inspectors to be selected and
appointed by the Director of Public Works or the Township Engineer.
§ 333-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-54
1:1325

ARTICLE V
Banners
[Adopted 12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1983]
§ 333-55. Criteria for display of banners across Township streets;
application required.
Banners to be displayed across Township streets as defined herein may be
permitted if the following criteria is met:
A. Banners shall announce functions or fund-raising events for charitable,
educational, civic or religious organizations within the Township of
Franklin.
B. Application shall be made to the Township Clerk of the Township of
Franklin at least 30 days prior to the intended date of display.
[Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3633]
C. Application shall include:
(1) Name and address of the applicant; charitable, educational, civic or
religious organization sponsoring the same;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the contact persons;
(3) Purpose of the banners;
(4) Date banner is to be displayed;
(5) Sketch of the banner, including the type, color, material and
language;
(6) Sketch of the proposed location of the banner.
(7) Certificate of insurance from an A-rated insurance company shall
be provided setting forth the Township of Franklin as a named
insured under the policy, with a liability insurance limit of
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
D. The banner(s) may remain in place for no more than 14 days.
E. The dimensions of a banner may not exceed six feet in height or 16 feet
in length, with a maximum area of 32 square feet.
F. The highest portion of a banner shall not exceed 25 feet.
G. The minimum clearance of banners above the finished grade level shall
be 16 feet.
H. Banners shall not be lighted.
I. Banners shall be displayed at least 1,000 feet from any traffic signal.
§ 333-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-55
1:1327
§ 333-56. Approval procedure; alternative location. [Amended
9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 3633]
Upon receipt of a complete application for the display of a banner, the Chief
of Police shall review and approve or deny a permit for said banner within
10 working days. After approved by the Chief of Police, the Township Clerk
shall issue a permit for said banner. If denied, the Township Clerk will notify
applicant of the same. If the proposed location for the display of the banner
is not in compliance with § 333-55 or is otherwise unacceptable, the Chief
of Police shall have the right to select an alternative location for display of
the banner.
§ 333-57. Non-Township streets.
Banners to be displayed across county and/or state roads shall be subject
to any applicable standards and permit requirements of the County of
Somerset and/or State of New Jersey, respectively.
J. The organization sponsoring the display of a banner shall submit an
indemnification agreement indemnifying and holding the Township of
Franklin harmless from any claims arising therefrom.
§ 333-55 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-57
1:1328
ARTICLE VI
Personal Property
[Adopted 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3874]
§ 333-58. Personal property on public streets and rights-of-way.
It shall be unlawful to place large items of personal property, excluding
motor vehicles and including but not limited to portable or permanent
basketball hoops, hockey goals and skateboard ramps, on the public streets
and rights-of-way of the Township. It shall also be unlawful for said items to
be situated in such a manner as to require those utilizing said items to do
so from the improved portion of the street.
§ 333-59. Abandoned personal property on public streets and
rights-of-way.
Large items of personal property, excluding vehicles and including but
not limited to portable or permanent basketball hoops, hockey goals and
skateboard ramps, which are found on public streets and rights-of-way and
which items do not have identification as to the ownership of those items,
shall be considered abandoned and shall be subject to removal by the Police
Department and/or the Department of Public Works.
§ 333-60. Personal property on public streets and rights-of-way with
identification of ownership.
Large items of personal property, excluding vehicles and including but
not limited to portable or permanent basketball hoops, hockey goals and
skateboard ramps, which identify their owner are also not allowed on the
public streets and rights-of-way of the Township but the Township shall give
notice of 72 hours to said owner prior to removing the object as abandoned.
The Township shall also be entitled to move said personal property onto the
property of the indicated owner.
§ 333-61. Confiscated abandoned personal property.
Abandoned personal property confiscated by the Township pursuant to this
article may be redeemed by the rightful owner upon payment of a fee of
$100, said fee calculated to cover the Township's cost in removing and
storing the item. Any citizen who desires may request a hearing before a
designee of the Township Manager to contest whether the item of personal
property was properly removed as abandoned property. Said hearing shall
be held within 21 days of the request for a hearing.
§ 333-62. Enforcement.
All members of the Township Police Department, the Township Department
of Public Works and the Zoning Inspector are authorized to file complaints
for violations of this article.
§ 333-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-63
1:1329
§ 333-63. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the court.
Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 333-63 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-63
1:1330
ARTICLE VII
Roll-off Dumpsters and Roll-off Containers
[Adopted 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 3874]
§ 333-64. Roll-off dumpsters and roll-off containers on public
streets and rights-of-way.
No person shall park or leave unattended any waste or refuse container,
commonly known as a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container, on the public
streets and rights-of-way of the Township, except that a person may request
a permit to park or leave unattended a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container
on a public street or right-of-way when a hardship can be demonstrated.
§ 333-65. Permit required.
§ 333-66. Reflective markers required.
To warn the operators of vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard
requiring the exercise of unusual care, any roll-off dumpsters or roll-off
container parked on or along any public street or right-of-way shall be
equipped with and display markers consisting of all-yellow reflective
diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size of 18 inches by 18 inches.
These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the dumpster or container at
both ends nearest the path of passing vehicles and facing the direction of
oncoming traffic. These markers shall have a minimum mounting height of
three feet from the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway.
§ 333-67. Enforcement.
All members of the Township Police Department, the Township Department
of Public Works and the Zoning Inspector are authorized to file complaints
for violations of this article.
A. Any person requesting a permit to park or leave unattended any roll-off
dumpsters or roll-off containers on the public streets and rights-of-way
of the Township shall submit a written request on the proscribed form
to the Township Clerk at least 30 days in advance. The request shall
include a drawing of the proposed location that the roll-off dumpster or
roll-off container will be placed, its dimensions and the width of the
street.
B. Upon receipt of a written request, the Township Clerk shall forward it
to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
investigate the request and make recommendations as necessary to the
Township Clerk.
C. If approved, permission to place a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container
on the public streets and rights-of-way of the Township shall be for no
more than 30 days, but may be renewed by the Township Clerk for one
additional thirty-day period upon application therefor. The fee for said
permit shall be $50 for each thirty-day period.
§ 333-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-68
1:1331
§ 333-68. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, at the discretion of the court.
Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 333-68 FRANKLIN CODE § 333-68
1:1332
Chapter 340
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 112. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
§ 340-1. License required for public or quasi-public pools and
beaches; fees; regulations; terms; revocation; inspections.
[Amended 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1576; 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3419;
8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3769]
§ 340-2. Adoption of standards. [Amended 11-8-1984 by Ord. No.
1196; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3165; 3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 3199]
A. No person shall operate, conduct or maintain any public or quasi-public
swimming pool or bathing area within the said Township without having
first obtained from the said Department of Health a license for such
purpose and paid an annual fee to said Department of Health for said
license in the amount of $600. In addition, the Health Department shall
review all construction plans for public and quasi-public swimming
pools for which it shall charge a fee of $150 for said review. When the
said license is issued, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
and such additional sanitary safeguards in respect to the premises to be
used as said Department of Health shall deem that the public health
may require. Such license shall set forth the method of disinfection and
treatment of the water which shall be used by the owners or operators
and the maximum number of persons who shall be allowed to use such
pool or beach at any one time and during any bathing period.
B. Such license shall be posted conspicuously at such pool or beach. Every
such license shall expire on December 31 following the date of issue
thereof, and may be revoked by said Department of Health for any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the additional
safeguards prescribed by said Department in granting such license.
C. In the event a prospective licensee shall receive a conditional or
temporary license or shall be denied a license, all further inspections
necessary in order for the licensee to obtain a permanent annual license
shall be charged at the following rates: [Amended 5-10-2016 by Ord.
No. 4151-16]
(1) First reinspection: $100.
(2) Second reinspection: $200.
(3) Third and subsequent reinspections: $300.
§ 333-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2
1:1333
§ 340-3. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 345
TAXATION
A. The Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey, 1970, is hereby adopted by
reference in full in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.6. Three copies of
said code have been placed on the file in the office of the Township
Clerk upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
until final action is taken on this chapter, for the use and examination of
the public.
B. In addition to the above, the Public Recreational Bathing Statute,
N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and 26:4A-7 (N.J.A.C. 8:26) as effective May 12, 2000,
and as the same shall be updated in the future, shall be enforced.
§ 340-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 340-3
1:1334
ARTICLE I
Real Property Tax Abatement
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3675192]
§ 345-1. Exemption established.
§ 345-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. There is hereby adopted and provided in this municipality a tax
abatement program pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 441, as same may be
amended from time to time.193 This program shall apply throughout the
municipality and provide for the abatement from real property taxation
of the aggregate first $25,000 in the Assessor's full and true value of
home improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and directly
affected by a home improvement in any owner-occupied portion of a
residential dwelling unit more than 20 years old as not increasing the
value of such property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that
the value of the dwelling to which such improvements are made is
increased thereby; provided, however, that during said period, the
assessment on said dwelling shall in no case, except that of damage
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction, be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to such home
improvements, and provided further that the aggregate amount of any
claims for any dwelling unit shall not be in excess of the maximum sum
of $25,000.
B. This exemption is also established for mixed-use, commercial and
industrial buildings in the Hamilton Street Business District and the
Renaissance Redevelopment Area. The program shall provide an
abatement from real property taxation of the aggregate first $100,000
in the Assessor's full and true value of building improvements for each
unit primarily and directly affected by a building improvement in a
building over 20 years old as not increasing the value of such property
for a five-year period, notwithstanding that the value of the building to
which such improvements are made is increased thereby; provided,
however, that during said period, the assessment on said improvements
shall in no case except that of damage through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction be less than the assessment thereon
existing immediately prior to such improvements, and provided further
that the aggregate amount of claims for any building not be in excess of
the maximum sum of $100,000.
192. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Real Property Tax Abatement,
adopted 4-12-1979 by Ord. No. 939, as amended.
193. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 345-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-2
1:1335
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building or
structure thereon which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this Act.
ACT — P.L. 1991, c 441, and all amendments and supplements thereto.194
APPLICATION — A written request for the exemption filed with the local
Tax Assessor on forms devised by the Director of the Division of Taxation.
ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
ASSESSOR'S FULL AND TRUE VALUE OF HOME IMPROVEMENTS —
That portion of any increased assessed value of real property which directly
resulted from improvements made thereon.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the use for which it was intended.
CONDOMINIUM — A property created or recorded as a condominium
pursuant to the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et
seq.).
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association, wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess and occupy
for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other unit of housing owned
by the corporation or association.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building used, to be used or held
for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on
the same premises, together with the land upon which such building or
buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment
thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building, defined as
a "multiple dwelling" pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.). A dwelling shall include, as
they are separately conveyed to individual owners, individual residences
within a cooperative, if purchased separately by the occupants thereof,
and individual residences within a horizontal property regime or a
condominium, but shall not include "general common elements" or
"common elements" of such horizontal property regime or condominium as
defined pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq.), or the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1
et seq.), or of a cooperative, if the residential units are owned separately.
EXEMPTION — That amount to be deducted from the Assessor's full and
true value of home improvements.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — The improvement of a dwelling which does
not change its permitted use, and shall include the modernization,
rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair of a dwelling.
194. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 345-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-2
1:1336
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a horizontal
property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168
(N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.).
§ 345-3. Eligible real property.
Real property must meet the following qualifications in order to gain the
exemption:
§ 345-4. Application procedure.
The following conditions shall apply to all claims for the exemption at the
time of application:
§ 345-5. Procedures upon allowance of exemption.
The following procedures shall apply upon allowance of exemption:
A. It must contain a building or buildings which were constructed more
than 20 years prior to the time of application for the exemption and are
used or being held for use, in whole or part, as homes or residential
dwellings, which are a constituent part of the real property.
B. No exemption or abatement shall be granted, pursuant to this article
with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
C. The property must be a mixed-use, commercial or industrial building in
the Hamilton Street Business District or the Renaissance
Redevelopment Area which was constructed more than 20 years prior
to the application for exemption.
A. Claims for the exemption shall be in writing upon forms prescribed by
the Director of the Division of Taxation and must be filed with the local
Tax Assessor within 30 days including Saturdays and Sundays following
completion of the home improvement.
B. Additional claims for the exemption may be submitted and approved
with regard to dwellings with respect to which a previous home
improvement exemption was granted in an amount less than $25,000;
provided, however, that the total aggregate amount of any claims for
any dwelling unit for so long as this article shall apply shall not be in
excess of the maximum sum of $25,000.
A. Every application for exemption of one or more improvements which
qualify shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor, but in no case
may the exemption exceed the maximum per dwelling unit.
B. Claim for the exemption, once filed on the prescribed form and allowed
by the Assessor, shall continue in force for a period of five years
following January 1 of the year in which the exemption was allowed.
§ 345-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-5
1:1337
§ 345-6. Administrative rules and regulations.
C. The law requires that the granting of any exemption pursuant to the Act
shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax record.
Accordingly, the Assessor shall designate the exemption by the symbol
"H" under "Specific exemptions" on the real property tax list and reflect
it in Column 7 on said list.
D. The law provides that, in applying the exemption, the Assessor may
regard the improvements "... as not increasing the value of such
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
dwelling to which such improvements are made is increased thereby..."
Accordingly, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-63.1 et seq., the Added and
Omitted Assessment Laws, shall not apply to the allowable increase in
the amount of assessed valuation in the year in which the improvements
qualify for the exemption.
E. The law provides that every application for exemption of one or more
improvements which qualify as improvements shall be approved and
allowed by the Assessor. Where application for exemption is made,
however, with respect to an improvement or improvements which do
not qualify, the Assessor should notify the claimant of the disallowance
of the claim, in writing, upon Form H.I.E.-2 within 20 days after
disallowance and properly note thereon the specific reasons for the
disallowance.
F. The exemption and abatement of real property taxes provided by
municipalities pursuant to this Act shall apply to property taxes levied
for municipal purposes, including fire districts and/or snow removal
districts, school purposes, county government purposes and for the
purposes of funding any other property tax exemptions or abatements.
A. The Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs is
authorized to determine standards and guidelines and to promulgate
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Act.
B. The Township shall include the appropriate notice in the mailing of
annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling located in an area
in which exemptions, or exemptions and abatements, may be allowed
pursuant to this article during the first year following adoption of this
article.
C. The Township Council shall report, on or before October 1 of each year,
to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs and the Division of Taxation in the
Department of the Treasury the total of real property taxes exempted
and the total amount abated within the municipality in the current tax
year for improvements of dwellings.
§ 345-5 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-6
1:1338
§ 345-7. Effectiveness of provisions.
Application for exemptions and abatements from taxation may be filed
pursuant to an ordinance so adopted to take initial effect for the first full
year commencing after the tax year in which this article is adopted, and
for tax years thereafter as set forth in this Act, but no application for
exemptions or abatements shall be filed for exemptions or abatements to
take initial effect for the 11th full year or any tax year occurring thereafter,
unless the ordinance is readopted by the Township Council pursuant to this
section.
(1) The Director of the Division of Taxation shall include a summary of
the information provided in the annual reports in the annual report
of the Division.
D. No exemption or abatement granted, or tax agreement entered into,
pursuant to an ordinance adopted pursuant to an act repealed by this
Act shall be affected or terminated by virtue of that repeal, but shall
remain in effect for the time and under the terms granted as if the act
authorizing the ordinance had not been so repealed. Notwithstanding
that repeal, any restriction or limitation contained in that Act against a
property being granted an additional exemption or abatement
thereunder shall apply with respect to granting an exemption or
abatement under this Act, and no property which was granted an
exemption or abatement under an act so repealed shall be granted an
exemption or abatement under this Act unless the property would have
qualified for an additional exemption or abatement under the act so
repealed.
§ 345-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-7
1:1339

ARTICLE II
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 3396]
§ 345-8. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114,195 which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant
to Subsection (d) of § 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall
be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local
ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of
a hotel room.
§ 345-9. Establishment of tax.
§ 345-10. Requirements; violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:196
A. There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in
the Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, which shall be fixed at a
uniform percentage rate of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy
of a hotel or motel room in the Township of Franklin, County of
Somerset, on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and 3% on
charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, on or after July 1, 2004, of a
room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d)
of § 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
B. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel
room.
C. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or
consumer is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy
under the Sales and Use Tax Act pursuant to Subsection (a) of § 9 of P.L.
1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
195. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq.
196. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq.
§ 345-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-10
1:1341
§ 345-11. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, for each offense.
§ 345-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-11
1:1342
ARTICLE III
Development and Redevelopment Tax Abatement or Exemption
[Adopted 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3960]
§ 345-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a policy and procedure for the
Township's receipt, review and consideration of applications for tax
abatements and/or tax exemptions pursuant to the Long Term Tax
Exemption Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.), the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.), the New Jersey Housing
Mortgage Finance Agency Law (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.) and any other
applicable law (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "exemption laws")
to offer financial assistance for development projects located in an area in
need of redevelopment or an area in need of rehabilitation, as such areas
are defined under the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.), as well as any affordable housing project as such project
may be defined under applicable law, including, but not limited to, the New
Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency Law.
§ 345-13. Policy.
The Township hereby establishes a policy whereby it shall accept, review
and consider an application, submitted in accordance herewith, for tax
abatements and/or tax exemptions pursuant to applicable law. However, this
article does not commit or require the Township to approve any application
submitted in accordance herewith. In considering each application, the
Township shall consider, in part, the benefits of the development project
for the Township and the impact of any tax abatement and/or exemption
requested on the budget of the Township.
§ 345-14. Application procedure.
A. Applicants for tax abatement and/or exemption shall submit an
application and the fee and escrow payments established by this article,
in a form attached hereto, setting forth:
(1) A general description of the project for which abatement and/or
exemption is sought;
(2) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Township to demonstrate the structure and design of the proposed
project;
(4) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement and/or
exemption on the project and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if a tax abatement/exemption is granted.
Included in this statement shall be the details of any state, county
§ 345-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-14
1:1343
or local financial contributions including loans or grants of any
kind.
(5) Estimates of the costs of completing the project;
(6) A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project
site;
(b) Estimated annual service charges that would be made annually
by the applicant on the project during the term of the proposed
tax abatement/exemption; and
(c) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant
on the project during the first full year following termination of
the tax abatement/exemption agreement;
(7) A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project and a history and description of the
users' business;
(8) A form of financial agreement containing, at a minimum, the terms
and conditions set forth below;
(9) A pro-forma and/or other fiscal analysis demonstrating the need for
the tax abatement and/or exemption;
(10) A description of any contribution to the project requested of or
proposed by the Township or the Redevelopment Agency including,
but not limited to, contributions from the Township Affordable
Housing Trust Fund or in-kind contributions in the nature of
construction of public improvements such as roads or
infrastructure;
(11) Such other pertinent information as may be required by the
Township.
B. Applicants shall submit applications for an abatement or exemption to
the Township Manager. Following receipt of a completed application as
set forth above, the Township shall review same to determine whether
an abatement and/or exemption for new construction shall be granted
following an individual review and evaluation of each application
submitted to the Township. The Township Manager shall notify the
Township Council upon receiving an application as soon as practicable
after the filing of an application with the Township. All applications
shall be forwarded by the Township Manager to the appropriate staff
for review, including, but not limited to the Chief Financial Officer; the
Township Attorney; the Tax Assessor; and the Township Planner. If the
application involves property within the Renaissance Redevelopment
Area or any other redevelopment area subject to the Redevelopment
Agency's jurisdiction, the Redevelopment Agency shall be forwarded a
copy of the application for their review, except where such application
§ 345-14 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-14
1:1344
§ 345-15. Authorization; terms of financial agreement.
§ 345-16. Additional requirements.
was initially submitted to the Redevelopment Agency and reviewed by
the Agency in accordance with § 345-16C. Within 60 days of filing of
the application, the Township Manager shall forward a copy of the
completed application and review memoranda to the Township Council.
C. No abatement and/or exemption shall be granted pursuant to this
article and the exemption laws except upon written application by an
applicant filed with the Township Manager, and subsequent review and
approval of the application and financial agreement by the Township
Council in accordance with this article.
A. The authorization to enter into a financial agreement must be granted
by ordinance regardless of the approval procedure contained in the
exemption laws. Any financial agreement shall contain those terms
required by the exemption laws, including, but not limited to:
(1) The applicant shall pay to the municipality, in lieu of full property
tax payments, an amount annually to be computed by one, but in no
case a combination of the cost basis formula, gross revenue basis
formula, or tax phase-in basis formula, all as defined in the
exemption laws and incorporated by reference herein as if set forth
fully.
(2) All tax abatements/exemptions applied for and granted pursuant to
the exemption laws and this section shall be in effect for a period of
no more than 30 full years following the date of completion of the
project or 35 years from execution of a financial agreement.
B. No abatement and/or exemption shall be granted, or financial
agreement entered into pursuant to the exemption laws or this article,
with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are
currently then due and owing.
C. The financial agreement shall be recorded by the applicant and made a
permanent part of the official tax records of the Township, which
records shall contain a notice of termination date thereof.
D. Within 30 days following execution of a financial agreement, pursuant
to the exemption laws and this section, the Township shall forward a
copy of the agreement to the Director of Local Government Services in
the Department of Community Affairs.
A. If any provisions for tax abatements and/or tax exemptions are not set
forth herein, the applicant and Township shall rely upon the provisions
set forth in the exemption laws.
§ 345-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-16
1:1345
§ 345-17. Application fees and escrows.
B. The Franklin Township Redevelopment Agency shall attach a copy of
this article to each redevelopment agreement and each redevelopment
agreement shall contain the following provision: "The Developer
acknowledges that any application for a Tax Abatement and/or Tax
Exemptions must be submitted to the Township of Franklin in
accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 3954-11."
C. Before the execution of any redevelopment agreement, the redeveloper
shall inform the Redevelopment Agency as to whether a tax abatement
and/or tax exemption will be sought. If the redeveloper plans to submit
for a tax abatement and/or tax exemption the following procedure shall
be followed:
(1) The redeveloper shall submit to the Redevelopment Agency the
application information required by § 345-14A and shall pay the
$500 application fee as per § 345-17.
(2) The Executive Director of the Redevelopment Agency may waive
the requirements of § 345-14A if it is determined that the
information is not yet available.
(3) The Redevelopment Agency shall review and comment on the
application.
(4) The Executive Director shall forward the application and the
Redevelopment Agency's comments to the Township Council for
their review and advisory input to the Redevelopment Agency, prior
to the Agency's execution of a redevelopment agreement with the
redeveloper.
A. The fee for each application under this article shall be $500. In addition,
the applicant shall submit with its application the sum of $5,000, except
in such case where the application is filed with the Redevelopment
Agency in accordance with § 345-16C to be held in escrow for the
payment of professional review services which are reasonably
necessary for the review, processing, research and/or memorialization
of any application including the drafting or review of any financial
agreement. These services may include, but need not be limited to, an
attorney, financial advisor, professional planner, professional engineer,
and/or other professional as deemed reasonable and necessary by the
Township. To the extent that the initial escrow is not sufficient the
applicant, upon notice by the Township shall submit such additional
escrow payment as are necessary to complete the processing of the
application. The escrow accounts shall be administered in accordance
with Chapter 112, Article XXVIII, of the Code of the Township of
Franklin.
§ 345-16 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-18
1:1346
§ 345-18. Termination.
Upon termination of a financial agreement referenced hereunder, a project
shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state
law and regulation, as well as local ordinances. However, nothing herein
shall prohibit a project, upon termination of a financial agreement, from
qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any other tax preferences
provided by law.
§ 345-19. Application form.
Attached hereto is the form of application an applicant shall use in
submitting a request for a tax abatement or exemption.197
197. Editor's Note: The tax abatement/exemption application form is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 345-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-19
1:1347
Chapter 350
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
§ 345-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 345-19
1:1348
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 350-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Township
with a taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the
taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along
the streets of this Township for any purpose other than while transporting
a passenger going to a definite destination by the most direct route, in
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger or returning by
the most direct route to the taxicab's home, terminus or hack stand after
discharging a passenger or going to or from the said terminus or hack stand
to the driver's home by the direct route shall be prima facie evidence of
cruising.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab or limousine within the
Township.
LICENSE — The license to operate issued by the Township Clerk in
accordance with this chapter and N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
LICENSING OFFICIAL — The Township Clerk or other official as the
Township Clerk may designate.
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity
of not more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided that
such a vehicle is certified by the manufacturer of the original vehicle and
the second-stage manufacturer, if applicable, to conform to all applicable
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Transportation pursuant to 49 CFR Part 571 (49 CFR 571.1
et seq.) and 49 CFR Part 567 (49 CFR 567.1 et seq.). In addition, a vehicle
emission control information label, which contains the name and trademark
of the manufacturer and an unconditional statement of compliance with
the emission requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall be
present on the vehicle. Nothing in this article contained shall be construed
to include taxicabs, hotel buses, buses employed solely in transporting
school children or teachers, vehicles owned and operated directly or
indirectly by businesses engaged in the practice of mortuary science when
those vehicles are used exclusively for providing transportation related
to the provision of funeral services, autobuses which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, or interstate autobuses
required by the federal or state law or regulations of the Department of
Transportation to carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law
on account of bodily injury or death.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-1
1:1349
LIMOUSINE SERVICE or LIVERY SERVICE — Includes the business of
carrying passengers for hire by limousines.
OPERATION — Transporting for hire in such taxicab one or more persons,
from a point within or without the Township to any other point within the
Township or from within the Township to a point outside of the Township
limits. The operation of a taxicab in either of the above-described manners
by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner
thereof as well as by the person actually driving the same. The
transportation of any person other than the owner or driver in any motor
vehicle bearing a sign therein or thereon using the words "taxi," "taxicab,"
"cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title to
any taxicab or limousine is registered with the New Jersey Department of
Motor Vehicles or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee
or lessee thereof, and who maintains its principal office for such taxicab or
limousine service within Franklin Township and who maintains continuous
telephone accommodations where he or his agent can be readily reached.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any
court whatsoever.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — In reference to a municipality, the
location of the main place of business of the taxicab or limousine service in
the municipality where the taxicab or limousine service is conducted, where
taxicabs or limousines are dispatched, or where taxicab or limousine drivers
report for duty.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other
public place.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised to
operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the streets within
the Township and which accepts passengers for transportation from points
or places to points or places within or without the Township for an agreedupon
fare or price.
§ 350-2. Letter of consent.
A letter of consent, for the purpose of motor vehicle registration, will be
issued by the Township after submission of the appropriate application
to the Township Clerk. The issuance of the letter of consent shall not be
construed as the issuance of any license by the Township.
§ 350-3. Fees.
Every applicant for a Township license issued under this chapter shall pay
the applicable fee to the Township Clerk at the time the application is
submitted. Fees submitted to the Township Clerk in connection with an
§ 350-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-3
1:1350
application for any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be
refundable.
§ 350-4. Transfer of license.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable or assignable.
§ 350-5. Smoking in vehicles prohibited.
The smoking of tobacco shall not be permitted in any taxicab or limousine
licensed by the Township during the operation of such vehicles. The
prohibition shall be conspicuously posted in each vehicle for hire.
§ 350-6. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. Limousine owner's license: $250 per year or portion of a year for which
the license is issued or renewed.
B. (Reserved)198
C. Taxicab owner's license numbers one through five: $250 per year or
portion of a year for which the license is issued or renewed.
D. Taxicab owner's license numbers six and over: as determined by
auction.
E. Taxicab vehicle fee: $100 per vehicle per year.
F. Taxicab owner annual inspection: $50 per vehicle.
G. Consent letter fee: $25.
H. License replacement fee: $10.
I. Late fee: $25.
A. The licensing official shall have power to suspend or revoke an
operating license under any of the following provisions:
(1) The licensing official may revoke any license of either class if the
applicant for the license has been once convicted of a crime in this
or any other jurisdiction, or convicted of being a disorderly person
or of a violation of Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations,
of the Revised Statutes, or who consistently violates any provision
of this chapter or has any judgment unsatisfied or record against
him arising out of an automobile accident or who has made false
answers in his application for such license or any renewal thereof
or who has not complied fully with all requirements of this chapter
for such class of license; or
(2) The licensing official may suspend:
198. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Limousine vehicle fee, was repealed 11-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 4043-13.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-6
1:1351
§ 350-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
(a) Any taxicab driver's license, if the licensee or applicant has in
any degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to
property arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle;
or has any communicable or contagious disease; or
(b) Any taxicab or limousine owner's license if the policy of
insurance required herein has lapsed, or if such coverage is not
maintained at all times. Such suspension shall be for a period
not to exceed 30 days.
B. Within 10 days of the date of the suspension or revocation, an appeal
from any such suspension or revocation may be made to the Township
Manager who shall forthwith schedule a hearing on the appeal. The
Township Manager shall render his decision within two days after
completion of the hearing.
§ 350-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-7
1:1352
ARTICLE II
Taxicab Licenses
§ 350-8. Licensing of taxicab and owner required.
§ 350-9. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses to be known as
"taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license," respectively.
§ 350-10. Drug screening.
Applicants for a taxicab driver or owner's license must have had a drug
screening conducted within 30 days of their application and must submit
the results of the drug test to the Township Clerk. This drug test must have
been performed by a facility duly licensed to conduct drug testing by the
State of New Jersey, and shall screen for all illegal substances. Failure to
submit drug-testing results, or to have failed a drug test, will result in the
rejection and/or denial of the application.
§ 350-11. Applications.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class
shall be made to the Township Clerk on forms adopted by and obtained
from the Township Clerk, which forms shall be designed to elicit information
respecting the identification, responsibility and law-abiding habits of the
applicant. An applicant, after a background investigation, can be
disqualified if convicted of offenses as per state statute.
§ 350-12. Application procedure.
Each applicant for a license of any class shall supply the information
requested on the application in full and verify the correctness thereof by his
oath or affirmation and thereafter file the completed application with the
Township Clerk, together with the full amount of the proper fee hereafter
fixed therefor. The Clerk shall issue or renew or deny the issuance or
renewal of such license within 30 days of the day application for the same
was filed with the Clerk. Failure by the Clerk to act on the application within
the aforesaid thirty-day period may be deemed by the applicant as a denial
of the same.
A. No person shall operate any taxicab within the Township unless both
the taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this article
and conform to all the provisions hereof.
B. Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the taxicab
driver and the taxicab owner as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Any sworn law enforcement officer may enforce this
section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township Clerk may
refuse to grant a taxicab owner's license for a period up to one year, if
an application is made.
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:1353
§ 350-13. Transfer of fees to Treasurer.
The Township Clerk shall, at the time a final decision is rendered on any
application, pay the fees received therefor over to the Township Treasurer.
§ 350-14. Expiration.
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall expire at 12:00
midnight on the 31st day of March of the year next following issuance,
unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 350-15. Taxicab owner's license.
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in the Township by a driver duly licensed hereunder until the
license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 350-16. Insurance prerequisite to issuance.
§ 350-17. Taxicab driver's license.
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within the Township any taxicab duly licensed hereunder until the license
either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and it shall not be
transferable.
A. Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall, together with his/
her application, submit to the Township Clerk a certificate of insurance,
naming the Township of Franklin, care of the Township Clerk, as
certificate holder, by a company duly licensed to transact business
under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey, and any
amendments thereto, insuring the vehicles for the following minimal
coverage amounts: $250,000 to satisfy all claims for damages, by
reason of bodily injury to, or the death of, any one person, resulting
from an accident, and a sum of not less the $300,000 to satisfy all
claims for damages, by reason of the bodily injuries to, or the death of
all persons, on account of any such accident by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance, or use of such taxicab upon any public street;
and conditioned for the payment of a sum of not less than $100,000 to
satisfy all claims for damages to property of all persons resulting from
an accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance, or use
of such taxicab upon any public street.
B. In the event that the applicant's insurance company does not issue split
levels of insurance coverage, a combined single-limit coverage may be
used. This single limit may not amount to less than $300,000 to satisfy
all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury or death, and/or
property damage resulting from the ownership, operation,
maintenance, or use of such taxicab upon any public street.
§ 350-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-18
1:1354
§ 350-18. Photograph required.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his application
two photographs, each one inch by one inch in size, clearly depicting the
facial features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall have been
taken within one year prior to the application for the taxicab license, and
which shall thereupon become the property of the Township and be retained
with the application form. Upon granting of the application, one of such
photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license card in a space
provided thereon.
§ 350-19. Fingerprinting.
Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license or taxicab owner's license
shall, at the time of filing his initial application, be fingerprinted by the
Police Department. After a license has been issued, the license holder may
thereafter annually elect to be refingerprinted or to supply to the Police
Department an executed New Jersey State Police, Bureau of Identification
Request for Criminal History Record Information Form, provided the license
holder is refingerprinted at least once in any five-year period. An impression
of such fingerprints shall thereupon be forwarded forthwith by the Police
Department to the Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey State Police
for a report of the applicant's criminal record, which report when received
shall be permanently maintained by the Police Department. The fee for such
fingerprinting and report and Bureau of Identification Request for Criminal
History Record Information Form shall be $5, payable to the Franklin
Township Police Department plus any applicable fee charged by the State
Police.
§ 350-20. Display of license.
§ 350-21. Physical examination.
The applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall cause himself to be
examined by a reputable doctor licensed to practice medicine in the state
and shall file with his application for the issuance or renewal of a driver's
A. Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's license shall be issued a
license card in evidence thereof signed by the Township Clerk. Such
license card shall at all times be prominently displayed and adequately
protected in the interior of any taxicab operated by the licensee so that
the face thereof shall be at all times in the full view of and plainly
legible to any passenger seated in the rear seat of such taxicab. The
license card shall at all times be and remain the property of the
Township and shall at any time be surrendered to the Township Clerk.
B. Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab driver's license for a period of seven to
30 days.
§ 350-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-21
1:1355
license a certificate of such doctor, dated within 30 days of filing, showing
that the applicant is in good general health, free of any communicable
disease and has no past history of epilepsy, coronary thrombosis, cerebral
hemorrhage or other affliction which might cause sudden loss of control of
a taxicab and eyesight corrected to 20/20 with glasses.
§ 350-22. Only license of driver to be displayed.
§ 350-23. Driving history required.
§ 350-24. Residency of taxicab drivers.
§ 350-25. Taxicab driver must understand and speak English.
A. No taxicab driver's license card other than that of the licensee actually
operating the cab at the time shall be displayed therein.
B. Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab driver's license for a period of seven to
30 days.
A. Applicants for a taxicab driver's or owner's license must, at time of
application, provide a certified abstract from the New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles detailing the applicants' previous five
years of driving history. Applicants who do not have five years worth of
driving experience within New Jersey must provide a certified abstract
from the state in which they were previously licensed, or an affidavit
explaining their lack of five years of driving experience.
B. Failure to submit a required abstract shall result in the rejection and/or
denial of the application by the Township Clerk.
A. All applicants for a taxicab driver's license must possess a valid New
Jersey driver's license prior to application being made.
B. Failure to meet the requirement of this section shall result in the
rejection and/or denial of the application by the Township Clerk.
A. Applicants for a taxicab driver's license must possess the ability to
understand and speak the English language.
B. Failure to meet the requirement of this section shall result in the
rejection and/or denial of the application by the Township Clerk.
§ 350-21 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-25
1:1356
ARTICLE III
Taxicab Regulations
§ 350-26. Identification of vehicles.
§ 350-27. Parking and standing.
§ 350-28. Minimum hours of operation.
§ 350-29. Cruising.
A. The taxi license number shall be displayed on the center of the rear
quarter panels of the driver and passenger sides of the car and the rear
center line of the vehicle trunk.
B. The name of the municipality issuing the taxicab license shall be
displayed on the rear door of the driver and passenger sides of the car.
C. Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides of the
exterior of the vehicle the word "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab" or an electric
sign affixed to the top of the motor vehicle in clear view from all sides
bearing the word "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab." This provision shall not be
applicable to limousines.
D. Violating this provision shall result in penalties assigned to the taxicab
owner as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk shall suspend the taxicab license for a period of up to 30 days.
Three or more violations resulting in convictions shall result in the
owner's taxicab license being revoked for one year.
A. No person shall park any taxicab on any of the streets of the Township
at any time except at such place or places as the Council may from time
to time designate as municipal taxi stands.
B. No taxicab shall stand at the curb within 15 feet of the entrance to any
railroad station, theater, hotel, restaurant or other public place, and it
shall not stand within 25 feet of any crosswalk or fire hydrant.
C. Violating this provision shall result in penalties assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab license of the driver for a period of up to
30 days.
A. The owner of a taxicab shall operate his/her taxicab or cause to have it
operated and on duty available to the public a minimum of 40 hours
each week.
B. Violating this provision may result in the Township Clerk suspending
the owner's taxicab license for a period of seven to 30 days.
§ 350-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-29
1:1357
§ 350-30. Soliciting patrons; loitering.
§ 350-31. Inspection; reinspection; stickers.
A. No person shall cruise on the streets of the Township with any taxicab
at any time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
B. Violating this provision shall result in a fine assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab license of the driver for a period of up to
30 days.
A. No licensee shall suffer or permit persons to loiter in or about his
taxicab while on duty.
B. No licensee shall solicit business by means of outcry or hawking.
C. No licensee shall solicit the patronage of nor in any manner interfere
with persons alighting from a public bus.
D. Violating this provision shall result in penalties assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab license of the driver for a period of up to
30 days.
A. Inspection.
(1) The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Township
shall keep the vehicle in good running order so that it makes a
positive presentable appearance, and affords safe and comfortable
rides to passengers. The owner, or designee, shall present the
taxicab annually for inspection to the Chief of Police, or designated
officer, prior to the issuance or renewal of the license. This
inspection will determine if the vehicle complies with the
provisions of this chapter. Inspection results shall be recorded
using an inspection form. A copy will be given to the owner or
designee, and must be kept within the vehicle for presentation to
the Chief of Police or designee, or the Township Clerk or designee.
(2) The Township Clerk shall deny the taxicab owner's license if the
vehicle has not been presented for inspection to the Chief of Police
or designee. If the vehicle has been presented to the Chief of Police
or designee, but the inspection report has not been kept with the
vehicle, then the Township Clerk may suspend the taxicab owner's
license for the vehicle in violation for a period up to 30 days. This
chapter may be enforced by the Chief of Police or designee, or the
Township Clerk or designee.
B. Reinspection.
§ 350-29 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-31
1:1358
§ 350-32. Doors.
Vehicles used as taxicabs within the Township shall have at least one door
on each side of the vehicle for passenger use and a separate door for driver
use.
§ 350-33. Rates and fares.
(1) At the time of inspection, if the inspecting officer observes a vehicle
defect, safety defect or mechanical defect, which is in violation of
Chapter 3 of Title 39, the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code, such
officer shall fail the vehicle and require repairs be made before a
Township reinspection. The office may also order that the vehicle
be reinspected by the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles
(DMV), or a DMV-approved private inspection facility to ensure it
meets their operating and maintenance standards. Repairs and a
DMV reinspection must occur within 14 days of the failure. The
failed vehicle must be reinspected by the Chief of Police or
designee before going back into service. During the period of
failure, the vehicle shall not be used to transport passengers.
(2) Violating this provision shall result in penalties as provided in
§ 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may enforce this
section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township Clerk
shall suspend the taxicab license for a period of 15 to 60 days.
Three or more violations shall result in the taxicab license being
suspended for one year.
C. Stickers.
(1) Upon passing the required Township inspection, taxicabs shall have
a sticker affixed to their rear bumper, which will conspicuously
indicate the year of successful inspection, and which must remain
affixed during the license period. The Township Chief of Police or
his designee shall determine the size, shape and color of this
sticker.
(2) Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the
taxicab owner as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement
officer may enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal
Court, the Township Clerk may suspend the taxicab license for a
period of seven to 30 days.
A. Posting of fares required.
(1) No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in the Township unless and
until there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof within
the full view and access of any passenger therein a complete list of
fares, charges or tariff rates charged for transportation of
passengers, which fares, charges or tariff rates so displayed, and
no other, shall be charged any passengers to be transported.
§ 350-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-33
1:1359
§ 350-34. Trip tickets; reports of accidents and lost property.
§ 350-35. Passenger receipts.
(2) Violating this provision shall result in penalties assigned to the
taxicab driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement
officer may enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal
Court, the Township Clerk may suspend the taxicab driver's license
for a period of seven to 30 days.
B. Taxicab owners shall also file with the Township Clerk a notarized
statement of current fare rates. Any changes in such rates must be filed
with the Township Clerk 30 days prior to the effective date of any
change. Any fares charged in excess of the filed rates shall be cause for
license suspension.
C. Maximum rates; meters. The Council shall have the right by resolution
to set a maximum rate of fare which may be charged for one passenger
from place to place anywhere within the limits of the Township which
may, at the discretion of the Council, be established on a zone basis.
D. Advance payment; refusal to carry. Any taxicab owner or driver shall
have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance of
transporting any passengers, and such owner or driver also has the
right to refuse to transport a disorderly or unruly person.
A. The owner of each taxicab so licensed shall keep or cause to be kept
written daily record of each trip made by the taxicab showing the date,
time and place the cab was engaged, the place and time of the
discharge of the passenger, the number of passengers carried, the fare
received, distance traveled, and the taxicab driver's license number of
the person driving the cab on the trip. Such records shall be kept in a
place that is convenient for a properly authorized representative of the
Township to inspect the same, and the owner shall give his full
cooperation in expediting such inspection. There shall also be reported
to the Township Clerk or other official as the Clerk shall designate the
happening of an accident involving such taxicab or the loss of property
left in the taxicab by a passenger within 24 hours after such event.
Within three business days of any accident, the taxicab owner shall
contact the Township inspecting officer for reinspection of the vehicle.
The inspecting officer may at his discretion order a reinspection by an
approved New Jersey DMV inspection facility.
B. Violating any of these provisions shall result in a penalty assigned to the
taxicab owner as provided in § 350-7. The Chief of Police or designee, or
Township Clerk or designee may enforce this chapter. Upon conviction
in Municipal Court, the Township Clerk may suspend the taxicab
owner's license for a period of seven to 30 days.
§ 350-33 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-35
1:1360
§ 350-36. Use of front seat; permission to pick up additional
passengers.
A. The operator of each taxicab shall at all times have available a suitable
cash receipt book to write out, sign and give to any passenger
requesting the same a written receipt in the amount of the fare paid.
B. Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab driver's license for a period of seven to
30 days.
A. The operator of each taxicab shall permit no other person to occupy the
front seat of the taxicab, unless the rear seat is fully occupied by
passengers while the taxicab is on duty.
B. The operator of each taxicab shall limit the use of his vehicle on each
trip to the services of the first passenger engaging the same, unless he
shall request and obtain the permission from the first passenger to pick
up additional passengers who may share the use thereof.
C. Violating this provision shall result in a penalty assigned to the taxicab
driver as provided in § 350-7. Any sworn law enforcement officer may
enforce this section. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, the Township
Clerk may suspend the taxicab driver's license for a period of seven to
30 days.
§ 350-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-36
1:1361

ARTICLE IV
Limousines
§ 350-37. Limousine owner's licenses.
§ 350-38. Application requirements for new or renewal limousine
owner's licenses.
Each applicant for a new or renewal limousine owner's license shall submit
the following information to the Township Clerk on the approved form:
A. Any owner of a limousine(s) who has a principal place of business in the
Township shall be required to file an application and obtain a limousine
owner's license from the Township Clerk. Upon receipt of the
application, insurance policy, power of attorney and payment of
required fees, the Clerk shall issue a license showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of this
chapter. The original license shall be retained within the limousine and
be available for inspection upon request by any law enforcement officer.
B. Any owner of a limousine who desires to provide service on a point-topoint
basis within the Township shall be required to file an application
and obtain a limousine owner's license from the Township Clerk. Upon
receipt of the application, insurance policy, power of attorney and
payment of required fees, the Clerk shall issue a license showing that
the owner of the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions
of this chapter. The original license shall be retained within the
limousine and be available for inspection upon request by any law
enforcement officer.
C. The number of licenses authorized by the Township shall be 35;
however, the Township shall not be required to issue all authorized
licenses. Each license issued hereunder shall expire on the following
March 31. Fees shall not be prorated.
D. The Township Clerk shall issue, in duplicate, a license to operate to the
owner who has fulfilled the terms and provisions of this chapter. The
license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number and
date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine insured
thereunder, and the registration number of same.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt any person from full
compliance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, including N.J.S.A.
48:16-13 et seq.
F. Each applicant for a license to operate shall also be responsible for
registering each vehicle with the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-19.
A. Name of applicant, principal place of business, telephone number, email
address, fax number.
§ 350-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-38
1:1363
§ 350-39. Insurance.
No limousine service whose principal place of business is in the Township of
Franklin shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in the Township
of Franklin until the owner of the limousine or limousine service shall
have filed with the Township Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state in the
sum of $1,500,000 insuring against loss by reason of the liability imposed
B. The location of the dispatcher.
C. Whether previously licensed to operate a limousine and where; whether
such license to operate has ever been revoked and, if so, for what cause.
D. If an individual, the applicant must be at least 21 years of age and
provide present primary residential address.
E. If a corporation or partnership, the company name, main office and
branch office locations:
(1) If a corporation, the state of the corporation; the names and
primary residential addresses of all officers and directors; their
citizenship status; and a list of all stockholders who hold more than
10% of the corporate stock.
(2) If a partnership, the names and primary residential addresses of
each partner.
F. Every application shall contain the following information about each
vehicle to be used as part of the business being licensed:
(1) Year, make, model and color.
(2) Vehicle identification number.
(3) New Jersey state license plate number.
(4) Passenger capacity.
(5) Insurance company, policy number and expiration date.
(6) Location at which the vehicles will be stored.
G. A copy of the bill of sale for each limousine to be operated on the streets
of the Township of Franklin shall be filed with the application for a
license to operate.
H. A copy of the vehicle registration shall be provided to the Township
Clerk within 48 hours of the vehicle's registration with the Motor
Vehicle Commission.
I. Any application for a new or renewal license which is not completed
within 60 days of receipt of the application shall be denied and no
license shall be issued.
§ 350-38 FRANKLIN CODE § 350-39
1:1364
by law upon every limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury
or death suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by
reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any
public street.
§ 350-40. Power of attorney.
The owner of the limousine shall, concurrently with the filing of the
insurance policy described above, submit to the Township Clerk proof of the
execution and delivery to the Division of Motor Vehicles (or Motor Vehicle
Commissioner, as appropriate) of a power of attorney, wherein and whereby
the owner shall appoint the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles (or
the Chief Administrator of the Motor Vehicle Commission, as appropriate)
his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any
process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the
insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 350-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-40
1:1365
Chapter 354
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
New Jersey Bell franchise — See Ch. A400.
Telecommunications franchises — See Ch.
A401.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A402.
§ 354-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given herein:
AUTHORIZED ACTION — Any ordinance or resolution heretofore or
hereafter adopted by the Township which grants any provider access to
the Township's public road rights-of-way for the provision of
telecommunications service.
PROVIDER — Any provider of telecommunications service that has been or
will be granted access to the Township's public road rights-of-way pursuant
to any authorizing action.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ 354-2. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has in the past and may in the future grant certain providers
the nonexclusive right to use the Township's right-of-way for the provision
of telecommunications service. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
such providers.
§ 354-3. Provider's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public or private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by each provider, and each provider will
notify the Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures permitted
§ 350-40 FRANKLIN CODE § 354-3
1:1366
to be installed pursuant to the applicable authorized action prior to such
installation.
§ 354-4. Territory.
The consent granted by any authorizing action shall apply to the entirety
of Franklin Township. All questions of municipal boundary location, rights
and interest in property, federal, state, county and/or other governmental
or quasi-governmental rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall
be investigated and researched at the provider's expense; procedures
necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every such question
shall be pursued in the provider's own name; and the Township shall never
be under any obligation to perform investigations or research, conduct or
prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of engineers,
surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take any steps to define,
delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the Township.
§ 354-5. Compliance with development and other ordinances.
All providers shall at all times be subject to full and complete compliance
with Chapter 112, Land Development, of the Code of the Township, all
other Township ordinances and regulations and all rules, regulations and
laws of the applicable jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation,
and maintenance of the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto
to provide telecommunications service. Any fixture other than wires, cable,
underground conduits, terminating equipment and electronics and fiber
optic cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before
their installation.
§ 354-6. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to a provider
by any authorizing action.
§ 354-7. Fee; failure to pay. [Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3064]
A. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to a provider by
the applicable authorizing action, each provider shall pay to the
Township on an annual basis the following fees:
(1) Two hundred dollars per mile of such provider's fiber optic cable
located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township, with a
minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by a provider shall be
made on or before June 1 of each year in which access to the Township's
public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to accurately make the
payment called for on or before October 1 of each said year will result
in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive franchise granted to
such provider by the applicable authorizing action.199
§ 354-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-8
1:1367
§ 354-8. Conditions of construction.
§ 354-9. Marking of underground lines.
Each provider shall respond when requested to mark out underground lines
within 48 hours of the request.
§ 354-10. Performance bond.
To secure the faithful performance by each provider of all of its obligations
to the Township, each provider shall deliver to the Township and maintain
in force throughout the duration of the provider's access to the Township's
said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000,
conditioned on the faithful performance by such provider of all of its
undertakings pursuant to this chapter and the authorizing action. Said bond
must be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney. The
bonding company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
A. Restoration. In the event any provider shall from time to time disturb
any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures,
equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or
surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter whatsoever,
such provider shall, at its sole expense, reasonably restore and replace
such places and things so disturbed to and in not less than as good
condition as existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so, such
provider shall comply with all applicable ordinances, resolutions, laws,
rulings and regulations. All restorations shall be completed within 30
working days of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of access to the Township's
public road rights-of-way, the Township shall alter or change the grade
of any public street or highway, or alter or change the location of grade
of any public water or sewer facility or other utility facility, each
provider, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall at its own
expense remove, re-lay and relocate its cables, equipment and other
facilities in such area.
C. Temporary removal of cables. Each provider shall for the purpose of
and upon request of the Township, at its expense temporarily raise,
lower or remove its cables and associated facilities in order to facilitate
the moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and machinery and to
accommodate other like circumstances. A provider may suggest
alternatives to the temporary removal of cables where such temporary
removal may cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with
the expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the
right to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
199. Editor's Note: Former § 246-8, which previously followed this section, was repealed
9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3064.
§ 354-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 354-11
1:1368
§ 354-11. Liability insurance.
§ 354-12. Indemnity.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, each
provider shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force, at its sole
expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive general
liability insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person.
(2) $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death from any one accident.
(3) $1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident.
(4) $5,000,000 "umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily
injury and property damage for each occurrence and in the
aggregate.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Each
provider shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be canceled
without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or greater notice
if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department of Insurance.
A. Each provider shall hold and save the Township harmless from and
indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss and
liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly,
immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent contained in the
applicable authorized action;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against such provider;
(5) Any act or omission of such provider or any of its officers, directors,
employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen or
affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of the municipal consent contained in the
applicable authorized action; or
§ 354-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-12
1:1369
§ 354-13. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this chapter are for
convenience and reference only and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this chapter.
§ 354-14. Law changes.
In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this chapter, this chapter shall be automatically modified to
incorporate the change.
§ 354-15. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 359
TENANT AND HOME BUYER PROTECTION
§ 359-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tenant's and Home
Buyer's Protection Code of the Township of Franklin."
§ 359-2. Regulatory agency.
This chapter shall be administered, regulated and enforced by the Zoning
Officer of the Township. The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 359-3. Sales office requirements.
(7) The provider's action, inaction, franchise, operation, maintenance,
construction or installation of the lines, cables and fixtures
described herein and in the applicable authorizing action.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. Any owner or seller of land within the Township who has obtained a
signed site plan for 10 or more residential units or a preliminary
approval to subdivide the land into 10 or more contiguous plots or
tracts to construct homes thereon or has obtained an approval to
develop his or her land under the so-called planned unit development
concept shall, prior to the sale of the lots or homes, maintain a sales
office within the Township.
§ 354-12 FRANKLIN CODE § 359-3
1:1370
§ 359-4. Sales map requirements.
The sales map shall be a complete set of site plans or subdivision plans
approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, signed
by the Board Secretary.
§ 359-5. Display of approved sales map; periodic review by Zoning
Officer.
§ 359-6. Certificate of compliance.
Upon the completion of sale of all properties within a subdivision, and
prior to the release of the performance guaranty, the developer/seller shall
submit a signed affidavit to the Zoning Officer stating that the following
information is true:
§ 359-7. Rental property.
Any person offering the rental of any residential property, excepting
dwellings with less than four rental units, shall provide every tenant with
a copy of the New Jersey New Residential Construction Off-Site Conditions
Disclosure Act200 prior to the signing of the initial lease.
§ 359-8. Violations and penalties.
B. The sales office shall have prominently displayed therein a sales map in
such place in the office that the same may be observed and reviewed by
any persons calling at the office.
A. The sales map shall be obtained by the owner or agent of the property,
who shall have such approved sales map displayed within their sales
office, within the Township, prior to the sale of any lot.
B. The Zoning Officer shall review each sales map displayed pursuant to
the terms of this chapter not less than once every six months.
A. The sales map was on display and available for inspection by the public
in the sales office at all times.
B. All purchasers had a reasonable opportunity to study and review the
sales map.
C. The owner or seller did not refuse or decline to answer any questions
directed to him or her pertaining to the sales map.
D. The purchaser or seller waives any potential claim or cause of action in
law and equity which he or she may have against the Township as a
result of any error, omission or inaccuracy in the information supplied
by it and for any defects which may occur in connection with any
construction related to the development.
200. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:3C-1 et seq.
§ 359-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-8
1:1371
Chapter 364
TORT CLAIMS
§ 364-1. Adoption of form.201
The tort claim form on file in the office of the Township Clerk is hereby
adopted as the official notice of tort claim for the Township of Franklin.
§ 364-2. Completion of form required.
All persons making claims against the Township of Franklin pursuant to
the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq., shall be required
to complete the form herein adopted as a condition of compliance with the
notice requirements of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
Chapter 374
VEHICLES, INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 378.
§ 374-1. Parking or storage in public places.
No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable motor vehicle on any
public lands or premises except in case of emergency and then for a period
of not more than 48 hours.
A. If any person engages in the sale of lots within a subdivision of any
property, as described herein, without first displaying the sales map as
required herein, the owner of the subdivision shall be subject to the
penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, per day for
each day that the sales map is not displayed as required herein, and
each day shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
B. In addition to the foregoing, if any person continuously for a period of
five days or more fails and refuses to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, the Township may institute and maintain action for
injunctive relief to prohibit the continued sale of lots or rental of units
until compliance with this chapter is completed.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 359-8 FRANKLIN CODE § 374-2
1:1372
§ 374-2. Storage on private lands.
No person shall park, leave store or maintain any inoperable motor vehicle
for a period of more than 30 days upon any private lands or premises.
§ 374-3. Responsibility of owner or occupant.
No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit or suffer
any inoperable motor vehicle to be parked, left, stored or maintained on his
lands or premises for more than 30 days.
§ 374-4. Applicability.
Sections 374-1 through 374-3 shall not apply to lawfully operated junkyards
or to motor vehicles located or stored in garages or other buildings.
§ 374-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties included
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Every day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 378
MOTORIZED SPORT BIKES AND RELATED VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 374.
§ 374-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-5
1:1373

ARTICLE I
Use on Public and Private Property and Rights-of-Way
§ 378-1. Definitions; regulations for operation of motorized sport
bikes and related vehicles.
A. The following terms used herein shall be defined thusly:
MOTORIZED SPORT BIKE — Any two-, three- or four-wheeled bicycle,
vehicle or conveyance that is motor propelled or contains a motor to
assist the operation of said vehicle and which vehicles are commonly
referred to as dirt bikes, scooters, minibikes, go-carts, all-terrain
vehicles (ATV's), dune buggies and trail bikes, which vehicles by their
nature and design are not intended to be used and operated along
paved roads and highways but are intended rather to be operated in
dirt, sand, up and down hills, along trails and in similar type areas.
"Motorized sport bike" shall also include snowmobiles.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All lands and buildings in the Township of
Franklin not included in the definition of "public property" or part of the
public road system.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands and buildings owned or leased by the
Township of Franklin, the Franklin Township Board of Education, the
County of Somerset or the State of New Jersey or any other equivalent
public body. "Public property" shall also include any parks, ballparks,
recreation areas, lake areas, Township-owned streets, easements and
sidewalks or areas dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, Township storage facilities, Township garage area,
Board of Education properties and any and all other Township-owned
and publicly owned lands and premises. It shall also include those
public lands set forth in P.L. 2009, c.275, including any public lands
which may be subsequently identified by ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any type of motorized sport bike under
the following circumstances:
(1) To operate a motorized sport bike upon public property at any time
unless authorized as indicated below.
(2) To operate a motorized sport bike on private property, other than
that private property owned by the family of the operator, without
the written consent of all of the owners of the private property.
(3) To operate a motorized sport bike during the period of one hour
after sunset, until four hours after sunrise.
(4) To operate a motorized sport bike upon any public street, roadway,
highway or within the boundaries of the public right-of-way within
the Township of Franklin, unless permitted by the licensure and
registration requirements of P.L. 2009, c. 275, administered by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 378-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-1
1:1375
(5) To operate a motorized sport bike that causes noise so as to disturb
or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons. Such noise
shall, for purposes hereof, be defined as such noise that exceeds 65
decibels when measured at or within the real property line of the
complainant beginning four hours after sunrise and continuing
until one hour after sunset, and on any day of the year, and such
noise that exceeds 50 decibels when measured at or within the real
property line of the complainant at any other time of any day of the
year.
(6) To operate a motorized sport bike so as to cause it to propel sand,
dirt, dust, rocks, gravel or other similar materials into the air so as
to be likely to injure persons and/or damage property.
(7) To operate a motorized sport bike on public or private property in
such a way as to harass or disturb farm animals, domestic livestock
or wildlife or further to destroy or damage crops or farm produce.
(8) To operate a motorized sport bike without the motorized sport bike
containing a muffler or other similar device to reduce the sound
coming from the engine of the vehicle.
(9) To operate a motorized sport bike without the original or
replacement fenders so as to keep objects upon the ground from
being propelled into the air.
(10) To operate a motorized sport bike near any public roadway so that
the operation of said motorized bike would cause operators of
automobiles, motorcycles or trucks to have to take evasive or
irregular action to move away from said motorized sport bike.
(11) To operate a motorized sport bike without the motorized sport bike
being in proper operating condition, which means that all of the
original operating equipment specified by the original
manufacturer must be present on the bike or replacement
equipment equal to the specifications of the original
manufacturer's equipment are present and in operating condition
at least equal to the manufacturer's requirements for the proper
operation thereof.
(12) To operate a motorized sport bike on any private street or right-ofway
within the Township of Franklin without the written permission
of the owner of the private street or right-of-way.
(13) To operate a motorized sport bike in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner which endangers the safety of any person,
including the operator himself, or the property of any person.
(14) To operate a motorized sport bike while under the influence of
liquor or drugs in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
39:4-50.
§ 378-1 FRANKLIN CODE § 378-1
1:1376
§ 378-2. General regulations.
(15) To operate a snowmobile within the Township under the following
circumstances:
(a) On any private street or right-of-way.
(b) On public grounds within the Township without the express
written permission or approval of the public authority having
charge or control thereof and then only in accordance with
such rules and regulations as such public authority may
impose.
(c) In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other
persons. Such noise shall, for purposes hereof, be defined as
such noise that exceeds 65 decibels when measured at or
within the real property line of the complainant, beginning four
hours after sunrise and continuing until one hour after sunset,
and on any day of the year, and such noise that exceeds 50
decibels when measured at or within the real property line of
the complainant at any other time of any day of the year.
(d) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or persons or
the property of any person or persons.
(16) To the degree not covered above, on public property without
express written provision or written permission to do so by the
proper public authority in accordance with P.L. 2009, c.275.
(17) To clean, maintain, repair or operate a motorized sport bike or
snowmobile in the driveway of any residential property, or on any
portion of private property, for more than 15 minutes in any hour,
no more than two times per day for a total of 30 minutes, unless
sound levels are at or below 65 decibels when measured at or
within the real property line of the complainant, beginning four
hours after sunrise and continuing until one hour after sunset, and
on any day of the year, and/or at or below 50 decibels when
measured at or within the real property line of the complainant at
any other time of any day of the year. For purposes hereof,
"driveway" shall be defined to mean a private driveway, road, field
road, or other traveled way, giving access from a public road or a
private road to one or more structures on a residential property.
(18) In any manner that fails to conform with the licensing and
operational requirements of P.L. 2009, c.275, upon its effective
date, which requires motorized sport bikes to be licensed and
registered in accordance therewith.
§ 378-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-2
1:1377
§ 378-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 378-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be subject
to the penalties included in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, or as
applicable, to those penalties provided for in P.L. 2009, c.275, upon its
effective date.
A. The operator of a motorized sport bike shall wear a (ANSI-regulation or
a MV-regulation approved) helmet upon his head and goggles or face
shields over his face.
B. No person operating a motorized sport bike or motorcycle shall engage
in trick riding or shall ride without maintaining full control of the
motorized sport bike or shall remove both hands from the handlebar.
C. No person operating a motorized sport bike shall carry any other
person on it except in a place designated for such purpose and
equipped for such purpose as part of the original manufacture for said
purpose.
A. Police and emergency vehicles;
B. Farm or lawn maintenance vehicles specifically being used for farming
activities, yard work and/or snow removal;
C. Motorized sport bikes or snowmobiles engaged in government or
emergency functions, including but not limited to utility repair, search
and rescue operations, firefighting or vehicles engaged in scientific
research in otherwise inaccessible areas;
D. Motorized sport bikes or snowmobiles in transit to or from public
roadways or when being loaded or unloading from their transport
vehicles;
E. Lawn mowers, tractors, lawn, garden or similar equipment for
residential use. This equipment must however operate with a factoryinstalled
or functionally equivalent muffler;
F. Public celebrations that are government-sponsored or governmentpermitted
events;
G. Permitted motor vehicle racetracks;
H. Safety training by a certified instructor under the Motorcycle Safety
Foundation (MSF) or another sanctioned curriculum and with written,
permitted approval from the Township; or
I. Any other vehicle exempt from the licensing and operational
requirements of P.L. 2009, c.275.
§ 378-2 FRANKLIN CODE § 378-4
1:1378
ARTICLE II
Use of Motorized Bicycles or Motorized Sport Bikes on Bike Paths
§ 378-5. Unlawful areas of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any motorized bicycle or motorized sport bike to be
operated upon, through or over the following described lands or portions
thereof:
§ 378-6. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, or as applicable, to those penalties
provided for in P.L. 2009, c.275, upon its effective date.
A. The bike path located along the entire length of John F. Kennedy
Boulevard from Amwell Road to Easton Avenue.
B. The bike path located along Easton Avenue from John F. Kennedy
Boulevard to Cedar Grove Lane.
C. Any other paths or public lands which may be subsequently identified
by ordinance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2009, c.
275.
§ 378-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-6
1:1379
Chapter 384
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 146.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 201.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 333.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 340.
§ 378-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 378-6
1:1380
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 384-1. Terms defined.
Whenever in this chapter the following words, clauses or terms are used,
they shall be construed to mean and shall have the meanings herein defined,
unless otherwise specifically stated:
AGENT — Any duly authorized representative of the owner.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works and may also be construed to
include the Assistant Director or Acting Director thereof.
DIVISION — The Water Division of the Department of Public Works of the
Township of Franklin.
MAIN — Construed either in the singular or plural to mean all pipes, other
than service connections, conveying water to or distributing water from the
Township of Franklin water supply.
OCCUPANT — Any person, persons, corporation, partnership or association
or anyone other than the owner thereof occupying or in possession of
property or premises which is or can be supplied with water service.
OWNER — Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or association
owning or claiming to own or any mortgagee in possession of any property
or premises which is or can be supplied with water service.
PRIVATE MAIN — A main running through private property or in a private
street to serve more than one home or other buildings or properties.
SERVICE CONNECTIONS or SERVICE PIPE or SERVICE LINE
CONNECTIONS — A pipe or pipes connected to a main and extending
thence to privately owned property or premises for supplying water service
thereto.
TOWNSHIP OF FRANKLIN — Includes the Township Council, the Township
Manager or any officer, agent or employee of the Township of Franklin
acting under authorization and in an official capacity by and for the
Township of Franklin, Somerset County, New Jersey.
§ 384-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-1
1:1381

ARTICLE II
Service Connections
§ 384-2. Tapping.
The Township will tap the main up to and including a two-inch deep tap and
provide a service connection from the main to the curb, curb stopcock and
curb box. All taps larger than two inches shall be made by the applicant
at the applicant's expense. In the case of major subdivisions where the
waterline is being furnished by the developer, the main may be tapped by
employees of the developer. All taps made by other than the Township will
be inspected by a representative of the Water Department.
§ 384-3. Connections maintained by owner; specifications.
The service connection from the curb box to the meter must be installed and
maintained by the owner.
§ 384-4. Repair of damage; costs.
The owner must repair any damage to a curb box within seven days of
service of notice by the Director, and in the event of his failure to do so, the
Township of Franklin may make the necessary repairs, charging the costs
thereof to the owner to be collected as other charges, except where the
damage was the direct result of the negligence of the Township, its agents,
servants or employees.
§ 384-5. Leaks.
When tests made by the Township indicate a leak in a service connection,
notice to repair the same within 24 hours will be served upon the owner.
If the notice is not complied with, the Township may shut off the tap
controlling the service connection or, in the alternative, may make any
necessary repairs and charge all costs thereof to the owner, to be collected
as other charges.
A. It shall consist of Type-K copper or approved plastic tubing and shall be
laid a minimum of 3 1/2 feet below the surface. When plastic tubing is
utilized, a metal wire shall be installed adjacent to the tubing so that a
metal detector can locate said line.
B. The minimum inside diameter of a service connection shall be one inch,
and such diameter shall not be less than that of the tap controlling it.
C. The surface connection shall be run as far as practicable at right angles
to the main and in a straight line to the meter, and there shall be no
attachment thereon from which water can be drawn between the meter
and the main.
D. The curb box shall be in sight on a level with the ground service and
free from obstruction at all times.
§ 384-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-6
1:1383
§ 384-6. Inspections.
All plumbing and other work from the main to the meter is subject to the
inspection and approval of the Township or its agents, and all such work
shall be inspected and approved before the pipes are covered and the water
supply furnished.
§ 384-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-6
1:1384
ARTICLE III
Application for Water Service
§ 384-7. Contents of application; inspections and tests; fees.
[Amended 12-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1614; 3-11-1998 by Ord. No.
2062; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3748; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3770]
A. Applications for water supply must be made on the forms furnished by
the Township for such purpose. The application must be made by the
owner of the premises or property or his authorized agent, shall state to
whom the fill for water rates and charges shall be rendered (either
owner or agent) and shall specify the purpose for which the water is to
be used, the type and character of the building and, when used for
construction or other special purposes, it must be so stated on the
application, and there shall be submitted therewith any fees necessary
to be paid in advance by this chapter.
B. Persons desiring a one-inch tap to be made on a specified day shall
make application therefor at least two weeks prior to said date; persons
desiring installation of a tab larger than one inch on a specified day
shall make application therefor at least 20 days prior to said date. The
Department will not, however, guarantee to any applicant that any tap
will be made on a specified date but will reasonably attempt to do so.
C. The Township shall, as part of said application, conduct an inspection
subsequent to the installation of any water supply to insure that such
water supply was constructed and installed in accordance with the
approved application and plans. In the event such inspection shall
reveal any deviations from the approved application and plans, the
applicant shall correct all such deviations and shall pay an additional
fee to the Township in the amount of $25 for each subsequent
inspection required as a result of such deviations.
(1) All newly drilled wells within the Township must have the water
from same analyzed and a certified report issued for potability by a
state-certified lab for the following indications:
(a) Coliform.
(b) Nitrate.
(c) pH.
(d) Manganese.
(e) Iron.
(f) Volatile organic compounds with MCLs.
(g) Sulfates.
(h) Arsenic.
§ 384-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-7
1:1385
§ 384-8. Applications for premises with delinquent accounts.
No application for water supply or service to be furnished to premises
against which there is an outstanding undisputed, delinquent account will
be accepted.
§ 384-9. Written application; tap fees.
All applications for installation of, change in or replacement of service
connections shall be made in writing, by the owner or his agent and shall, if
a new tap on the main is necessary, be accompanied by the payment of the
required tap fee in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
§ 384-10. Closing of curb stops.
When a tap has been made for a new service connection, curb stops shall
be closed and shall not be opened unless a meter has been set and installed
or unless the owner or authorized agent applies for construction water and
has paid the appropriate fees.
(i) Lead.
(2) The provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:10-7.2 are expressly incorporated
herein to permit the Health Department to determine that water is
unacceptable if, in the judgment of the Health Department,
physical, chemical or biological characteristics render the water
unduly unpalatable or aesthetically objectionable.
(3) A copy of such test results shall be filed with the Health
Department within 10 days of certification by such laboratory. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless such results have
been issued by the Health Department for such wells.
D. One shall obtain local Health Department approval and a permit before
constructing a public noncommunity or nonpublic water system
(private well). "Nonpublic water systems" are defined as a water system
that is not a public water system. "Public noncommunity water system"
is defined as a public water system that is not a community water
system. A "public community water system" is defined as a public water
system which serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round
residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents.
(1) Fee to drill a well: $75.
(2) Fee to install a pump: $25.
E. For a permit for the abandonment of an individual or semipublic water
system: $50.
F. Any permit issued for the installation of an individual or semipublic
water supply shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of its
issuance.
§ 384-7 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-11
1:1386
§ 384-11. Construction water. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
4287-19]
Fire hydrant use is permitted only with the use of a water meter.
A. The fee to rent a three-fourths-inch meter adaptable only to garden
hose requires a deposit of $500 plus a water usage deposit of $500.
B. The fee to rent a three-inch meter adaptable to a fire hose of 2 1/2
inches requires a deposit of $2,000 plus a water usage deposit of
$1,000.
C. All deposits must be made by cash, money order, cashier's check or
certified check payable to the Township of Franklin Water Utility.
Charges for use will be based upon the current water rate and will be
deducted from the deposit. The remaining moneys will be returned to
the applicant.
D. Rental fees for a three-fourths-inch meter are $2 per day; rental fees for
a three-inch meter are $5 per day. Only Franklin Township meters are
permitted.
E. Meter readings must be submitted weekly to the Franklin Water Utility
or a penalty of $5 per day will be deducted from the deposit.
§ 384-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-11
1:1387

ARTICLE IV
Water Rates and Meter Charges
§ 384-12. Quarterly consumption charges. [Amended 5-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 1960; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 3314; 10-14-2003 by Ord. No.
3403; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3518; 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 3969;
11-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3994; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 4015-13]
The rates for water to water users in the Township shall, for users of such
water be as follows:
§ 384-13. Definitions. [Added 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 3397; amended
8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 4208-17]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REDUCED-RATE USE —
A. All gallonage as of April 1, 2013: $5.66.
B. Minimum charge per quarter effective April 1, 2013:
Meter Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge
(per quarter)
5/8 - 3/4 $56.60
1 $135.84
1 1/4 $169.80
1 1/2 $271.68
2 $339.60
3 $509.40
4 $679.20
6 $1,171.62
8 $1,698.00
As provided for in N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-10.1, any person who is enlisted in
any branch of the United States Armed Forces during the period of time
in which that person is deployed for active service in time of war as
provided by state law; or
A.
The person residing in a dwelling house owned by her/him to whom
the periodic rates, rentals or other charges for water supply services
or sewerage service are charged or from whom they are collected, and
who is of the age of 65 or more years, or less than 65 years of age
and permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions of
the Federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq., or disabled
under any federal law administered by the United States Department
B.
§ 384-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-13
1:1389
§ 384-14. Minimum service rates for reduced-rate users. [Added
9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 3397; amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 4208-17]
The reduced-rate users described in § 384-13A above shall be entitled to a
50% reduction on the minimum charge per quarter, as indicated in § 384-12,
for each quarter they are actually deployed. The reduced rate users
described in § 384-13B shall be entitled to a 15% reduction on the minimum
charge per quarter as indicated in § 384-12.
§ 384-15. Application for reduced rates. [Added 9-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 3397]
Any person seeking to qualify himself/herself as a reduced-rate payer shall
file a written application with the Collector of Revenues certifying they
have meet all the requirements of the definition of reduce-rate user. The
Collector of Revenues will review the application and approve or disapprove
the application. If disapprove the Collector of Revenues shall provide a
written explanation to the applicant.
§ 384-16. Effective date of reduced rates. [Added 9-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 3397]
The reduced rate shall be effective the next billing cycle after approval of
the application for discount rates.
of Veterans Affairs if the disability is rated as 60% or higher, and
the person either is annually eligible to receive assistance under the
Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled (PAAD) Program,
P.L. 1975, c. 194 (N.J.S.A. 30:4D-20 et seq.) or has a total income not in
excess of $10,000 per year exclusive of benefits under any one of the
following:
The Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.) and all
amendments and supplements thereto;
(1)
Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any
other federal law which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu
of benefits referred to in or for persons excluded from coverage
under Subsection B(1) of this section, including but not limited to
the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974, 45 U.S.C § 231 et
seq., and federal pension disability and retirement programs; or
(2)
Pension, disability or retirement program of any state or its
political subdivision, or agencies thereof, for person not covered
under Subsection B(1) of this section except that the total amount
of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under Subsection
B(2) or (3) of this section shall not be in excess of the maximum
amount of benefits payable to and allowed for exclusion by an
owner in similar circumstances under Subsection B(1) of this
section.
(3)
§ 384-13 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-16
1:1390
ARTICLE V
Other Charges and Fees
§ 384-17. Late charges; estimated bills.
If bills rendered are not paid within 30 days of the billing date, interest of
8% will be added to the bill. In the event that there is a stopped meter or the
Township is unable to get a reading, the customer shall receive an estimated
bill.
§ 384-18. Fire line service charges. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 1699; 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1787; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 3314;
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 3969; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 4015-13]
There shall be a charge for fire service as follows:
§ 384-19. Curb connection capital fees. [Amended 11-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 1523; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 1699; 5-13-1998 by Ord. No
2080; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3487; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3655;
3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3742; 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 3856]
Charges for curb connection shall be calculated as follows:
A. Private fire hydrants located on private property: quarterly charge of
$248 for each such fire hydrant. The charge is for fire service only. The
owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of said hydrants.
B. Private fire line service charges: For each fire line service connection, a
minimum quarterly service charge shall be made as follows:
Services Size
(inches) Effective 4-1-2013
2 or smaller $236.26
4 $460.16
6 $659.57
8 $858.96
10 $1,058.35
12 $1,257.73
A. The number of equivalent single-family connections, referred to as
"equivalent units," within the district shall be determined annually on
or about January 1. One equivalent unit shall be defined as the average
daily flow of water to an average single-family residence within the
utility's district and which shall equal in amount 206 gallons per day.
Facilities other than single-family residences shall be assigned a total
number of equivalent units equal to the facility's average daily demand
divided by the flow established for one equivalent unit.
§ 384-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-19
1:1391
B. The total system cost shall include debt service costs and capital
expenditures less any nonreimbursable gifts, grants, subsidies, etc.,
and shall be defined annually on or about January 1.
C. The connection fee for an equivalent unit for the current year shall
equal the ratio of the total historical system cost through the previous
year to the total number of equivalent units for the previous year. The
fee to be paid, for a particular connection, will be equal to the number
of equivalent units for the connection multiplied by the connection fee
for an equivalent unit.
D. Determination of number of equivalent units.
(1) The Township Council shall annually, on or before January 1 of each
year, adopt a resolution fixing and determining the total number of
equivalent units for the previous year, the total system cost for the
previous year and the connection charge for the present year in
accordance with the formula set forth in this chapter.
(2) The connection fee for one equivalent unit in Franklin Township for
the period January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 shall be
$2,305.04 based on a system cost in CY2018 of $66,818,513 and
28,988 equivalent units. The connection fee for a given year is
based on the system costs and total connections for the previous
year. (1990 fee/12-12-1989; 1991 fee/2-12-1991; fee/1-14-1992;
1993 fee/1-25-1994; 1995 fee/1-24-1995; 1997 fee/2-11-1997; 1998
fee/2-25-1998; FY2001 fee/9-12-2000; FY2003 fee/7-9-2002;
FY2005 fee/9-14-2004; FY2007 fee/2-13-2006; FY2008 fee/
3-11-2008; FY2010 fee/11-10-2009; CY2013 fee/02-26-2013;
CY2014 fee/07-08-2014). [Amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No.
4005; 7-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4065-14; 9-27-2016 by Ord. No.
4164-16; 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 4269-19]
E. No connection fee shall be charged for any building, construction and
property of whatsoever kind and type owned and/or operated by
Franklin Township or its public school system which are now directly or
indirectly connected with or which may in the future be connected to
the water system.
(1) Curb connection tap fee. Charges for curb connection tap fees shall
be calculated as follows: [Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No.
4164-16]
Tap Fees Size
(inches) Effective 10-1-2016
1 $3,113.15
1 1/4 $3,227.65
1 1/2 $3,341.90
2 $3,463.65
§ 384-19 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-20
1:1392
§ 384-20. Meter charges. [Amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3373;
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4164-16]
A. The schedule of charges for meters shall be as follows:
Meter Size and Description 5/8 x 3/4, with connection
Meter Price $320
Installation Inspection $5
Total $395
B. For meters greater than 5/8 inch by 3/4 inch, the charge for the meter
shall be computed on the basis of the cost of the meter, plus a surcharge
of 35%. In addition, the installation and inspection charge of $75 shall
also apply and be included in the cost.
C. The fee for water meter final inspection or reread inspection shall be
$40 per service.
§ 384-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-20
1:1393

ARTICLE VI
Water Main Extensions
[Amended 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 4114-15]
§ 384-21. Approval and supervision required.
An applicant may install the water main at his own expense in accordance
with plans submitted in triplicate for approval by the Township Engineer/
Director of Public Works and under the direction of the Township Public
Works Manager.
§ 384-22. Requirements to be met.
The main and appurtenances will be located and be sized to agree with the
Master Plan for the water system and provide for the completion of loops
where necessary. The extension will be carried from the existing water main
to at least the center line of the tract of the owner or as determined by
Fire Prevention. All the above functions are to be performed at the cost and
expense of the developer.
§ 384-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-22
1:1395

ARTICLE VII
Discontinuance of Service
§ 384-23. Reasons.
The Township may discontinue the service of water for any of the following
reasons:
§ 384-24. Service charge for reinstatement of water supply.
[Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4164-16]
A service charge of $75 will be made for turning on the water supply where
it has been found necessary to discontinue service of water by reason of the
infraction of any regulation of this chapter or where water has been turned
off at the owner’s request.
§ 384-25. Voluntary discontinuance.
No voluntary discontinuance of service will be effective unless the owner or
occupant gives at least two days' written notice thereof to the Township.
A. Violation by the owner or occupant of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any ordinances of the Township of Franklin relative to the
use and sale of water.
B. For tampering with any service connection pipe or line, meter, curb
stop or any other appliance belonging to the Township.
C. For the refusal of reasonable access to property for the purpose of
inspection or for reading meters.
D. For the failure to maintain in good condition any branch connection
therefrom, any service pipe or service connection.
E. For failure to pay water usage bills within 20 days after notice of
delinquency is mailed. Notice of delinquency should be mailed 21 days
after the due date of the water usage bills. [Amended 11-27-1990 by
Ord. No. 1607]
§ 384-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-25
1:1397

ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 384-26. Connection to main.
When a house is constructed on a public street within 250 feet of a public
water main in that street, the owner will be required to extend the main,
and only one meter per tap will be permitted.
§ 384-27. Multiple meters in apartment buildings.
In apartment buildings, separate meters on a common service line may be
permitted, but the owner will pay the same for the second and for each
succeeding meter.
§ 384-28. Use of water for certain purposes prohibited.
Water must not be allowed to run to waste to prevent freezing in the service
pipes or their attachments or for any other purposes, except when taken
through a meter, and must not be used for any other purposes than those
indicated in the application and permit for same.
§ 384-29. Meter required in every building.
A meter will be required in every house or building supplied with water
from the mains.
§ 384-30. Tampering with curb stop.
The stop at the curb shall not be used or tampered with other than by an
authorized agent of the Water Division.
§ 384-31. Personal consumption; changes of use.
No consumer shall supply water to any other person or family or suffer them
to take it except for use on his own premises and for the purposes specified
in the application, nor shall he, after water is introduced into any building or
upon any premises, make any changes affecting the water supply without a
written permit from the Director stating the particular changes to be made
and purposes for which the water is to be used.
§ 384-32. Notice of vacancies.
Owners of houses that become vacant must give notice, in writing, of such
vacancy at the office of the Water Division so that the water may be turned
off. If the water is left on during the vacancy, the customary rent will be
charged. No deduction in water rent will be made for an unexpired quarter,
nor will any deduction be made if the owner fails to report the vacancy as
above stated.
§ 384-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-33
1:1399
§ 384-33. Notice of discontinuance.
Any consumer wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the
mains must give two days' notice thereof, in writing, at the office of the
Water Division.
§ 384-34. Use of fire hydrants.
All persons are prohibited from opening or in any way interfering with any
fireplug or hydrant for any purpose whatever except under the direction
of the Director or his agent. The Chiefs of the various volunteer fire
companies, assistant officers and members of said departments are
authorized to use the hydrants and plugs for the purpose of extinguishing
fires or cleaning their engines and hose or department materials or making
trails of the hose or department, but all such use shall be under the
direction and supervision of the respective Chief or his assistants, and in
no event shall an inexperienced or incompetent person be permitted to
manipulate or control in any way any hydrant, plug or other fixture.
§ 384-35. Fire-suppression systems.
If standpipes, sprinkler systems or other devices used or to be used solely
for the suppression of fires are designed and maintained as independent
and separate systems which are capable of use only for suppression of
fire, no charge shall be made for water used in such standpipes or other
systems. Any owner desiring to install or maintain any standpipe, sprinkler
system or other device for the suppression of fire shall make application to
the Water Division, which application shall show the existing or proposed
independent system. If the system meet all requirements of the Water
Division, the application shall be approved by the Director. Such approved
systems shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Director of Public
Works or his authorized agents. No person, firm or corporation shall make
any connection to any such approved independent system or suffer or
permit the making of any tap or connection whereby water may be drawn
from such system for use other than purposes of fire suppression and
testing of system. No alteration in or extensions to any approved system
shall be made without first notifying the Director.
§ 384-36. Street openings.
Street openings for the purpose of installing or repairing waterlines must
be made in accordance with all applicable Township ordinances.202
§ 384-37. Consent of Director required for alterations.
No person shall attached, alter or extend any water pipe nor make any
alterations in any tap stop or other fixture nor do any work calculated to
increase the facilities for using water nor turn on or off the connection to
the main or at the curb without first having the consent of the Director.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 333, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 384-33 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-38
1:1400
§ 384-38. Interference with inspection prohibited.
No person shall prevent or hinder any Township employees from making
inspections at any reasonable time of all service connections, meters, taps
and fixtures.
§ 384-39. Tampering with meters.
No person, other than employees of the Township, shall break or remove
any seal placed upon any meter by the Township or its agents or employees,
nor shall any person tamper with, deface or attempt to alter any meter. The
owner shall be responsible for all meter repairs occasioned by other than
ordinary wear, and the cost of repairs becoming necessary by reason of the
negligent or willful conduct of the owner or any other person, except an
agent of the Township, shall, if remaining unpaid for more than 30 days
after billing, become a lien on the owner's property and shall be collected
as other charges.
§ 384-40. Storage of dangerous substances.
No person shall keep or store any explosives, acids or other substances
likely to insure or damage the water supply system within 50 feet of any
of the mains or appurtenances of the water supply or distribution system
without first obtaining a permit from the Director.
§ 384-41. Taps and connections by authorized persons only.
No person shall tap or connect any water main or insert a stopcock therein
except duly authorized employees of the Township or as authorized by the
Director of Public Works.
§ 384-42. Tampering with valves.
No person, except a Township employee or other authorized person, shall
open or close any valve in the public main or tamper or interfere with any
valve or valve box cover.
§ 384-43. Connection to supply appropriate premises only.
No person shall use a service connection to supply premises or property
other than that particularly described in the application hereinabove
provided.
§ 384-44. Meter testing. [Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4164-16;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 4272-19]
A. An owner may request that his meter be removed and tested in order to
determine its accuracy. If tests indicate that the meter is recording in
excess of 102% on a full flow, the owner shall be entitled to an
adjustment in his last quarterly bill on the basis of the percentage in
excess of 102%, and no charge shall be made for the test. If the test
§ 384-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-44
1:1401
§ 384-45. Joints.
When the distance from the curb stop to the house or building to be serviced
is less than 50 feet and the pipe is 1 1/2 inches or less in diameter, no joints
shall be permitted. No sweat joints shall be permitted underground between
the main and the meter. Only flared, IPS brass and approved compression
joints shall be allowed.
§ 384-46. Conditions for laying water service pipes.
No water service pipes nor any underground water pipes shall be run or laid
in the same trench with a sewer service or drainage piping, unless:
indicates that the meter is recording less than 102% on a full flow,
no adjustment in the owner's bill shall be made, and the owner shall
be charged $50 for making the test. No adjustment shall be made in
any owner's bill because of leaks or for any other reason, except as
hereinabove set forth.
B. Meters two inches and larger are required to be tested once each year.
The testing is done by a testing company approved by the Water
Department. The cost of this testing is paid for by the customer, and
certification of such test be sent to the Water Department.
C. Irrigation meters (regardless of the size) are required to be tested
before the beginning of each season, once each year. The testing is done
by a testing company approved by the Water Department. The cost of
this testing is paid for by the customer, and certification of such test be
sent to the Water Department.
A. The bottom of the water service pipe, at all joints, is at least 18 inches
above the top of the adjacent sewer line or drainage piping;
B. The water service pipe shall be placed on a firm foundation at one side
of the common ditch;
C. The materials and joints of the building drain and building sewer shall
be installed in such manner and shall possess the necessary strength
and durability to prevent the escape of solids, liquids and gases
therefrom under all known adverse conditions, such as corrosion,
strains due to temperature changes, settlement vibrations and
superimposed loads; and
D. Building sewers installed in the same trench with the water service pipe
must be constructed of durable materials which are corrosive-resistant
and are installed so as to remain watertight and rustproof. Only sewer
pipe with watertight joints, as approved by the Director, shall be
acceptable for this construction.
§ 384-44 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-47
1:1402
§ 384-47. Installation and reading of meters.
All water meters shall be installed so that they may be read from the outside
of the building. A two-part meter shall be installed in which the dial system
is located on the outside of the building and is easily accessible for reading,
excluding commercial buildings.
§ 384-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-47
1:1403

ARTICLE IX
Water Conservation
[Amended 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 4074-14]
§ 384-48. Water conservation rules.
A. Water conservation rules during nonemergency periods. Except as may
be further restricted in accordance with § 384-49 below, the use of
water within the Township of Franklin, regardless of the source of
supply (e.g., public water supplies, well or groundwater, lakes, streams
or ponds), unless expressly exempt in Subsection B, Exemptions. Such
water use shall conform to the following:
(1) Lawn watering and irrigation.
(a) "Lawn watering" is defined as the watering of land by artificial
means to foster plant growth utilizing a hose.
(b) "Irrigation" is defined as the watering of land by artificial
means to foster plant growth with an installed permanent
irrigation system.
(2) All citizens shall be urged to observe indoor conservation measures
at all times; and
(3) Lawn watering with a hose or hose-end sprinkler:
(a) Advisory: Residents of single- and two-family homes utilizing
public water or on large lots are urged to only water properties
two days per week.
(b) Mandatory: Residents of single- and two-family homes utilizing
wells on lots of less than 40,000 square feet in the R-20, R-15,
R-10, R-10A, R-10B, R-7, R-7 SF, R-7 2F, C-R SF, C-R 2F, C-R
APT TNH, N-B and OP zones may only water properties two
days per week. Properties with even-number addresses may
only water on even days of the month, and properties with oddnumber
addresses may only water on odd days of the month.
Homeowners' associations with common areas on both sides of
the streets must select either odd or even, but not both.
(c) In order to minimize evaporation and to conserve water as
much as possible, watering is recommended to be conducted
during the cooler parts of the days, ideally before 9:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m.
(d) The watering of any single area shall not exceed 30 minutes
per day.
(e) Flowers and shrubs may be watered as needed with a handheld
hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle, a drip
§ 384-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-48
1:1405
watering system, which use shall not exceed 15 minutes per
watering area, with a hose or a handheld watering can.
(f) No hose or hose-end watering shall be permitted when it is
raining.
(4) Irrigating lawns and landscapes with automatic irrigation systems
equipped with a conventional irrigation controller. (This includes
all systems that do not have a SMART controller as defined in
Subsection A(5).
(a) Advisory: Citizens are urged to irrigate two days per week.
Properties with even-number addresses should only irrigate on
Mondays and Thursdays; properties with odd-number
addresses should only irrigate on Tuesdays and Fridays.
Homeowners' associations with common areas on both sides of
the streets should water on either Monday and Thursday or
Tuesday and Friday, but not both.
(b) Irrigation shall only be conducted between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m.
(c) Operation of any irrigation zone equipped with spray (mist)
heads shall not exceed 15 minutes per zone. Operation of any
irrigation zone equipped with rotary sprinkler heads shall not
exceed 50 minutes per zone.
(5) Irrigation with systems equipped with a SMART controller:
(a) To qualify for this provision, the SMART controller must have
met the minimum requirements of IA-SWAT protocol testing.
Lists of climate-based and sensor-based controllers that have
successfully completed the protocol testing can be found at
http://www.irrigation.org/SWAT/Industry/ ia-tested.asp.
(b) The property owner must register the SMART controller with
the municipality.
[1] The municipality will issue a yard placard, which the
owner must display, signifying that the property is
irrigated with a SMART controller.
(c) The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA
WaterSense partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape
Irrigation Contractor Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
[1] The SMART controller must be programmed to irrigate
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m.;
[2] Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/
irrigation information must be entered;
§ 384-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-48
1:1406
[3] The SMART controller programming data shall be posted
at the controller;
[4] The WaterSense partner must make a minimum of two site
visits after the initial programming to adjust and fine tune
the irrigation schedule.
(6) Irrigation systems programmed and monitored by an irrigation
manager.
(a) The property owner must designate a qualified person who will
be the irrigation manager and register that person with the
municipality with defining qualifications. The designated
person may be an employee, a contractor or any other person
so designated by the property owner. Registration shall be
limited to filing the name, address, telephone contact number
and qualifications of the designated person, the property
address, including block and lot number.
[1] The municipality will issue a yard placard, which the
owner must display, signifying that the property is
irrigated by an irrigation manager.
(b) The irrigation manager must be an EPA WaterSense partner or
show evidence of successfully completing one of the approved
courses listed below:
[1] Rutgers University Continuing Education Course,
Irrigation Systems: Scheduling.
[2] Irrigation Association's online course, Landscape
Irrigation Scheduling.
[3] A comparable course offered by a recognized continuing
education facility or professional association.
(c) A property-specific irrigation program shall be developed by
the irrigation manager based on plant variety, soil type,
exposure, slope, precipitation rate, and irrigation efficiency.
(d) Weekly adjustments shall be made to the irrigation schedule
based on current evapotranspiration (ET) rates or weather
conditions.
(7) All automatic irrigation systems:
(a) Shall be equipped with an operational automatic rain sensor
device, which disables the system when a predetermined
amount of rainfall has occurred (1/4 inch). Each rain sensor
device shall be capable of and programmed to interrupt the
automatic irrigation cycle when 1/4 inch of rain has fallen.
§ 384-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-48
1:1407
(b) Any work performed on a system as a result of any inspection
made by the homeowner or a professional must be in
compliance with the Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3).
(c) Flowers and shrubs irrigated with drip or micro irrigation may
be watered as needed.
(8) All new irrigation systems must comply with the following:
(a) The system must be installed by an EPA WaterSense partner
who holds a New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
(b) New Jersey irrigation best management design practices are
listed below. More information on these practices can be found
in the Landscaping For Water Conservation Guide located on
the Franklin Township website.
[1] Designing a system that insures sufficient operating
pressure at the sprinkler head;
[2] Dividing irrigated areas into hydrozones of turf and plants
with similar water requirements;
[3] Creating zoning systems according to exposure;
[4] Considering the soil type so the sprinkler irrigation
precipitation rate is compatible with the soil infiltration
rate or dividing the zone runtimes into multiple short
cycles;
[5] Providing separate control of sloped areas;
[6] Preventing sprinkler heads from overthrowing onto
driveways, roads, and sidewalks;
[7] Providing for separate irrigation for parkway strips
between curbs and sidewalks that minimizes overthrow
onto walks, pavement, and other impervious surfaces;
[8] Using pressure-regulating technology as necessary to
ensure sprinkler heads operate within the manufacturer's
recommended range. The pressure regulation may be:
[a] A pressure regulation device at the point of
connection;
[b] Pressure regulation at each remote control valve;
[c] Pressure regulation at the sprinkler head;
[d] A combination of the above.
§ 384-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-48
1:1408
[9] Irrigating all flowers and shrubs with drip and/or micro
irrigation;
[10] Including check valves in low sprinkler heads to prevent
low-point drainage;
[11] Having a pressure regulating device and wye strainer on
each drip/micro control valve.
(c) The system must have a SMART controller capable of
estimating or measuring depletion of available plant soil
moisture and operating the irrigation system only to replenish
the water as needed while minimizing excess water use.
[1] The SMART controller must have undergone SWAT testing
and be listed on the EPA WaterSense website.
http://www.epa.gov/ watersense/product search.html,
http://www.swatirrigation.org. (Choose Irrigation
controllers.)
[2] The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA
WaterSense partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape
Irrigation Contractor Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:5AA-3.
[a] Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/
irrigation information must be entered;
[b] The SMART controller programming data shall be
posted at the controller;
[c] The WaterSense partner must make a minimum of two
site visits after the initial programming to adjust and
fine tune the irrigation schedule.
(9) Washing of vehicles, decks, and driveways.
(a) Vehicles, decks, and driveways may be washed on any day, but
only with a power washer or handheld hose equipped with an
automatic shutoff device.
(b) If runoff water drains to a storm sewer or stream, only
biodegradable, phosphate-free detergents (or none) may be
used.
(10) Violators are subject to fines as described in § 384-50 of this article.
(11) Upon the declaration of water emergency by the Franklin Township
Council, additional restrictions identified in § 384-49 shall
supersede the restrictions in this section.
(12) State of New Jersey requirements shall supersede those identified
in this section when more stringent than those identified in this
article.
§ 384-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-48
1:1409
§ 384-49. Water use restrictions during water emergencies.
B. Exemptions. Restrictions in Subsection A above do not apply to the
following:
(1) Outdoor water use from rainwater harvesting, gray water, or
reclaimed water are exempt from the provisions of this article. Use
of gray or reclaimed water must have an approved NJPDES permit
issued through the NJDEP.
(2) Outdoor water use for commercial farms producing harvestable
crops, commercial nurseries, sod farms and golf courses are
exempt from the provisions of this article.
(3) Outdoor irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with
an application of chemicals requires immediate watering to
preserve an existing landscape or to establish a new landscape.
(4) Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
or seeded lawns or landscaping within the first 21 consecutive days
after planting.
(5) Visually supervised operation of an irrigation system by a person in
compliance with the New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-1) and at the minimum
rate necessary in order to check system condition and
effectiveness.
(6) Outdoor water use for harvestable crops that will be consumed on
site or grown in community gardens are exempt from the
provisions of this article. However, gardeners are advised to water
before 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. if possible.
A. Declaration of water emergency. A water emergency shall be declared:
(1) Upon action by resolution of the governing body.
(a) Whenever the Township Engineer in his or her professional
judgment finds that emergency conditions exist within the
Township, he or she shall recommend to the Township Council
that a water emergency be declared. An interim water
emergency may be proclaimed by the Township Manager until
the next regular or special meeting of the Township Council.
Said recommendation shall contain findings which specify
which water use restrictions, if any, contained in Subsection B
below are appropriate. Factors which the Township Engineer
may consider in making said recommendation include, but are
not limited to, the following:
[1] Lack of precipitation for an extended time period;
[2] Below-average water levels in Township streams or other
surface water bodies;
§ 384-48 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-49
1:1410
[3] Declaration of a water emergency by the Governor;
[4] A finding by New Jersey American Water, or its successor
in supplying the Township water system, that a water
shortage exists;
[5] Declaration of a water emergency by a neighboring
municipality or municipalities;
[6] Designation by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection of a drought watch or drought
warning condition;
[7] Below-average water levels in wells monitored by the
United States Geological Survey or other wells monitored
by agencies of the United States;
[8] Evidence of low or dirty water yields in private wells in the
Township;
[9] Declaration of a water emergency resulting from
infrastructure failure or any other safe drinking water
emergency issues.
(b) Upon receiving such a recommendation, the Township Council
may accept the Township Engineer's recommendation and
findings, or any portion thereof, and adopt a resolution
declaring a water emergency in the Township.
(c) Such resolution shall be adopted by the Township Council at
any regular, special, adjourned or emergency public meeting of
the Township Council. Such resolution shall specify which of
the water use restrictions, if any, contained in Subsection B
below are being imposed. Such resolution shall be effective
immediately upon publication and shall continue in effect for
90 days, or such lesser time period as may be specified, unless
extended or repealed as stated in Subsections C and D below.
B. Water use restrictions during emergency. Upon adoption by the
Township Council of a resolution declaring that a water emergency
exists in the Township in accordance with Subsection A of this section:
(1) All citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures; and
(2) Water uses and restrictions including but not limited to the below
may be included in a Water Emergency Resolution:
(a) The watering of all plant growth, except commercial crop and
sod farms, nursery stock at nurseries or retail outlets, and golf
courses;
§ 384-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-49
1:1411
(b) The washing of vehicles, except for emergency vehicles or by a
commercial enterprise whose primary function is car washing
and which recycles the water used, regardless of whether the
operation is mobile or stationary, or in those instances where a
threat to public health may exist;
(c) The washing of streets, driveways, sidewalks, decks, patios or
paved areas;
(d) The serving of tap water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places
unless specifically requested by patrons;
(e) The use of fire hydrants by fire companies for testing fire
apparatus and for fire department drills, except as the
Township Fire Prevention Director deems necessary in the
interest of public safety;
(f) The use of fire hydrants by municipal road departments,
contractors, and all others, except as necessary for firefighting
or protection purposes;
(g) The filling of swimming, wading, and ornamental pools, and all
outdoor recreational uses which expend water;
(h) The washing of the outsides of dwellings, buildings, or other
structures, except windows;
(i) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure
making a similar use of water except as necessary to preserve
or support fish and aquatic life;
(j) The washing of streets via a street sweeper, except in those
instances where Reclaimed Water for Beneficial Reuse (RWBR)
is authorized under a valid New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) permit;
(k) Any other water use activity specified by the Township Council
in the resolution required by Subsection A(1) of this section
which is reasonable under the circumstances considering the
nature and extent of the water emergency.
(l) Exempted from these restrictions is the use of water previously
collected as rainwater and stored in a covered vessel.
(3) The following restrictions may be imposed on the water uses stated
in Subsection B(2) of this section:
(a) All outdoor usage which is not strictly prohibited by this
subsection is limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or
between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
(b) The watering of any single area shall not exceed 30 minutes
per day; and
§ 384-49 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-49
1:1412
§ 384-50. Enforcement of water conservation rules and water use
restrictions; violations and penalties.
(c) Any other restriction specified by the Township Council which
is reasonable under the circumstances considering the nature
and extent of the water emergency.
(4) Any water use restriction imposed pursuant to this subsection may
be amended by the Township Council to add, alter, or delete any
restriction in this subsection at any time during the water
emergency. Said amendment shall be by resolution of the Township
Council.
(5) Any water use restriction imposed pursuant to this subsection shall
apply equally to both users of privately owned wells and users
served by a public utility.
(6) Nothing in this subsection shall be read so as to prohibit, restrict or
limit water usage where a bona fide health emergency exists.
C. Duration of water emergency. Whenever the Township Engineer in his
or her professional judgment finds that the emergency drought
conditions in the Township have abated prior to the expiration of the
time period specified in the resolution, he or she shall recommend to
the Township Council that the water emergency cease. Upon such a
recommendation to cease, the Township Council may adopt a resolution
declaring the water emergency ended and the water use restrictions
identified in Subsection B inapplicable. In the interim, the water
emergency may be ended by the Township Manager until the next
regular or special meeting of the Township Council. Otherwise, at the
end of the time period specified in the original resolution, the water use
restrictions identified in Subsection B shall lapse and be inapplicable
and unenforceable.
D. Extension of water emergency time period. If at the expiration of the
time period specified in the resolution, the Township Engineer in his or
her professional judgment finds that the emergency drought conditions
have not abated, he or she shall recommend to the Township Council
that the water emergency remain in effect. Said recommendation shall
specify the duration of the extension. Whenever the Township Council
has received such a recommendation, it may accept the Township
Engineer's recommendation and findings, or any portion thereof, and
adopt a resolution to extend the water emergency. Said resolution shall
specify the duration of the extension, which shall not be for more than
90 days.
E. Notice. Reasonable attempts shall be made to notify citizens and
residents of the Township of the existence of a water emergency, the
restrictions imposed, and the penalties for violations.
§ 384-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-50
1:1413
§ 384-51. through § 384-52. (Reserved)
A. Enforcement of water conservation rules and water use restrictions.
The water use restrictions and automatic rain sensor requirement
imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforced by the local
authorized official or his/her designee. Whenever the official designated
by the Township Manager to enforce this article shall find a violation of
the water use restrictions regardless of the source of the water (public
or private supply), such authorized official shall issue a written warning
and explain the penalties for a second and third offense as provided in
Subsection B below. The local authorized official shall keep such
records as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of
determining the persons and businesses who have been warned upon a
first offense. The local authorized official is hereby empowered to write
summons for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this section.
B. Penalties. After a warning for a first offense in accordance with
Subsection A of this section, any person or business that thereafter
violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall
be subject to the penalty provisions as listed:
(1) During nonemergency periods:
(a) Second offense: $50.
(b) Third offense: $100.
(c) Fourth offense: $250.
(d) For each offense in the same calendar year subsequent to the
fourth, the maximum fine shall be doubled.
(2) During water emergencies: The above fines for nonemergency
periods shall be tripled.
(a) Second offense: $150.
(b) Third offense: $300.
(c) Fourth offense: $750.
(d) For each offense in the same calendar year subsequent to the
fourth, the maximum fine shall be doubled.
§ 384-50 FRANKLIN CODE § 384-51
1:1414
ARTICLE X
Air Conditioning Systems
§ 384-53. Water circulation required.
No owner shall install, use or operate any air-conditioning unit or units
which require the use of Township water in the system unless the system is
so constructed that the water can be circulated.
§ 384-54. Application for permit.
Any person who hereafter wishes to install, use or maintain an airconditioning
system which requires the use of Township water in the system
must, prior to the installation or use thereof, file an application, including
a diagram of the installation, with the Director. If the application meets all
requirements of the Division, the Director may issue a permit.
§ 384-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-54
1:1415

ARTICLE XI
Cross-Connections
§ 384-55. Restriction.
Cross-connections between the public water supply and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or
questionable quality are prohibited, except when and where, as approved
by the Director, suitable protective devices, such as an approved physical
connection installation as specified in New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act
regulations, are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper operation
on a continuing basis.
§ 384-56. Protection against backflow.
The Director may authorize installation of approved, double-check valve
assemblies with test cocks as protective devices against backflow that
present no significant health hazard in the judgment of the Director. The
Director shall require installation of approved reduced-pressure-zone
backflow preventer assemblies with test cocks as protective devices against
backflow that presents a significant health hazard in the judgment of the
Director.
§ 384-57. Approval of backflow preventers.
No backflow preventer shall be put in use without the prior approval of the
State Department of Health.
§ 384-58. Testing and inspection. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1478]
Backflow preventers shall be subject to testing for tightness under
prevailing pressure conditions at least every three months by the Plumbing
Subcode Official, the Health Officer and the Water Superintendent. An
internal inspection shall be done within six months prior to the application
for permit renewal. After reassembly, a test for tightness to assure the
integrity of the device shall be conducted.
§ 384-59. Potable water connections.
Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air gap or
provided with an approved backflow preventer.
§ 384-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-59
1:1417

ARTICLE XII
Other Regulations
§ 384-60. Water system connections.
All connections to the water system shall be installed in accordance with
the Plumbing Code203 of the Township of Franklin and the applicable local
and state regulations regarding water supply. However, employees of the
Water Division of the Department of Public Works shall be empowered to
make such taps, installations and corrections in the water system as may be
necessary to correct operation of the public water system of the Township
of Franklin.
§ 384-61. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to issue such further rules and
regulations as may be necessary to effectively administer the general policy
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations must be issued in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 5, Administrative of Government, of the
Code of the Township of Franklin.
§ 384-62. Waiver of fees. [Added 6-30-2005 by Ord. No. 3553;
amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3744]
A. Declaration of water emergency. In situations where the Health Officer
declares a general water emergency, the following fees may be waived
by resolution of the Township Council (effective April 28, 2004):
(1) Well abandonment fee as stated in § 384-7E.
(2) Curb connection capital fees as stated in § 384-19.
(3) Curb connection tap fees as stated in § 384-19E(1).
(4) Meter charges as stated in § 384-20.
B. Special circumstances. In situations where a nonprofit project is
supported by the Township of Franklin and funded by grant monies, the
following fees may be waived by resolution of the Township Council:
(1) Well abandonment fee as stated in § 384-7E.
(2) Curb connection capital fees as stated in § 384-19.
(3) Curb connection tap fees as stated in § 384-19E(1).
(4) Meter charges as stated in § 384-20.
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 384-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-62
1:1419

ARTICLE XIII
Enforcement; after-hour emergencies
[Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 4164-16]
§ 384-63. Violations and penalties.
§ 384-64. After-hour emergencies.
For any after-hour emergency, which requires personnel to report in, the
costs will be charged to the water rate payer. This includes items which are
a result of failure to maintain the property.
A. No person except a Township employee or authorized person, shall
open or close any hydrants, valves, or curb boxes. Any person who
violates this provision is subject to a fine up to $1,000.
B. Any person who violates any other of the provisions of this chapter or
any part thereof shall, upon conviction before the Township Judge, be
subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 384-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-64
1:1421
Chapter 390
WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226. Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 374.
§ 390-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures
for administering the issuance, renewal, suspension and revocation of all
licenses issued under this chapter in the interest of fair and equitable
treatment of the motoring public and towing operators and to establish
standards for the operation of towing businesses by licensees and to set
rates for services performed by licensees.
§ 390-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — Driving an unengaged wrecker back and forth on a public
street in a manner primarily calculated to solicit business.
FIFTH WHEEL — A device towed behind a heavy wrecker containing dual
wheels with a hinged pivot hitch used to replace a tractor connection to a
towed trailer. The wheels of the fifth wheel shall have a tire size of not less
than 10.00 by 20 inches.
GARAGE — A building in which motor vehicles can be sheltered, stored,
repaired and made ready for use, and is specifically intended not to include
within the meaning of this definition a gasoline service station used
principally for furnishing gasoline, oil and lubrication and minor services for
motor vehicles.
HEAVY DUTY WRECKER — A wrecker of either of the types set forth in the
definition of "wrecker," designed to be capable of towing vehicles having a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or more.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
INSIDE BUILDINGS — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
LIGHT-DUTY WRECKER — A wrecker of either of the types set forth in the
definition of "wrecker," designed to be capable of towing vehicles having a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of less than 10,000 pounds.
§ 384-64 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-2
1:1422
OPERATOR — A person, firm, corporation or other legal entity engaged in
the business of providing wrecker services and storage services for vehicles
towed.
OUTSIDE SECURED — A motor vehicle storage facility that is outdoors and
is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site
security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
POLICE TOW — The towing or servicing of a vehicle which has been
involved in an accident or disabled on a highway in such a manner so as
to interfere or be likely to interfere with the safe passage of traffic or any
vehicle involved in a police investigation.
PRIMARY WRECKER OPERATOR — A municipally licensed wrecker
operator who responds to the scene of a police tow.
STORAGE CHARGES PER TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-four-hour
period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01
a.m.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A municipally licensed wrecker operator called to the
scene by the primary wrecker operator to assist.
TOWING BUSINESS — A business, located within Franklin Township, with
an inside building and/or an outside secured area in which motor vehicles
can be sheltered, stored, repaired and made ready for use. A light-duty tow
agency shall be one which owns or operates any two or more wreckers,
as defined. At a minimum, each light-duty business must have at least one
boom-style wrecker and one tilt-body wrecker in order to be maintained on
the towing list.
TOWING LIST — A list of licensed towing businesses maintained by the
Franklin Township Police Department and used for the purpose of calling
appropriate towing service for all police needs and for removing vehicles
from crashes.
WRECKER — A vehicle equipped with a boom or booms, winches, slings,
tilt beds, wheel lifts, or under-reach equipment specially designed by its
manufacturer for the removal and transport of motor vehicles.
§ 390-3. Licensing procedure; fees.
A. To be placed on the towing list with the Franklin Township Police
Department, a license to perform police tows is required to be obtained
from the Township Clerk. Every wrecker available for call from the
towing list shall be separately licensed.
B. All towing licenses issued under this chapter will expire on the last day
of December next following the date of issuance.
C. Application for licenses will be made on forms prepared by the Chief of
Police and shall contain the following information, together with such
§ 390-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:1423
other information as the Chief of Police may find reasonably necessary
to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address and phone number of the applicant's place of
business.
(3) The names and addresses of all persons having a ten-percent or
greater interest in the business, whether the business is a
partnership or corporation.
(4) The one telephone number which will be called by the Police
Department on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week basis.
(5) The year, make, type and model of each tow truck used in said
business, its vehicle identification number and New Jersey
registration number.
(6) The location and size of all vehicle storage lots.
(7) The names, addresses and New Jersey driver's license numbers of
all employee-drivers of the vehicles identified. Employee-drivers
must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license prior to the date of
application.
(8) Certification that each employee operating under this license is
able to read and write the English language.
(9) Certification that each employee operating under this license is not
addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
(10) Any and all successful civil complaints filed against the owner,
agent thereof, the corporation or any officer thereof of deceptive
business practices, including but not limited to insurance fraud,
price gouging, or other similar complaint or offense. This shall not
be construed to be limited to substantiated complaints with regards
to towing services.
(11) An original letter of authorization for the Franklin Township Police
Department to conduct a full and complete criminal and driver
license background check on each owner, agent thereof and
employee-driver. The owners and the corporation shall also include
an authorization for the Franklin Township Police Department to
conduct an investigation into the insurance coverage as it applies
to the license. Each employee must execute his own letter of
authorization. Blank authorizations are not permitted.
(12) A description of the security features of the vehicle storage lots.
(13) A list of the names, addresses, policy numbers and coverage of the
insurance required by this chapter.
§ 390-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-3
1:1424
(14) Any other information, whether at the time of application or as part
of the investigation, that the Township of Franklin shall deem
appropriate and necessary to properly evaluate the towing agency
for this license.
D. License fees shall be $80 for the first license for a towing business and
$15 for each additional license issued to a towing business, payable to
the Township of Franklin.
E. Investigation.
(1) After the filing of a fully completed application and payment of the
licensing fee, the Chief of Police shall, within 30 days, cause to be
conducted an investigation to determine the accuracy and
completeness of the information contained in the application, as
well as an investigation as to the towing business's prior record of
compliance with the intent, purpose and regulations established
under this chapter. The application shall also be reviewed by the
Zoning Officer, who shall advise the Chief of Police whether the
towing business is a permitted use and complies with Chapter 112,
Development.
(2) During the course of the investigation, the applicant shall schedule
the wrecker to be licensed to be inspected by the designee of the
Chief of Police. This inspection shall be conducted to ensure that
the wrecker meets all applicable safety standards as well as the
requirements of this chapter.
(3) Upon completion of all investigations and inspections, the Chief of
Police shall return a copy of the application to the Township Clerk,
indicating approval or disapproval of the license. Any disapproval
will be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for
disapproval. Any approval will be accompanied by a proposed
classification of the applicant as a light-duty and/or heavy-duty
service. If the application is approved, the applicant shall supply
the Township Clerk with the insurance policies or certificates as
required by this chapter.
(4) The Township Clerk shall approve and classify an application when
he/she finds that the following requirements have been met by the
applicant:
(a) That the public convenience and necessity will be served by the
use of the vehicle or vehicles for which application has been
made.
(b) That the insurance policies, as required, have been procured
and supplied.
(c) That the applicant and proposed operators are qualified to
operate the wrecker and conduct a wrecker service in the
Township of Franklin.
§ 390-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:1425
(d) That the requirements of this chapter and all other laws,
statutes and ordinances have been met, including zoning
ordinances.
(e) That the vehicle has been properly licensed and inspected by
the State of New Jersey and has the necessary stickers affixed.
No vehicle shall be licensed as a wrecker which is using dealer
license plates or which has failed state inspection.
(f) That the wrecker to be licensed, on inspection, meets with the
required minimum standards, as set forth in this chapter, for
the class to which it has been assigned.
(g) That applicant has available space for properly accommodating
and protecting a minimum of 20 towed vehicles and that the
vehicles will not be stored or allowed to remain on public
property or any street or property in the Township that is not
zoned for such storage. The storage area must be enclosed
with a minimum six-foot-high fence and the area must have
adequate lighting.
(5) The applicant or an employee-driver may be refused if the
investigation reveals any of the following or if the applicant or any
employee refuses to permit the investigation:
(a) Conviction of any crime of the fourth degree or higher,
possession of or use of a controlled dangerous substance; and
other crimes against the person or crimes involving moral
turpitude. Any plea arrangement, which results in pretrial
intervention, conditional discharge, or any other similar
diversionary trial settlement may be viewed as a conviction to
the original charge/offense.
(b) Conviction of operating a motor vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicating liquor or drug (39:4-50 or 39:3-10.13), leaving
the scene of a crash (39:4-129), failure to report a crash
(39:4-130), reckless driving (39:4-96) and possession of a
controlled dangerous substance in a motor vehicle
(39:4-49.1).204
(c) Successful civil complaints filed against the owner or agent
thereof, the corporation or any officer thereof for deceptive
business practices, including but not limited to insurance
fraud, price gouging or other similar complaint or offense.
(6) Appeal of application denial.
(a) Upon receipt of a denial of a license, or partial denial, the
applicant may file an appeal with the Township Clerk. The
204. Editor's Note: References are to Title 39, New Jersey Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations.
§ 390-3 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-3
1:1426
§ 390-4. Minimum standards for wreckers.
The following shall serve as a guide for minimum standards as they apply to
light-duty and heavy-duty wreckers.
appeal must be filed within 10 business days of receipt of the
decision. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing and shall
document the applicant's position for approval of the license.
(b) Upon receipt of the appeal the Township Manager shall review
all documentation relating to this application. Such review may
include interviews with the interested parties. The Township
Manager shall make a decision within 10 business days of
receipt of the appeal.
(c) If the Township Manager does not grant the license the last
step for appeal will be the Township Council. The appeal must
be filed within 10 business days of the last denial. Such appeal
shall be submitted in writing and shall document the
applicant's position for approval of the license.
(d) Upon receipt of the appeal, the Township Council shall review
all documentation relating to this application. Such review may
include interviews with the interested parties. The Township
Council shall make a decision within 30 days of receipt of the
appeal. The decision of the Council is final and binding. No
further appeals are permitted.
A. Light-duty (below 10,000 pounds GVWR capacity):
(1) Dual rear wheels or equivalent.
(2) A power take-off controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 3/8 inch.
(3) A three-eighths-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety
chain are not to be attached in any form or manner to the same part
of the wrecker.
(4) A gross vehicle weight of not less than 15,000 pounds.
(5) Originate from a garage equipped with a portable car dolly and
steering lock bar.
(6) Three-hundred-sixty-degree rotating amber beacon light mounted
over the cab.
(7) Four double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high at
maximum state requirements.
(8) All lights shall be of such candlepower in intensity as to be visible
from 1/4 mile away or must be equal to the candlepower of the
lights on Township Police vehicles.
§ 390-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:1427
§ 390-5. Insurance.
(9) Tow businesses must maintain light permits for all wrecker
emergency lighting.
B. Heavy-duty (over 10,000 pounds GVWR capacity).
(1) Dual rear wheels.
(2) A power take-off controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 5/8 inch.
(3) A one-half-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety chain are
not to be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker.
(4) A gross vehicle weight of not less than 20,000 pounds.
(5) A three-hundred-sixty-degree rotating amber beacon light mounted
on the cab.
(6) Four double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high at
maximum state requirements.
(7) All lights shall be of such candlepower in intensity as to be visible
from 1/4 mile away or must be equal to the candlepower of the
lights on Township Police vehicles.
(8) Air brakes.
(9) Connecting air lines for connection with the air compressor and air
brake lines of towed vehicles.
(10) A brake caging tool.
(11) Detachable amber flashing lights to be attached to the rear of
towed vehicles.
C. All wreckers shall be equipped with the following:
(1) One large street broom and shovel.
(2) Safety flares for night work.
(3) Speedy dry or equivalent absorbent material for fluid spills.
(4) Fire extinguisher (ABC type).
(5) Basic set of automotive tools.
D. All wreckers licensed under this Act shall be in compliance with all the
applicable provisions of Title 39, New Jersey Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations.
§ 390-4 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-5
1:1428
A. Each towing agency shall maintain, during the term of their license, the
following minimum insurance coverage, naming the Township of
Franklin as an additional insured.
(1) Automobile liability insurance, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit, covering each vehicle utilized by
the operator in his business.
(2) Workmen's compensation insurance, as required by the State of
New Jersey, including employer's liability coverage with a limit of at
least $100,000.
(3) Comprehensive general liability insurance, in an amount of not less
than $1,000,000 for personal injuries, per occurrence, and
$1,000,000 for property damage, per occurrence, including
premises' operations and products/completed operations.
(4) Garage keepers and garage liability insurance, in an amount of not
less than $100,000.
(5) All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing for
collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
B. All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement requiring that at
least 15 days' notice shall be given to the Township Clerk in the event of
any material change in or cancellation of the policy.
C. The operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township of
Franklin from any claims for injury or property damage arising out of,
or in any way related to, the operation of any wrecker, tow agency or
storage yard, pursuant to this chapter. The tow agency shall further
defend the Township of Franklin at the operator's expense in
connection with any suit or action brought against the Township of
Franklin and arising out of the operation of any wrecker, tow service or
tow yard, pursuant to this chapter.
D. All policies of insurance shall be issued by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and shall remain in
full force and effect during the entire term of the license. The Township
of Franklin shall be named as additional insured on all policies of
liability insurance.
E. No license shall be issued until an approved applicant files insurance
certificates verifying all of the above requirements. The insurance
certificates shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
F. Any licensee who has a lapse in any insurance policy, for any reason
whatsoever, shall have his/her license immediately suspended. Upon
notice of lapse of coverage, the Township Clerk shall immediately serve
notice of suspension upon the licensee, with copy of said notice
provided to the Township Manager and Chief of Police. The suspension
shall remain in effect until such a time as the insurance is restored.
§ 390-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-6
1:1429
§ 390-6. Display and contents of card.
The Township Clerk shall issue to the person owning a licensed wrecker
a card, not less than four inches nor more than six inches in width, in
such form as may be set by the Township Clerk, which shall be at all times
displayed on the right front windshield of each wrecker. The card shall bear
the name of the applicant, official license number of the wrecker, the rate of
fares and conditions of employment under which the wrecker is operating
and a notice that, in case of any complaint, the complainant may notify
the Police Department, and the date of inspection of the wrecker, together
with blank spaces upon which any entry shall be made of the date of every
inspection of the wrecker by the inspector. In lieu of the card, a metal plate
to be furnished by the owner, giving the same information, may be affixed
in a prominent place on the wrecker.
§ 390-7. Inspection and operation rules and regulations.
§ 390-8. Records.
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of the names of all persons owning
and operating wreckers licensed under this chapter, together with the
license number and a description of the wreckers and the date and complete
record of inspection made of them.
§ 390-9. Towing rates; storage charges; service rates.
A. No wrecker or tow agency covered by the terms of this chapter shall be
licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined by the Chief of Police or his designee and found to be in a
thoroughly safe and sanitary condition. Any wrecker or tow agency
found to be unsafe shall not be licensed. The Chief of Police is
authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and
regulations for the inspection of wreckers and tow agencies for the
construction and condition for the safety of persons and property.
B. The Police Department shall maintain due vigilance over all tow trucks
and towing agencies licensed under this chapter and see that they are
kept in a condition of safety and sanitation, and to this end shall have
the right at any and all times to inspect any and all such licensed
vehicles and storage facilities and shall maintain a record in writing of
the report of all such inspections.
A. No vehicle owner shall be liable to any person or corporation who tows
or stores motor vehicles for any fees in excess of those permitted by the
towing and storage schedules established in this section.
B. The fees set forth on the schedule for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or
less towed by a wrecker.
§ 390-6 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-9
1:1430
(1) The towing rate shall be calculated based on the total distance
traveled from the wrecker's base of operation to the job site and
return, by way of the shortest available route. Fractions shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole mile. Mileage shall be determined
using a standard scale map of the Township as provided by the
Township Clerk.
(2) When towing services are required, the day rate shall apply when
the vehicle is transported (pickup to delivery) entirely between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
New Jersey state and federal holidays. The night, weekend and
holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
C. The fees set forth on the schedule for storage fees are the maximum
storage charges per twenty-four-hour period that shall apply to an
automobile that is stored by a person or corporation.
D. The following is the fee schedule for light-duty towing services:
(1) Days.
(a) First mile or less: $65.
(b) Each additional mile within Township: $2.
(c) Each additional mile outside the Township: $3.
(2) Nights, weekends and New Jersey state and federal holidays.
(a) First mile or less: $85.
(b) Each additional mile within the Township: $2.
(c) Each additional mile outside the Township: $3.
E. The following is the fee schedule for storage of vehicles with a GWWR
of 10,000 pounds or less:
(1) Inside storage: $30.
(2) Outside secured: $20.
F. Additional authorized light-duty fees and charges. The following is a list
of related fees that may be charged should they apply to the job being
completed:
(1) Service charge. Days: $50; nights, weekends and New Jersey state
and federal holidays: $60. This will cover calls for service such as
vehicle jump start, out of fuel, change tire or lockout service, if
provided. This charge does not include any charges for parts or
fuel. This only applies when no tow is completed.
(2) Crash scene cleanup: $25. Includes but not limited to sweeping up
debris, cleaning up fluid spills and removing vehicle parts removed
during crash and post crash activities.
§ 390-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-9
1:1431
(3) Yard charge: $30. This is a one-time per-vehicle charge that a
company can charge if any of the following occurs:
(a) Escort an insurance appraiser, a removing tow company, the
owner or their representative or anyone other than a law
enforcement official who properly requests to see the vehicle.
(4) Material off-loading charge: $100 per hour billed in one-fourthhour
increments. The vehicle has material that needs to be off
loaded for security, health or safety reasons. If the tow company is
charged a disposal fee for the material, that fee may also be passed
on to the responsible party.
(5) Winching: $150.
(a) The basic tow rate applies to vehicles that are upright and on
the road ready for tow. A winching charge may apply if:
[1] A vehicle is overturned.
[2] A vehicle is off the road.
[3] A vehicle is stuck on another vehicle or other object on or
off the road.
[4] A vehicle is stuck in mud, snow or submerged in water on
or off the road.
(b) In the case when more than one winching criteria exist, the
charge may be 1 1/2 times the winching rate.
G. The maximum towing fee for Vehicle over 10,000 pounds GVWR will be:
GVWR
(pounds)
Fee
10,001-25,000 $175
25,001-55,000 $300
55,001-80,000 $425
Each fee includes the first mile, each additional
mile
$5
H. The following is the fee schedule for storage of commercial vehicles
with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds. (In the case of an articulated
vehicle, the tractor and trailer shall be considered as two separate
vehicles.)
(1) Inside storage: $120.
(2) Outside secured: $80.
I. Additional authorized heavy-duty fees and charges.
§ 390-9 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-9
1:1432
§ 390-10. Conduct of owners and operators.
A wrecker license hereunder shall be issued subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Winching: $350.
(2) Remove bumper: $30.
(3) Connect air line: $25.
(4) Remove axle: $25 per axle.
(5) Remove driveshaft: $35.
(6) Remove air scoop: $45.
(7) Remove exhaust pipes: $30 per pipe.
(8) Cage brake chambers: $25 per hour.
(9) Extra men, per hour per man: $25.
(10) Crash scene cleanup: $25. Does not include the cost of materials
and any fees to dispose of contaminated material.
(11) Yard charge: $30. This is a one-time per-vehicle charge that a
company can charge if any of the following occurs:
(a) Escort an insurance appraiser, a removing tow company, the
owner or their representative or anyone other than law
enforcement officials who properly requests to see the vehicle.
(12) Material off-loading charge: $100 per hour billed in one-fourthhour
increments. The vehicle has material that needs to be off
loaded for security, health or safety reasons. If the tow company is
charged a disposal fee for the material, that fee may also be passed
onto the responsible party.
(13) Securing vehicle: $100 per hour plus materials. In order to be
towed and due to damage sustained after being involved in a motor
vehicle crash parts of the vehicle need to be secured in order for
the vehicle to be safely towed.
J. If the Township of Franklin shall be the owner of the vehicle towed or
shall specifically request the storage of any vehicle, the fees charged to
the Township of Franklin shall be governed by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50, as
amended.
A. No person owning or operating a wrecker or other automobile, while
waiting for employment, shall stand at any public street or intersection
or on any public or private property, other than his/her own, without
first obtaining the consent of a police officer or of the owner of the
property.
§ 390-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:1433
B. No person shall seek employment by repeatedly and persistently
driving his wrecker back and forth in a short space in front of any
disabled vehicle or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly
progress of traffic along the public highways.
C. No person owning or operating a wrecker licensed under this chapter
shall engage in cruising.
D. No person owning or operating a wrecker licensed under this chapter
shall permit or invite loitering within or near his/her wrecker.
E. No person shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of a
given garage to another garage.
F. No person shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any
commission or fee except the proper fee for transporting the disabled
vehicle in accordance with § 390-9.
G. No person shall intercept police calls by short-wave radio or obtain
information as to the location of the scene of a crash or disabled vehicle
by means of interception of police radio calls and then use the
intercepted information to attempt to solicit employment of the
licensee's services.
H. No person shall pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person
not involved in the crash or to a police officer for any information as to
the location of any crash or for soliciting the employment of the
licensee's services, nor give any gratuities fees or other compensation
or gifts to any members of the Police Department.
I. Any wrecker service summoned either by the Police Department or the
owner of the vehicle shall be required to respond on scene within 1/2
hour.
J. The wrecker company must be available seven days a week, 24 hours a
day. The Chief of Police may grant a leave of absence requested by the
company upon request, in writing, at least one week in advance.
K. The wrecker company must be open for customers to claim their
vehicles between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except
Sundays and New Jersey and federal holidays.
L. A wrecker company that cannot respond when called shall not have any
other wrecker company, whether on the rotation list or not, respond in
its place. The next wrecker on the list shall be called to respond by the
Police Department.
M. Any wrecker company unable to respond to four or more Police
Department requests per month will be subject to removal from the
approved list. In the event that a telephone call goes unanswered by
either human or machine, the Police Department shall allow the phone
to ring 10 times on any call before going to the next service on the list.
If a message is left on voicemail or a company is paged, they will be
§ 390-10 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-10
1:1434
§ 390-11. Complaints; violations; punishment procedures.
granted a five-minute wait period to respond to the voicemail or page
before the Police Department calls the next wrecker company on the
list. [Amended 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 3927]
N. A wrecker company on the police rotation list and responding to a job as
a result of the police rotation list shall only charge fees and rates
established by this chapter.
O. Owners, agents or employees of a wrecker company shall act
professionally when dealing with the public as a result of a policerequested
tow.
P. Any wrecker that responds to a scene as a result of a police request
from the tow rotation list shall be in compliance with the minimum
standards established in § 390-4.
A. Citizen complaints.
(1) Any complaints regarding unprofessional, unethical or
discourteous conduct of a wrecker company owner or employee
shall be made to the Police Department on a wrecker company
complaint form. The Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau shall
investigate these complaints and a report shall be made to the
Chief of Police as to the findings.
(2) If a complaint is substantiated, the report shall be forwarded to the
Township Clerk, who shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
the wrecker company's license. The wrecker company shall have
the right to appeal any suspension or revocation within 10 working
days of the action and request, in writing, a hearing, with said
appeal to be filed with the Township Clerk.
(3) The hearing officer for a first-level appeal shall be the Township
Manager. The wrecker company may be represented by an attorney
during this hearing. If the Township Manager upholds the actions
taken by the Township Clerk, the wrecker company shall once
again have the right to appeal the decision and request, in writing,
a second appeal hearing, with the Township Council. Said request
must be filed with the Township Clerk within 10 working days of
the first hearing.
(4) The decision of the Town Council with regards to the appeal shall
be made within 30 days of its hearing. The decision is final and
binding. No further appeals are permitted.
B. Police complaints.
(1) When a violation of the rules of conduct occurs with regards to
mandated procedures, a complaint may originate from within the
Police Department.
§ 390-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-11
1:1435
§ 390-12. Record of vehicles towed.
Every person owning a licensed wrecker shall keep a record of all details of
each vehicle towed, serviced or transported, together with full information
concerning the details surrounding the hire and the full name of the owner
of the towed vehicle and of the person engaging him.
§ 390-13. Rotating call list.
(2) The infraction shall be reduced to writing and, with all supportive
documents, given to the Chief of Police designee so a complete and
thorough investigation may be completed.
(3) If a complaint is substantiated, the report shall be forwarded to the
Township Clerk, who shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
the wrecker company's license. The wrecker company shall have
the right to appeal any suspension or revocation within 10 working
days of the action and request, in writing, a hearing, with said
appeal to be filed with the Township Clerk.
(4) The hearing officer for a first-level appeal shall be the Township
Manager. The wrecker company may be represented by an attorney
during this hearing. If the Township Manager upholds the actions
taken by the Township Clerk, the wrecker company shall once
again have the right to appeal the decision and request, in writing,
a second appeal hearing, with the Township Council. Said request
must be filed with the Township Clerk within 10 working days of
the first hearing.
(5) The decision of the Town Council with regards to the appeal shall
be made within 30 days of its hearing. The decision is final and
binding. No further appeals are permitted.
A. All requests for towing or wrecking service made by the Police
Department shall be by rotation.
B. The rotation system shall be conducted in the following manner:
(1) The Township Clerk shall compile a list of all owners, lessees or
bailees as provided in this chapter.
(2) The original and annual public reporting of the current list of
designated towing contractors containing the company name,
address, telephone number and maximum towing fees shall be
printed and circulated in the Township. The annual reporting of the
list shall be available for inspection by any member of the general
public upon request and during regular business hours.
(3) Each owner, lessee or bailee of a wrecker licensed hereunder shall
be placed on an initial call list, for light duty or heavy duty, based
upon the date on which the license is issued and upon the
classification of the wrecker. Where an owner, lessee or bailee shall
§ 390-11 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-13
1:1436
§ 390-14. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to persons who pick up disabled vehicles
outside the Township and are in the course of taking the vehicles to a
garage either within or outside the Township. This chapter shall not apply
to persons whose principal place of business as wreckers is outside the
Township who come into the Township to pick up a disabled vehicle under
contract for hire with any person engaged in the trucking or transportation
business or in the operation of fleets of vehicles, or to wreckers hired
by motorists without the assistance and/or involvement of the Police
Department.
§ 390-15. Public access to fee schedules.
The Township Clerk shall make available all fee schedules and regulations
applicable to towing for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 390-16. Effects on rights of motor vehicle owner.
Nothing in this chapter shall abrogate or in any way diminish the rights of
the vehicle owner to make his own selection of a wrecker, except where the
vehicle presents a real and immediate hazard to the public safety.
§ 390-17. Violations and penalties.
own or lease more than one wrecker classified for light duty, said
owner's, lessee's or bailee's name shall appear but once on said call
list.
(4) Whenever the Police Department or any other department
summons a wrecker, the owner, lessee or bailee at the beginning of
the list will be called. After such owner, lessee or bailee has been
called, that owner, lessee or bailee shall be placed at the end of
such list, whether or not said owner, lessee or bailee responds to
the call. Thereafter, the next licensee shall be called until the
rotation is completed.
C. Additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of wreckers as
may be promulgated hereunder by the Township Clerk shall take effect
immediately after service of a copy thereof to all holders of licenses for
wreckers in the Township, which may be made by addressing the same
to the licensees by mail at their last known addresses.
D. In establishing a rotation system of assignment of wreckers, a separate
list shall be set up limited to heavy-duty wreckers, and the assignment
of a heavy-duty wrecker to tow a disabled truck or bus shall be in
addition to and not in limitation of the rights of the heavy-duty wrecker
owners to participate on a rotation basis on the light-duty call list.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 390-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-17
1:1437
§ 390-18. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply
only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision so adjudged,
and the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
Appendix
Chapter A400
NEW JERSEY BELL FRANCHISE
Chapter A401
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Television Advisory Committee — See
Ch. 13, Art. VI.
Telecommunications services — See Ch. 354.
New Jersey Bell franchise — See Ch. A400.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A402.
REVOCATION — The immediate termination of the current license
to tow as a police rotation list tow company as well as any other
municipal tows. This termination shall have a duration of the remaining
current year plus one full calendar year. The revoked license will not be
reinstated; the wrecker company will have to reapply.
SUSPENSION — The temporary removal of the wrecker company from
the police rotation list as well as any other municipal tows. Duration
may be a minimum of one day and as much as one year.
B. Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
suspension or revocation of his or her tow license.
C. Suspension or revocation shall be based on the nature and frequency of
the offense.
D. No suspension or revocation shall be served until such a time that all
appeals have been exhausted or the time limits have expired.
§ 390-17 FRANKLIN CODE § 390-18
1:1438
ARTICLE I
New Jersey Fiber Technologies
[Adopted 8-12-1997 by ord No. 2024]
§ A401-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
NJFT — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as New
Jersey Fiber Technologies, it servants, employees, agents, officers, directors
and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-2. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding NJFT's request for
use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and feels that it is in the
best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to grant said request.
§ A401-3. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § A401-4 below.
Said period shall begin on July 28, 1997 and shall expire five years from said
date on July 27, 2002. This consent shall permit NJFT to place and maintain
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the public highways and
streets in Franklin Township, poles, wires, cable, underground conduits,
manholes and fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation of the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the
provisions of this ordinance. In the event that NJFT violates any provision
of this ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow
NJFT 30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is granted by the
Township Council. In the event that NJFT does not cure the violation in the
prescribed time, appropriate action will be taken on behalf of the Township
which may include, but is not limited to, court intervention and the voidance
of this ordinance and the termination of any and all relationships between
the Township and NJFT.
§ A401-4. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-5
1:1439
§ A401-5. NJFT's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by NJFT and NJFT will notify the Township
of the location of any cable or other fixtures permitted to be installed
pursuant to this ordinance prior to such installation.
§ A401-6. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the entirety of Franklin
Township. All questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest
in property, federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasigovernmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be
investigated and researched at NJFT's own cost and expense; procedures
necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every such question
shall be pursued in NJFT's own name and the Township shall never be under
any obligation to perform investigations or research, conduct or prosecute
proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of engineers, surveyors,
title searchers or others or otherwise take any steps to define, delineate,
establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the Township.
§ A401-7. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other than
wires, cable, underground conduits, terminating equipment and electronics
and fiber optic cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written
approval before their installation.
§ A401-8. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to NJFT.
§ A401-9. Fee. [Amended 9-14-1999 by ord No. 3064]
A. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to NJFT, NJFT
agrees to pay the Township on an annual basis the following fees: $200
per mile of NJFT fiber optic cable located in the public road rights-ofway
within the Township with a minimum annual fee of $500.
§ A401-5 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-9
1:1440
§ A401-10. (Reserved)205
§ A401-11. Conditions of construction.
§ A401-12. Underground lines.
NJFT shall respond, when requested to mark out underground lines, within
48 hours of the request.
§ A401-13. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by NJFT of all of its obligations to
the Township, NJFT shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by NJFT shall be made on
or before October 1 of each year in which access to the Township's
public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to accurately make the
payment called for on or before October 1 of each year will result in the
automatic revocation of the nonexclusive franchise granted to such
NJFT by the applicable authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event NJFT shall from time to time disturb any
public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures, equipment or
other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or surfaces in the
natural topography or any other matter whatsoever, NJFT shall, at its
sole expense, reasonably restore and replace such places and things so
disturbed to and in not less than as good condition as existed prior to
each disturbance. In doing so, NJFT shall comply with all applicable
ordinances, resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations
shall be completed within 30 working days of the work requiring the
same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, NJFT, upon reasonable notice by
the Township, shall at its own expense, remove, relay and relocate its
cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. NJFT shall for the purpose of and upon
request of the Township, at NJFT's expense temporarily raise, lower or
remove its cables and associated facilities in order to facilitate the
moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and machinery and to
accommodate other like circumstances. NJFT may suggest alternatives
to the temporary removal of cables where such temporary removal may
cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with the
expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the right
to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
205. Editor’s Note: Former § A401-10 was repealed 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3064.
§ A401-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-13
1:1441
throughout the duration of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way
a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000, conditioned on
the faithful performance by NJFT of all of its undertakings pursuant to
this ordinance. Said bond must be acceptable in form and content to the
Township Attorney. The bonding company shall be authorized to do business
in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-14. Liability insurance.
§ A401-15. Indemnity.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, NJFT
shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force, at its sole expense,
sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive general liability
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in
the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) "Umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. NJFT shall
assure that no such policy of insurance shall be canceled without a
minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or greater notice if
required by regulations of the New Jersey Department of Insurance.
A. NJFT shall hold and save the Township harmless from and indemnify
and defend the Township against every claim, loss and liability of every
kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly, immediately or
consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against NJFT;
(5) Any act or omission of NJFT or any of its officers, directors,
employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen or
affiliated companies;
§ A401-13 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-15
1:1442
§ A401-16. Limitations.
§ A401-17. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-18. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only, and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-19. Law changes.
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) NJFT's action, inaction, franchise, operation, maintenance,
construction or installation of the lines, cables and fixtures
described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This Ordinance is for NJFT's nonexclusive use of the Township's said
rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When and if NJFT
increases its scope offering to any business or resident in the State of
New Jersey and said increase in scope passes through the NJFT cable
lines located within the Township, the within ordinance shall be null
and void. NJFT and the Township must then renegotiate the terms,
conditions and fees of the proposed increase in scope. If agreement
cannot be reached, this ordinance will be deemed terminated. The
Township is not obligated to accept any increase in scope proposed by
NJFT.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to NJFT's use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, NJFT is deemed to be a public
utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the appropriate
governmental authority, then NJFT shall no longer be subject to this
§ A401-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-19
1:1443
§ A401-20. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of NJFT's
written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such acceptance is not received
by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final passage of the ordinance,
the same will automatically expire and be of no further effect.
ordinance except to the extent that other public utilities providing
telecommunications service are subject to like requirements.
§ A401-19 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-20
1:1444
ARTICLE II
MCI Worldcom
[Adopted 9-14-1999 by ord No. 3065]
§ A401-21. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
MCI WORLDCOM — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is
known as MCI Worldcom, it servants, employees, agents, officers, directors
and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-22. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding MCI Worldcom's
request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and feels that
it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to grant said
request.
§ A401-23. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § A401-24 below.
Said period shall begin on September 1, 1999 and shall expire five years
from said date on August 31, 2004. This consent shall permit MCI Worldcom
to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the
public highways and streets in Franklin Township, poles, wires, cable,
underground conduits, manholes and fiber optic cables and fixtures
necessary for the maintenance and operation of the proposed use. The
consent, however, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. In the event
that MCI Worldcom violates any provision of this ordinance, the Township
will give notice of such violation and allow MCI Worldcom 30 days to cure
the violation unless additional time is granted by the Township Council. In
the event that MCI Worldcom does not cure the violation in the prescribed
time, appropriate action will be taken on behalf of the Township which
may include, but is not limited to, court intervention and the voidance of
this ordinance and the termination of any and all relationships between the
Township and MCI Worldcom.
§ A401-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-24
1:1445
§ A401-24. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing Telecommunications Service.
§ A401-25. MCI Worldcom's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by MCI Worldcom and MCI Worldcom will
notify the Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures permitted
to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to such installation.
§ A401-26. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the entirety of Franklin
Township. All questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest
in property, federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasigovernmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be
investigated and researched at MCI Worldcom's own cost and expense;
procedures necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every
such question shall be pursued in MCI Worldcom's own name and the
Township shall never be under any obligation to perform investigations or
research, conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the
charge of engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take
any steps to define, delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights
of the Township.
§ A401-27. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township Ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other than
wires, cable, underground conduits, terminating equipment and electronics
and fiber optic cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written
approval before their installation.
§ A401-28. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor
any other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to MCI
Worldcom.
§ A401-29. Fee.
§ A401-24 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-29
1:1446
§ A401-30. Conditions of construction.
§ A401-31. Underground lines.
MCI Worldcom shall respond when requested to mark out underground
lines, within 48 hours of the request.
A. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to MCI Worldcom,
MCI Worldcom agrees to pay the Township on an annual basis the
following fees: $200 per mile of MCI Worldcom fiber optic cable located
in the public road rights-of-way within the Township with a minimum
annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by MCI Worldcom shall be
made on or before October 1 of each year in which access to the
Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such MCI Worldcom by the applicable authorizing
action.
A. Restoration. In the event MCI Worldcom shall from time to time disturb
any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures,
equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or
surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter whatsoever, MCI
Worldcom shall, at its sole expense, reasonably restore and replace
such places and things so disturbed to and in not less than as good
condition as existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so, MCI
Worldcom shall comply with all applicable ordinances, resolutions,
laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations shall be completed within
30 working days of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, MCI Worldcom, upon reasonable
notice by the Township, shall at its own expense, remove, relay and
relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. MCI Worldcom shall for the purpose of
and upon request of the Township, at MCI Worldcom's expense
temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and associated facilities in
order to facilitate the moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and
machinery and to accommodate other like circumstances. MCI
Worldcom may suggest alternatives to the temporary removal of cables
where such temporary removal may cause a disruption of services or
otherwise interfere with the expectations of its customers. However,
the Township retains the right to make the final decision regarding said
cable removal.
§ A401-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-32
1:1447
§ A401-32. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by MCI Worldcom of all of its obligations
to the Township, MCI Worldcom shall deliver to the Township and maintain
in force throughout the duration of the use of the Township's said rights-ofway
a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000, conditioned
on the faithful performance by MCI Worldcom of all of its undertakings
pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must be acceptable in form and
content to the Township Attorney. The bonding company shall be authorized
to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-33. Liability insurance.
§ A401-34. Indemnity.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, MCI
Worldcom shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force, at its sole
expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive general
liability insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) "Umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. MCI
Worldcom shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be
canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. MCI Worldcom shall hold and save the Township harmless from and
indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss and
liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly,
immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against MCI Worldcom;
§ A401-32 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-34
1:1448
§ A401-35. Limitations.
§ A401-36. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-37. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only, and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-38. Law changes.
(5) Any act or omission of MCI Worldcom or any of its officers,
directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen
or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) MCI Worldcom's action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for MCI Worldcom's nonexclusive use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When
and if MCI Worldcom increases its scope offering to any business or
resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in scope passes
through the MCI Worldcom cable lines located within the Township, the
within ordinance shall be null and void. MCI Worldcom and the
Township must then renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the
proposed increase in scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this
ordinance will be deemed terminated. The Township is not obligated to
accept any increase in scope proposed by MCI Worldcom.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to MCI Worldcom's
use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
§ A401-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-38
1:1449
§ A401-39. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of MCI
Worldcom's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such acceptance is
not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final passage of the
ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no further effect.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, MCI Worldcom is deemed to be a
public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the
appropriate governmental authority, then MCI Worldcom shall no
longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent that other
public utilities providing telecommunications service are subject to like
requirements.
§ A401-38 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-39
1:1450
ARTICLE III
4Connections, LLC
[Adopted 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3697]
§ A401-40. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
4CONNECTIONS, LLC — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and
is known as 4Connections, LLC, its servants, employees, agents, officers,
directors and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-41. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding 4Connections,
LLC's request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and
feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to
grant said request.
§ A401-42. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § 246-61 below.
Said period shall begin on June 1, 2007, and shall expire five years from
said date on May 31, 2012. This consent shall permit 4Connections, LLC to
place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over the public highways
and streets in Franklin Township, poles, wires, cable, and fiberoptic cables
and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of the proposed
use. The consent, however, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. In
the event that 4Connections, LLC violates any provision of this ordinance,
the Township will give notice of such violation and allow 4Connections,
LLC 30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is granted by the
Township Council. In the event that 4Connections, LLC does not cure the
violation in the prescribed time, appropriate action will be taken on behalf
of the Township, which may include, but is not limited to, court intervention
and the voidance of this ordinance and the termination of any and all
relationships between the Township and 4Connections, LLC.
§ A401-43. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-44
1:1451
§ A401-44. 4Connections, LLC's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by 4Connections, LLC, and 4Connections,
LLC will notify the Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures
permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to such
installation.
§ A401-45. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled Schedule A, and attached to this ordinance.206 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and /or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at 4Connections, LLC's own cost and expense; procedures
necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every such question
shall be pursued in 4Connections, LLC's own name and the Township shall
never be under any obligation to perform investigations or research,
conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of
engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take any steps
to define, delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the
Township.
§ A401-46. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiberoptic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other than
wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiberoptic cables
shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
§ A401-47. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor
any other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to
4Connections, LLC.
206. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township's offices.
§ A401-44 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-48
1:1452
§ A401-48. Fee.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to 4Connections, LLC,
4Connections, LLC agrees to pay the Township on an annual basis the
following fees:
§ A401-49. Conditions of construction.
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of 4Connections, LLC fiberoptic cable
located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township with a
minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by 4Connections, LLC
shall be made on or before October 1 of each year in which access to the
Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such 4Connections, LLC by the applicable
authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event 4Connections, LLC shall from time to time
disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures,
equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or
surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter whatsoever,
4Connections, LLC shall, at its sole expense, reasonably restore and
replace such places and things so disturbed to and in not less than as
good condition as existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so,
4Connections, LLC shall comply with all applicable ordinances,
resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations shall be
completed within 30 working days of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location or grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, 4Connections, LLC, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, shall at its own expense, remove,
relay and relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. 4Connections, LLC shall for the purpose
of and upon request of the Township, at 4Connections, LLC's expense,
temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and associated facilities in
order to facilitate the moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and
machinery and to accommodate other like circumstances.
4Connections, LLC may suggest alternatives to the temporary removal
of cables where such temporary removal may cause a disruption of
services or otherwise interfere with the expectations of its customers.
However, the Township retains the right to make the final decision
regarding said cable removal.
§ A401-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-50
1:1453
§ A401-50. Underground lines.
4Connections, LLC shall respond when requested to mark out underground
lines, within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-51. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by 4Connections, LLC of all of its
obligations to the Township, 4Connections, LLC shall deliver to the
Township and maintain in force throughout the duration of the use of the
Township's said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less
than $50,000, conditioned on the faithful performance by 4Connections,
LLC of all of its undertakings pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must
be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney. The bonding
company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-52. Liability insurance.
§ A401-53. Indemnity.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way,
4Connections, LLC shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force,
at its sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive
general liability insurance naming the Township as an additional
insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) Umbrella excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
4Connections, LLC shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be
canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. 4Connections, LLC shall hold and save the Township harmless from and
indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss and
liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly,
immediately or consequently, from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
§ A401-50 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-53
1:1454
§ A401-54. Limitations.
§ A401-55. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-56. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-57. Law changes.
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against 4Connections, LLC;
(5) Any act or omission of 4Connections, LLC or any of its officers,
directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen
or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) 4Connections, LLC's action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for 4Connections, LLC's nonexclusive use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When
and if 4Connections, LLC increases its scope offering to any business or
resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in scope passes
through the 4Connections, LLC cable lines located within the Township,
the within ordinance shall be null and void. 4Connections, LLC and the
Township must then renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the
proposed increase in scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this
ordinance will be deemed terminated. The Township is not obligated to
accept any increase in scope proposed by 4Connections, LLC.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to 4Connections,
LLC's use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
§ A401-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-57
1:1455
§ A401-58. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of
4Connections, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such
acceptance is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final
passage of the ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no
further effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, 4Connections, LLC is deemed to
be a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the
appropriate governmental authority, then 4Connections, LLC shall no
longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent that other
public utilities providing telecommunications service are subject to like
requirements.
§ A401-57 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-58
1:1456
ARTICLE IV
Zayo Group, LLC
[Adopted 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 3724; amended in its entirety
2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 4006]
§ A401-59. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
ZAYO GROUP, LLC — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and
is known as Zayo Group, LLC, it servants, employees, agents, officers,
directors and contractors.
§ A401-60. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding Zayo Group, LLC's
request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and feels that
it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to grant said
request.
§ A401-61. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § A401-62 below.
Said period shall begin on March 18, 2013, and shall expire five years
from said date on March 17, 2018. This consent shall permit Zayo Group,
LLC to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, and over the
public highways and streets in Franklin Township poles, wires, cable, and
fiberoptic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
of the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the provisions of
this ordinance. In the event that Zayo Group, LLC violates any provision
of this ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow
Zayo Group, LLC 30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is
granted by the Township Council. In the event that Zayo Group, LLC does
not cure the violation in the prescribed time, appropriate action will be
taken on behalf of the Township which may include but is not limited to
court intervention and the voidance of this ordinance and the termination of
any and all relationships between the Township and Zayo Group, LLC.
§ A401-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-62
1:1457
§ A401-62. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-63. Zayo Group, LLC's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township shall be respected by Zayo Group, LLC, and Zayo Group,
LLC will notify the Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures
permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to such
installation.
§ A401-64. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled "Schedule A," and attached to this ordinance.207 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at Zayo Group, LLC's own cost and expense; procedures
necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every such question
shall be pursued in Zayo Group, LLC's own name and the Township shall
never be under any obligation to perform investigations or research,
conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of
engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take any steps
to define, delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the
Township.
§ A401-65. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiberoptic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other than
wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiberoptic cables
shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
207. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ A401-62 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-66
1:1458
§ A401-66. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to Zayo Group,
LLC.
§ A401-67. Fee.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to Zayo Group, LLC,
Zayo Group, LLC agrees to pay the Township on an annual basis the
following fees:
§ A401-68. Conditions of construction.
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of Zayo Group, LLC fiberoptic cable
located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township with a
minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by Zayo Group, LLC shall
be made on or before October 1 of each year in which access to the
Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such Zayo Group, LLC by the applicable
authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event Zayo Group, LLC shall from time to time
disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures,
equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or
surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter whatsoever,
Zayo Group, LLC shall, at its sole expense, reasonably restore and
replace such places and things so disturbed to and in not less than as
good condition as existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so, Zayo
Group, LLC shall comply with all applicable ordinances, resolutions,
laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations shall be completed within
30 working days of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, Zayo Group, LLC, upon reasonable
notice by the Township, shall at its own expense, remove, relay and
relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. Zayo Group, LLC shall for the purpose of
and upon request of the Township, at Zayo Group, LLC's expense,
temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and associated facilities in
order to facilitate the moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and
machinery and to accommodate other like circumstances. Zayo Group,
LLC may suggest alternatives to the temporary removal of cables where
§ A401-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-68
1:1459
§ A401-69. Underground lines.
Zayo Group, LLC shall respond when requested to mark out underground
lines within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-70. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by Zayo Group, LLC of all of its
obligations to the Township, Zayo Group, LLC shall deliver to the Township
and maintain in force throughout the duration of the use of the Township's
said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000,
conditioned on the faithful performance by Zayo Group, LLC of all of its
undertakings pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must be acceptable in
form and content to the Township Attorney. The bonding company shall be
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-71. Liability insurance.
§ A401-72. Indemnity.
such temporary removal may cause a disruption of services or
otherwise interfere with the expectations of its customers. However,
the Township retains the right to make the final decision regarding said
cable removal.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, Zayo
Group, LLC shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force, at its
sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive
general liability insurance naming the Township as an additional
insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) Umbrella excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Zayo
Group, LLC shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be
canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. Zayo Group, LLC shall hold and save the Township harmless from and
indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss and
§ A401-68 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-72
1:1460
§ A401-73. Limitations.
§ A401-74. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly,
immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against Zayo Group, LLC;
(5) Any act or omission of Zayo Group, LLC or any of its officers,
directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen
or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) Zayo Group, LLC's action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for Zayo Group, LLC's nonexclusive use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When
and if Zayo Group, LLC increases its scope offering to any business or
resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in scope passes
through the Zayo Group, LLC cable lines located within the Township,
the within ordinance shall be null and void. Zayo Group, LLC and the
Township must then renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the
proposed increase in scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this
ordinance will be deemed terminated. The Township is not obligated to
accept any increase in scope proposed by Zayo Group, LLC.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to Zayo Group, LLC's
use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
§ A401-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-75
1:1461
§ A401-75. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only, and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-76. Law changes.
§ A401-77. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of Zayo
Group, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such acceptance is
not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final passage of the
ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no further effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, Zayo Group, LLC is deemed to be
a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the
appropriate governmental authority, then Zayo Group, LLC shall no
longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent that other
public utilities providing telecommunications service are subject to like
requirements.
§ A401-75 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-77
1:1462
ARTICLE V
AT&T
[Adopted 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 3725]
§ A401-78. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
AT&T — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as AT&T,
its servants, employees, agents, officers, directors and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-79. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding AT&T's request for
use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and feels that it is in the
best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to grant said request.
§ A401-80. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § A401-81 below.
Said period shall begin on December 15, 2007, and shall expire five years
from said date on December 14, 2012. This consent shall permit AT&T
to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, and over the public
highways and streets in Franklin Township poles, wires, cable, and
fiberoptic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
of the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the provisions
of this ordinance. In the event that AT&T violates any provision of this
ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow AT&T
30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is granted by the
Township Council. In the event that AT&T does not cure the violation in the
prescribed time, appropriate action will be taken on behalf of the Township
which may include but is not limited to court intervention and the voidance
of this ordinance and the termination of any and all relationships between
the Township and AT&T.
§ A401-81. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-82
1:1463
§ A401-82. AT&T's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township shall be respected by AT&T, and AT&T will notify the
Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures permitted to be
installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to such installation.
§ A401-83. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled "Schedule A," and attached to this ordinance.208 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at AT&T's own cost and expense; procedures necessary to
gather relevant information and to resolve every such question shall be
pursued in AT&T 's own name and the Township shall never be under
any obligation to perform investigations or research, conduct or prosecute
proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of engineers, surveyors,
title searchers or others, or otherwise take any steps to define, delineate,
establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the Township.
§ A401-84. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiberoptic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other than
wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiberoptic cables
shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
§ A401-85. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to AT&T.
§ A401-86. Fee.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to AT&T, AT&T agrees
to pay the Township on an annual basis the following fees:
208. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ A401-82 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-86
1:1464
§ A401-87. Conditions of construction.
§ A401-88. Underground lines.
AT&T shall respond when requested to mark out underground lines within
48 hours of the request.
§ A401-89. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by AT&T of all of its obligations to
the Township, AT&T shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of AT&T fiberoptic cable located in the
public road rights-of-way within the Township with a minimum annual
fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by AT&T shall be made on
or before October 1 of each year in which access to the Township's
public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to accurately make the
payment called for on or before October 1 of each said year will result
in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive franchise granted to
such AT&T by the applicable authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event AT&T shall from time to time disturb any
public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
driveways, above or below ground utilities, lines, fixtures, equipment or
other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or surfaces in the
natural topography or any other matter whatsoever, AT&T shall, at its
sole expense, reasonably restore and replace such places and things so
disturbed to and in not less than as good condition as existed prior to
each disturbance. In doing so, AT&T shall comply with all applicable
ordinances, resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations
shall be completed within 30 working days of the work requiring the
same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, AT&T, upon reasonable notice by
the Township, shall at its own expense remove, relay and relocate its
cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. AT&T shall for the purpose of and upon
request of the Township, at AT&T 's expense, temporarily raise, lower
or remove its cables and associated facilities in order to facilitate the
moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and machinery and to
accommodate other like circumstances. AT&T may suggest alternatives
to the temporary removal of cables where such temporary removal may
cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with the
expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the right
to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
§ A401-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-89
1:1465
throughout the duration of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way
a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000, conditioned on
the faithful performance by AT&T of all of its undertakings pursuant to
this ordinance. Said bond must be acceptable in form and content to the
Township Attorney. The bonding company shall be authorized to do business
in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-90. Liability insurance.
§ A401-91. Indemnity.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, AT&T
shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force, at its sole expense,
sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive general liability
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in
the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) Umbrella excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. AT&T
shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be canceled without a
minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or greater notice if
required by regulations of the New Jersey Department of Insurance.
A. AT&T shall hold and save the Township harmless from and indemnify
and defend the Township against every claim, loss and liability of every
kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly, immediately or
consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against AT&T;
(5) Any act or omission of AT&T or any of its officers, directors,
employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen or
affiliated companies;
§ A401-89 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-91
1:1466
§ A401-92. Limitations.
§ A401-93. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-94. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only, and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-95. Law changes.
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) AT&T's action, inaction, franchise, operation, maintenance,
construction or installation of the lines, cables and fixtures
described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for AT&T's nonexclusive use of the Township's said
rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When and if AT&T
increases its scope offering to any business or resident in the State of
New Jersey and said increase in scope passes through the AT&T cable
lines located within the Township, the within Ordinance shall be null
and void. AT&T and the Township must then renegotiate the terms,
conditions and fees of the proposed increase in scope. If agreement
cannot be reached, this ordinance will be deemed terminated. The
Township is not obligated to accept any increase in scope proposed by
AT&T.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to AT&T's use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, AT&T is deemed to be a public
utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the appropriate
governmental authority, then AT&T shall no longer be subject to this
§ A401-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-95
1:1467
§ A401-96. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of AT&T's
written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such acceptance is not received
by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final passage of the ordinance,
the same will automatically expire and be of no further effect.
ordinance except to the extent that other public utilities providing
telecommunications service are subject to like requirements.
§ A401-95 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-96
1:1468
ARTICLE VI
4Connections, LLC
[Adopted 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3746; amended in its entirety
3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4099-15]
§ A401-97. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
4CONNECTIONS, LLC — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and
is known as 4Connections, LLC, its servants, employees, agents, officers,
directors and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-98. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding 4Connections,
LLC's request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way and
feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township to
grant said request.
§ A401-99. Grant of consent.209
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § 246-61 below.
Said period shall begin on April 1, 2015, and shall expire five years from
said date on February 28, 2035. This consent shall permit 4Connections,
LLC to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over the public
highways and streets in Franklin Township, poles, wires, cable, and fiber
optic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of
the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the provisions of this
ordinance. In the event that 4Connections, LLC violates any provision of
this ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow
4Connections, LLC 30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is
granted by the Township Council. In the event that 4Connections, LLC does
not cure the violation in the prescribed time, appropriate action will be
taken on behalf of the Township which may include, but is not limited to,
court intervention and the voidance of this ordinance and the termination of
any and all relationships between the Township and 4Connections, LLC.
209. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ A401-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-100
1:1469
§ A401-100. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-101. 4Connections, LLC's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by 4Connections, LLC, and 4Connections,
LLC will notify the Township of the location of any cable or other fixtures
permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to such
installation.
§ A401-102. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled Schedule A and attached to this ordinance.210 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at 4Connections, LLC's own cost and expense; procedures
necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every such question
shall be pursued in 4Connections, LLC's own name and the Township shall
never be under any obligation to perform investigations or research,
conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the charge of
engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take any steps
to define, delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights of the
Township.
§ A401-103. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other
than wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiber optic
cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
210. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ A401-100 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-104
1:1470
§ A401-104. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor
any other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to
4Connections, LLC.
§ A401-105. Fee.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to 4Connections, LLC,
4Connections, LLC agrees to pay the Township on an annual basis the
following fees:
§ A401-106. Conditions of construction.
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of 4Connections, LLC fiber optic cable
located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township with a
minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by 4Connections, LLC
shall be made on or before October 1 of each year in which access to the
Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such 4Connections, LLC by the applicable
authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event 4Connections, LLC shall from time to time
disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveways, above- or belowground utilities, lines, fixtures,
equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other landscaping or
surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter whatsoever,
4Connections, LLC shall, at its sole expense, reasonably restore and
replace such places and things so disturbed to and in not less than as
good condition as existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so,
4Connections, LLC shall comply with all applicable ordinances,
resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All restorations shall be
completed within 30 working days of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, 4Connections, LLC, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, shall, at its own expense, remove,
relay and relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. 4Connections, LLC shall for the purpose
of and upon request of the Township, at 4Connections, LLC's expense,
temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and associated facilities in
order to facilitate the moving of buildings, equipment, vehicles and
machinery and to accommodate other like circumstances.
4Connections, LLC may suggest alternatives to the temporary removal
§ A401-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-106
1:1471
§ A401-107. Underground lines.
4Connections, LLC shall respond when requested to mark out underground
lines, within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-108. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by 4Connections, LLC of all of its
obligations to the Township, 4Connections, LLC shall deliver to the
Township and maintain in force throughout the duration of the use of the
Township's said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less
than $50,000, conditioned on the faithful performance by 4Connections,
LLC of all of its undertakings pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must
be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney. The bonding
company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-109. Liability insurance.
§ A401-110. Indemnity.
of cables where such temporary removal may cause a disruption of
services or otherwise interfere with the expectations of its customers.
However, the Township retains the right to make the final decision
regarding said cable removal.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way,
4Connections, LLC shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force,
at its sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive
general liability insurance naming the Township as an additional
insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) "Umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
4Connections, LLC shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be
canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. 4Connections, LLC shall hold and save the Township harmless from and
indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss and
§ A401-106 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-110
1:1472
§ A401-111. Limitations.
§ A401-112. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-113. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or indirectly,
immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) All proceedings of every kind by or against 4Connections, LLC;
(3) Any act or omission of 4Connections, LLC, or any of its officers,
directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers, materialmen
or affiliated companies;
(4) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(5) 4Connections, LLC's action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for 4Connections, LLC's nonexclusive use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When
and if 4Connections, LLC increases its scope offering to any business or
resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in scope passes
through the 4Connections, LLC cable lines located within the Township,
the within ordinance shall be null and void. 4Connections, LLC and the
Township must then renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the
proposed increase in scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this
ordinance will be deemed terminated. The Township is not obligated to
accept any increase in scope proposed by 4Connections, LLC.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to 4Connections,
LLC's use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in scope.
§ A401-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-114
1:1473
§ A401-114. Law changes.
§ A401-115. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of
4Connections, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such
acceptance is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final
passage of the Ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no
further effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the Ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, 4Connections, LLC is deemed to
be a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, by the
appropriate governmental authority, then 4Connections, LLC shall no
longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent that other
public utilities providing telecommunications service are subject to like
requirements.
§ A401-114 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-115
1:1474
ARTICLE VII
Level 3 Communications, LLC
[Adopted 9-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3783]
§ A401-116. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
LEVEL 3 COMMUNICATIONS, LLC — The grantee of rights under this
ordinance and is known as "Level 3 Communications, LLC," its servants,
employees, agents, officers, directors and contractors.
SCOPE OFFERING — Any business or service offering that Level 3
Communications, LLC currently or in the future may provide to any
business or resident, whether or not currently contemplated.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-117. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding Level 3
Communications, LLC's request for use of the municipality's public road
rights-of-way and feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of
Franklin Township to grant said request.
§ A401-118. Township consent granted. [Amended 10-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 4087-14]
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to the
nonexclusive use of its right-of-way for a period of five years. The conditions
for the parameters of said use are set forth below. Said period shall begin
on November 1, 2014, and shall expire five years from said date on October
31, 2019. This consent shall permit Level 3 Communications, LLC to place
and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over the public highways and
streets in Franklin Township poles, wires, cable and fiber optic cables and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of the proposed use.
The consent, however, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. In
the event that Level 3 Communications, LLC violates any provision of this
ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow Level 3
Communications, LLC 30 days to cure the violation unless additional time is
granted by the Township Council. In the event that Level 3 Communications,
LLC does not cure the violation in the prescribed time, appropriate action
will be taken on behalf of the Township, which may include, but is not
limited to, court intervention and the voidance of this ordinance and the
§ A401-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-118
1:1475
termination of any and all relationships between the Township and Level 3
Communications, LLC.
§ A401-119. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications services.
§ A401-120. Level 3 Communications, LLC's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township shall be respected by Level 3 Communications, LLC, and Level
3 Communications, LLC will notify the Township of the location of any cable
or other fixtures permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior
to such installation.
§ A401-121. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the entirety of Franklin
Township. All questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest
in property, federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasigovernmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be
investigated and researched at Level 3 Communications, LLC's own cost
and expense; procedures necessary to gather relevant information and to
resolve every such question shall be pursued in Level 3 Communications'
own name and the Township shall never be under any obligation to perform
investigations or research, conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal
fees or pay the charge of engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others,
or otherwise take any steps to define, delineate, establish or clarify the
boundaries or rights of the Township.
§ A401-122. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other
than wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiber optic
cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before its
installation.
§ A401-118 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-123
1:1476
§ A401-123. No interest in township property granted.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to Level 3
Communications, LLC.
§ A401-124. Fees.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to Level 3
Communications, LLC, Level 3 Communications agrees to pay the Township
on an annual basis the following fees:
§ A401-125. Conditions of construction.
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of Level 3 Communications, LLC fiber
optic cable located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township,
with a minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by Level 3
Communications, LLC shall be made on or before November 1 of each
year in which access to the Township's public road rights-of-way is in
effect. Any failure to accurately make the payment called for on or
before November 1 of each said year will result in the automatic
revocation of the nonexclusive franchise granted to such Level 3
Communications, LLC by the applicable authorizing action. [Amended
10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 4087-14]
A. Restoration. In the event Level 3 Communications, LLC shall, from time
to time disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, driveways, aboveground or below-ground utilities,
lines, fixtures, equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other
landscaping or surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter
whatsoever, Level 3 Communications, LLC shall, at its sole expense,
reasonably restore and replace such places and things so disturbed to
and in not less than as good condition as existed prior to each
disturbance. In doing so, Level 3 Communications, LLC shall comply
with all applicable ordinances, resolutions, laws, rulings and
regulations. All restorations shall be completed within 30 working days
of the work requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, Level 3 Communications, LLC,
upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall, at its own expense,
remove, relay and relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. Level 3 Communications, LLC shall, for
the purpose of and upon request of the Township, at Level 3
Communications, LLC's expense, temporarily raise, lower or remove its
cables and associated facilities in order to facilitate the moving of
§ A401-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-125
1:1477
§ A401-126. Underground lines.
Level 3 Communications, LLC shall respond when requested to mark out
underground lines within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-127. Performance bond.
To secure the faithful performance by Level 3 Communications, LLC of
all of its obligations to the Township, Level 3 Communications, LLC shall
deliver to the Township and maintain in force throughout the duration of
the use of the Township's said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum
of not less than $50,000, conditioned on the faithful performance by Level 3
Communications, LLC of all of its undertakings pursuant to this ordinance.
Said bond must be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney.
The bonding company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
§ A401-128. Liability insurance.
§ A401-129. Indemnity.
buildings, equipment, vehicles and machinery and to accommodate
other like circumstances. Level 3 Communications, LLC may suggest
alternatives to the temporary removal of cables where such temporary
removal may cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with
the expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the
right to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, Level 3
Communications, LLC shall deliver to the Township and maintain in
force, at its sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and
comprehensive general liability insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit,
judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) Umbrella excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Level 3
Communications, LLC shall assure that no such policy of insurance
shall be canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township
or greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
§ A401-125 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-129
1:1478
§ A401-130. Limitations.
A. Level 3 Communications, LLC shall hold and save the Township
harmless from and indemnify and defend the Township against every
claim, loss and liability of every kind, arising in any and every way,
directly or indirectly, immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings or every kind by or against Level 3
Communications, LLC;
(5) Any act or omission of Level 3 Communications, LLC or any of its
officers, directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers,
materialmen or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) Level 3 Communications, LLC's action, inaction, franchise,
operation, maintenance, construction or installation of the lines,
cables and fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for Level 3 Communications, LLC's nonexclusive use
of the Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services.
When and if Level 3 Communication, LLC increases its scope offering to
any business or resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in
scope offering passes through the Level 3 Communications, LLC cable
lines located within the Township, the within ordinance shall be null
and void. Level 3 Communications, LLC and the Township must then
renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the proposed increase in
scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this ordinance will be deemed
terminated. The Township is not obligated to accept any increase in
scope proposed by Level 3 Communications, LLC.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to Level 3
Communications, LLC's use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the
increase in scope.
§ A401-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-131
1:1479
§ A401-131. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-132. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-133. Law changes.
§ A401-134. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of Level
3 Communications, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such
acceptance is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final
passage of the ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no
further effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, Level 3 Communications, LLC is
deemed to be a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13,
by the appropriate governmental authority, then Level 3
Communications shall no longer be subject to this ordinance except to
the extent that other public utilities providing telecommunications
service are subject to like requirements.
§ A401-131 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-134
1:1480
ARTICLE VIII
Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC
[Adopted 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3800]
§ A401-135. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
FIBER TECHNOLOGIES NETWORKS, LLC — The grantee of rights under
this ordinance and is known as Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC, its
servants, employees, agents, officers, directors and contractors.
SCOPE OFFERING — Any business or service offering that Fiber
Technologies Networks, LLC, currently or in the future, may provide to any
business or resident, whether or not currently contemplated.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-136. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding Fiber Technologies
Networks, LLC's request for use of the municipality's public road rightsof-
way and feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin
Township to grant said request.
§ A401-137. Grant of permission.
The Township hereby grants to the provider the right, privilege and
authority to enter upon the Township's right-of-way to attach, install,
operate, maintain, remove, reattach, reinstall, relocate, maintain and
replace its telecommunications system in or on utility poles or other
structures located within the Township's right-of-way. Nothing in this
agreement shall be deemed to grant, convey or vest a real property interest
in land, including any fee, leasehold interest, easement, or any other form
of interest or ownership, to the provider.
§ A401-138. Nonexclusive grant.
This agreement shall not in any manner prevent the Township from entering
into other similar agreements or granting other or further franchises or
uses in, under, on, across, over, through, along or below any of the
Township's rights-of-way, streets, avenues or all other public lands or
properties of every type and description. This agreement shall in no way
prevent or prohibit the Township from using any of its roads, streets or
other public properties or affect its jurisdiction over them or any part of
§ A401-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-138
1:1481
them, and the Township shall retain power to make all necessary changes,
relocations, repairs, maintenance, establishment, improvement, and/or
dedication of same as the Township may deem fit, including the dedication,
establishment, maintenance, and improvement of all new rights-of-way,
thoroughfares and other public properties of every type and description.
§ A401-139. Location of facilities.
The facilities to be attached and/or installed on existing utility poles and/or
in underground conduit in the public right-of-way shall be installed at the
sole cost and expense of the provider.
§ A401-140. Work in right-of-way.
§ A401-141. Legal requirements.
The provider shall adhere to all applicable federal, state, county and
Township laws, ordinances, rules and regulations for use and safety of
the public right-of-way, and shall comply with all federal, state, county
and Township laws, ordinances, rules and regulations requiring permits,
inspections, and certificates prior to, during, and at the completion of
construction.
§ A401-142. Indemnification.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work in the public right-of-way, for
the purpose of installation, construction, repair, maintenance or
relocation of its facilities or equipment, the provider shall obtain all
applicable permits and approvals as may be required by the Township
and shall pay all duly established permit and inspection fees associated
with the processing of permits and approvals. During any work
performed or conducted by or on behalf of the provider within the
public right-of-way and other public properties, such work shall be
conducted so as to minimally interfere with the free passage of traffic
and the free use of adjoining property. Further, the provider shall at all
times during such period of work, post and maintain proper barricades
and comply with all applicable safety regulations as required by the
ordinances of the Township and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. The provider shall be responsible for the repair of any and all damage to
paving, existing utility lines, or any surface or subsurface installations,
caused by or from the construction, installation or maintenance of said
facilities. Such repair shall return the paving or surface to the condition
it was in immediately prior to any work conducted by or on behalf of the
provider. The provider shall promptly complete all repair work at its
sole cost and expense.
A. The provider hereby releases and agrees to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its officers, employees, agents and
representatives from any and all claims, costs, judgments, awards or
liability to any person or entity, including claims by the provider's own
§ A401-138 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-142
1:1482
employees, whether from injury, sickness or death of any person or
damage to property, arising from the negligent acts or omissions of
the provider, its agents, servants, officers or employees. The provider
further releases, and agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the Township, its officers and employees from any and all claims, costs,
judgments, awards or liability to any person or entity, including claims
by the provider's own employees, arising against the Township solely
by virtue of the Township's ownership or control of the right-of-way or
other public properties, by virtue of the provider's exercise of the rights
granted herein, or by virtue of the Township's permitting the provider's
use of the Borough's right-of-way or other public property, or based
upon the Township's inspection or lack of inspection of work performed
by the provider, its agents and servants, officers or employees in
connection with work authorized on the Township's property or
property over which the Township has control, pursuant to this
agreement or pursuant to any other permit or approval issued in
connection with this agreement excluding in all instances, claims
arising out of gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of
the Township, its officers, agents, employees and contractors. This
covenant of indemnification shall include, but not be limited by this
reference to, claims against the Township arising as a result of
negligent acts or omissions of the provider, its agents, servants, officers
and employees in barricading, instituting trench safety systems or
providing other adequate warnings of any excavation, construction, or
work in any public right-of-way or other public place in performance of
work or services permitted under this agreement. In the event that the
provider's transmission technology or facilities emit electromagnetic
impulses (EMF), the provider expressly agrees that this indemnity
provision extends to any and all claims for injury, sickness or death of
any person or entity, including employees of the provider, arising out of
or caused by said emissions.
B. Inspection or acceptance by the Township of any work performed by the
provider at the time of completion of construction shall not be grounds
for avoidance of any of these covenants of indemnification. The
indemnification obligations shall extend to claims which are not
reduced to a suit and any claims which may be compromised prior to
the culmination of any litigation or the institution of any litigation,
provided that the provider has been given prompt written notice by the
Township of any such claim, has the right to defend or participate in the
defense of such claim, and has the right to approve any settlement or
other compromise of any such claim.
C. In the event that the provider refuses the tender of defense in any suit
or any claim, said tender having been made pursuant to the
indemnification clauses contained herein, and said refusal is
subsequently determined by a court having jurisdiction (or such other
tribunal that the parties shall agree to decide the matter) to have been a
wrongful refusal on the part of the provider, then the provider shall pay
all of the Township's costs for defense of the action, including all
§ A401-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-142
1:1483
§ A401-143. Insurance.
In addition to the foregoing indemnity provisions, the provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, procure and maintain at all times during the term
of this agreement, in full force and effect, paid policies for comprehensive
commercial general liability insurance in favor of the Township, in the
amount of at least $5,000,000, covering bodily injury and property damage
arising out of any one accident. The provider shall also maintain automobile
liability insurance with limits of no less than $1,000,000 combined single
limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage and workers
compensation insurance in an amount as required by law. Proof of said
coverage, naming the Township, its officers, elected officials, agents,
employees, engineers and consultants as additional named insureds, and
including the indemnification provisions in § A401-142, shall be filed with
the Township Clerk prior to commencement of any work pursuant to this
agreement. The Township shall have the right to require reasonable
increases in the amount of comprehensive general liability insurance and
to alter the terms of insurance called for under this section. The insurance
shall not be subject to cancellation or change until 30 days after the
Township Clerk has received written notice thereof as evidenced by return
receipt of certified or registered letter.
§ A401-144. Limitation of liability.
Notwithstanding any provision contained herein, neither the Township nor
the provider shall be liable to the other for consequential, incidental,
exemplary or punitive damages on account of any activity pursuant to this
agreement.
§ A401-145. Abandonment and removal of provider's
telecommunication facilities.
No telecommunication facility laid in the right-of-way by the provider may
be abandoned by the provider without the express written consent of the
Township. Any plan for abandonment or removal of the provider's facilities
must be first approved by the Township, and all necessary permits must be
obtained prior to such work. The provisions of this section shall survive the
expiration, revocation or termination of this agreement. In the event that
the Township allows the provider to abandon any portion of its facilities, the
Township shall be responsible for such facilities and the provider shall have
no further obligation to maintain, relocate or remove such facilities.
reasonable expert witness fees and reasonable attorneys' fees and the
reasonable costs of the Township, including reasonable attorneys' fees
of recovering under this indemnification clause.
D. The provisions of this section shall survive the expiration, revocation or
termination of this agreement.
§ A401-142 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-146
1:1484
§ A401-146. Term.
The permission and authority hereby granted to the provider shall be for
a period of 50 years from the effective date of this agreement, so long as
the provider remains in compliance with the terms and conditions set forth
herein, and such grant of permission and authority is in accordance with
law.
§ A401-147. Modification.
The parties hereby reserve the right to alter, amend or modify the terms
and conditions of this agreement upon written agreement of both parties to
such alteration, amendment or modification, which agreement shall not be
unreasonably withheld by either party.
§ A401-148. Payment of reasonable costs.
In consideration of the rights herein conveyed to the provider, the provider
shall compensate the Township for its reasonable costs incurred for its
professional legal and engineering work and review, and other reasonable
costs and services rendered by the Township in connection with the
provider's request pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:30A-124.
§ A401-149. Performance bond.
The provider shall provide the Township with a performance surety bond
in the amount of $25,000 to ensure the faithful performance of its
undertakings, at its sole cost and expense. The bond shall be submitted
to the Township at the time of application for a building permit, before
commencement of any construction under this agreement, or within 30 days
of the date of this agreement, whichever occurs first. The performance bond
shall remain in effect during the entire course of the work to be performed
under this agreement and for a period of one year after completion of all
such work.
§ A401-150. Forfeiture and revocation.
If the provider willfully violates or fails to comply with any of the material
provisions of this agreement, or through willful misconduct or gross
negligence fails to comply with any notice given by the Township under
the provisions of this agreement, then the provider shall, at the election
of the Township, forfeit all rights conferred hereunder and this agreement
may be revoked, terminated or annulled by the Township after a hearing
held upon reasonable notice to the provider. The Township may decide,
after consideration of the reasons for the provider's failure to comply with
the agreement, to allow the provider additional time to cure before such
termination or revocation. The Township may elect, in lieu of the above
and without any prejudice to any of its other legal rights and remedies, to
obtain an order from the Superior Court having jurisdiction, compelling the
provider to comply with the provisions of this agreement and to recover
§ A401-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-150
1:1485
damages and costs incurred by the Borough by reason of the provider's
failure to comply.
§ A401-151. Remedies to enforce compliance.
In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the Township reserves the
right to pursue any remedy to compel or force the provider to comply with
the terms hereof, and the pursuit of any right or remedy by the Township
shall not prevent the Township from thereafter declaring a forfeiture or
revocation for breach of conditions herein.
§ A401-152. Change of law.
The provider shall be subject to any ordinance or resolution now or
hereafter adopted by the Township, and shall be subject to any state or
federal statute applicable to this agreement or the rights conveyed herein .
§ A401-153. Assignment.
This agreement may not be assigned or transferred without written
approval of the Township, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld or delayed, except the provider may freely assign this agreement
in whole or in part to a parent, subsidiary, or affiliated corporation or
as part of any corporate financing, reorganization or refinancing. In the
case of transfer or assignment as security by mortgage or other security
instrument in whole or in part to secure indebtedness, such consent shall
not be required unless and until the secured party elects to realize upon the
collateral. The provider shall provide prompt, written notice to the Borough
of any such assignment.
§ A401-154. Governing law.
This agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-155. Notice.
All notices or other correspondence in connection with this agreement
should be mailed to:
For the Township:
Kenneth Daly, Township Manager
Township of Franklin
475 DeMott Lane
Somerset, New Jersey 08873
with a copy to:
Leslie G. London, Esq.
Township Attorney
§ A401-150 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-155
1:1486
McManimon & Scotland, LLC
One Riverfront Plaza, 4th Floor
Newark, New Jersey 07102
For the provider:
Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC
300 Meridian Centre
Rochester, New York 14618
Attn: General Counsel
With a copy to:
Richard P. DeAngelis, Jr., Esq.
Stryker, Tams & Dill, LLP
Two Penn Plaza East
Newark, New Jersey 07105
§ A401-156. Entire agreement.
This agreement constitutes the entire understanding and agreement
between the parties as to the subject matter herein and no other
agreements or understandings, written or otherwise, shall be binding upon
the parties upon execution of this agreement.
§ A401-157. Severability.
If any one or more of the provision or provisions of this agreement is
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in a final judicial action
to be void, voidable, or unenforceable, such provision(s) shall be deemed
severable from the remaining provisions of this agreement and shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this agreement.
§ A401-158. Binding agreement.
This agreement shall be binding upon the parties and their successors and
assigns.
§ A401-159. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of Fiber
Technologies Networks, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If
such acceptance is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the
final passage of the ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of
no further effect.
§ A401-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-159
1:1487

ARTICLE IX
CenturyLink
[Adopted 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 4225-18211]
§ A401-160. Grant of franchise.
The Township hereby grants to CenturyLink the right, privilege, and
authority to construct, maintain, operate, upgrade, and relocate its cables
and related appurtenances ("facilities") in, under, along, over, and across
the present and future streets, alleys, and public ways in the Township
("public ways," or in the singular, "public way"), including for the purpose
of providing telecommunication services to the Township's inhabitants.
§ A401-161. Acceptance by CenturyLink.
Within 60 days after the passage of this ordinance by the Township,
CenturyLink shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof with the
Township Recorder; otherwise the Ordinance and the rights granted herein
shall be null and void.
§ A401-162. Term.
The initial term of this franchise is 20 years, commencing on the date
of acceptance by CenturyLink as set forth above in § A401-161 and shall
automatically renew from year to year unless either party gives advance
written notice to the other party at least 120 days prior to expiration of
the initial term or subsequent annual term requesting the parties enter into
good-faith discussions to reach terms of a new agreement.
§ A401-163. Records inspection.
CenturyLink shall make available to the Township, upon reasonable advance
written notice of no fewer than 60 days, such information pertinent only
to enforcing the terms of this ordinance in such form and at such times
as CenturyLink can reasonably make available. Subject to applicable laws,
any information that is provided to the Township, except as otherwise
provided herein, and/or that the Township reviews in camera is confidential
and proprietary and shall not be disclosed or used for any purpose other
than verifying compliance with the terms of this ordinance. Except as
otherwise provided herein, any such information provided to the Township
shall be returned to CenturyLink following review, without duplication,
unless CenturyLink grants the Township permission to duplicate the
information.
§ A401-164. Nonexclusive franchise.
The right to use and occupy the public ways shall be nonexclusive, and the
Township reserves the right to use the public ways for itself or any other
211. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IX, United Telephone Company,
adopted 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3827.
§ A401-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-164
1:1489
entity. The Township's use, however, shall not unreasonably interfere with
CenturyLink's facilities or the rights granted CenturyLink herein.
§ A401-165. Township regulatory authority.
The Township reserves the right to adopt such additional ordinances and
regulations as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power
for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their
properties consistent with applicable federal and state law. The Township
agrees to promptly notify CenturyLink of any such changes potentially
applicable to this franchise.
§ A401-166. Indemnification.
The Township shall not be liable for any property damage or loss or injury
to or death of any person that occurs in the construction, operation or
maintenance by CenturyLink of its facilities. CenturyLink shall indemnify,
defend and hold the Township harmless from and against claims, demands,
liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on account of
CenturyLink's use of the public ways. The Township shall: a) give prompt
written notice to CenturyLink of any claim, demand or lien with respect
to which the Township seeks indemnification hereunder; and b) permit
CenturyLink to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien.
CenturyLink shall not be subject to liability for any settlement made without
its consent. Notwithstanding the other provisions contained herein,
CenturyLink shall in no event be required to indemnify the Township for any
claims, demands, or liens arising from the negligence or wrongful actions
or inactions of the Township, its officials, boards, commissions, agents,
contractors, and/or employees.
§ A401-167. Insurance requirements.
CenturyLink will maintain in full force and effect for the term of the
franchise, at CenturyLink's expense, a comprehensive liability insurance
policy written by a company authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey, or will provide self-insurance reasonably satisfactory to the
Township, protecting it against liability for loss, personal injury and
property damage occasioned by the operation of the system, including the
facilities, by CenturyLink. Such insurance will be in an amount not less
than $1,000,000. CenturyLink will also maintain Workers' Compensation
coverage throughout the term of this franchise as required by law. Evidence
of such insurance will be provided to the Township upon request.
§ A401-168. Annexation.
When any territory is approved for annexation to the Township, the
Township shall within 10 business days provide by certified mail to
CenturyLink: a) each site address to be annexed as recorded on Township
assessment and tax rolls; b) a legal description of the proposed boundary
§ A401-164 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-168
1:1490
change; and c) a copy of the Township's ordinance approving the proposed
annexation.
§ A401-169. Plan, design, construction and installation of
CenturyLink's facilities.
A. All facilities under authority of this ordinance shall be used, constructed
and maintained in accordance with applicable law.
B. CenturyLink shall, prior to commencing new construction or major
reconstruction work in public ways or other public places, apply for a
permit from the Township, which permit shall not be unreasonably
withheld, conditioned, or delayed. CenturyLink will provide as-built
route maps of new facilities placed in the public ways pursuant to a
permit issued by the Township. CenturyLink will abide by all applicable
ordinances and reasonable rules, regulations and requirements of the
Township consistent with applicable law, and the Township may inspect
the manner of such work and require remedies as may be reasonably
necessary to assure compliance. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
CenturyLink shall not be obligated to obtain a permit to perform
emergency repairs.
C. To the extent practical and consistent with any permit issued by the
Township, all facilities shall be located so as to cause minimum
interference with the public ways and shall be constructed, installed,
maintained, cleared of vegetation, renovated, or replaced in
accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations of the
Township.
D. If, during the course of work on its facilities, CenturyLink causes
damage to or alters the public way or other public property,
CenturyLink shall replace and restore such public way or public
property at CenturyLink's expense to a condition reasonably
comparable to the condition that existed immediately prior to such
damage or alteration.
E. CenturyLink shall have the right to excavate the public ways subject to
reasonable conditions and requirements of the Township. Before
installing new underground facilities or replacing existing underground
facilities, CenturyLink shall first notify the Township of such work. The
Township may then notify its other franchisees, who may, each at its
own expense, share the trench for laying its own facilities therein,
provided that such shared use will not unreasonably interfere with
others' use of the trench or unreasonably delay completion of
CenturyLink's installation or replacement project.
F. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the Township
from constructing, maintaining, repairing, or relocating its sewers,
streets, water mains, sidewalks, or other public property. However,
before commencing any work within a public way that may affect
CenturyLink's facilities, the Township shall give written notice to
§ A401-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-169
1:1491
§ A401-170. Relocation of facilities.
CenturyLink, and all such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in
such a manner as not to obstruct, injure, or prevent the free use and
operation of CenturyLink's poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes,
and appurtenances.
G. CenturyLink shall not attach to, or otherwise use or commit to use, any
pole owned by Township until a separate pole attachment agreement
has been executed by the parties.
A. Relocation for the Township. CenturyLink shall, upon receipt of
advance written notice of not fewer than 120 days, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any CenturyLink property
located in a public way when required by the Township consistent with
its police powers. CenturyLink shall be responsible for any costs
associated with these obligations to the same extent as other users of
the respective public way.
B. Relocation for a third party. CenturyLink shall, at the request of any
person holding a lawful permit issued by the Township, protect,
support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in, or remove
from public ways, as applicable, any CenturyLink property, provided
that the cost of such action is borne by the person requesting it and
CenturyLink is given reasonable advance written notice. In such
situation, CenturyLink may also require advance payment. For
purposes of this subsection, "reasonable advance written notice" shall
mean no fewer than 14 days for a temporary relocation, and no fewer
than 120 days for a permanent relocation.
C. Alternatives to relocation.
(1) CenturyLink may, after receipt of written notice requesting a
relocation of facilities, submit to the Township written alternatives
to such relocation. Such alternatives shall include the use and
operation of temporary transmitting facilities in adjacent public
ways. The Township shall promptly evaluate such alternatives and
advise CenturyLink in writing if one or more of the alternatives are
suitable. If requested by the Township, CenturyLink shall promptly
submit additional information to assist the Township in making
such evaluation.
(2) The Township shall give each alternative proposed by CenturyLink
full and fair consideration. In the event the Township ultimately
determines that there is no other reasonable alternative,
CenturyLink shall relocate the facilities as otherwise provided
herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, CenturyLink shall in all
cases have the right to abandon the facilities.
§ A401-169 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-171
1:1492
§ A401-171. Vegetation management.
CenturyLink shall have the authority to trim trees and other natural growth
in the public ways in order to access and maintain the facilities in
compliance with applicable law and industry standards.
§ A401-172. Compensation to Township.
CenturyLink will pay administrative costs actually incurred by the Township
due to CenturyLink's occupation of the public rights-of-way as conforms to
the requirements in N.J.S.A. 54:30A-124.
§ A401-173. Revocation of franchise for noncompliance.
A. In the event that the Township believes that CenturyLink has not
complied with the terms of the franchise, the Township shall informally
discuss the matter with CenturyLink. If these discussions do not lead to
resolution of the problem, the Township shall notify CenturyLink in
writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
B. CenturyLink shall have 30 days from receipt of the written notice
described in Subsection A to either respond to the Township, contesting
the assertion of noncompliance, or otherwise initiate reasonable steps
to remedy the asserted noncompliance issue, notifying the Township of
the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be
completed.
C. In the event that CenturyLink does not comply with Subsection B,
above, the Township shall schedule a public hearing to address the
asserted noncompliance issue. The Township shall provide CenturyLink
at least 10 days prior written notice of and the opportunity to be heard
at the hearing.
D. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the Township,
after the hearing set forth in Subsection C, determines that
CenturyLink is noncompliant with this ordinance, the Township may:
(1) Seek specific performance of any provision which reasonably lends
itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or
(2) Commence an action at law for monetary damages or other
equitable relief; or
(3) In the case of substantial noncompliance with a material provision
of the ordinance, seek to revoke the franchise in accordance with
Subsection E.
E. Should the Township seek to revoke the franchise after following the
procedures set forth above, the Township shall give written notice to
CenturyLink. CenturyLink shall have 90 days from receipt of such
notice to object in writing and state its reason(s) for such objection.
Thereafter, the Township may seek revocation of the franchise at a
§ A401-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-173
1:1493
§ A401-174. No waiver of rights.
Neither the Township nor CenturyLink shall be excused from complying
with any of the terms and conditions contained herein by any failure of the
other, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more
occasions, to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and
conditions. Each party expressly reserves any and all rights, remedies, and
arguments it may have at law or equity, without limitation, and to argue,
assert, and/or take any position as to the legality or appropriateness of any
provision in this ordinance that is inconsistent with state or federal law, as
may be amended.
§ A401-175. Transfer of franchise.
CenturyLink's right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered without prior notice to
and prior approval by the Township, such approval not to be unreasonably
withheld, except when said sale, transfer, assignment, or encumbrance
is to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with
CenturyLink, or for any rights, title, or interest of CenturyLink in the
franchise or facilities in order to secure indebtedness.
§ A401-176. Amendment.
Amendments to the terms and conditions contained herein shall be mutually
agreed upon in writing by the Township and CenturyLink.
§ A401-177. Notices.
Any notice required or permitted to be given hereunder shall be deemed
sufficient if given by a communication in writing and shall be deemed to
have been received a) upon personal delivery or actual receipt thereof or
b) within two days after such notice is deposited in the United States Mail,
postage prepaid, certified, and addressed to the parties as set forth below:
public hearing. The Township shall cause to be served upon
CenturyLink, at least 30 days prior to such public hearing, a written
notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its
intent to revoke the franchise. At the designated hearing, the Township
shall give CenturyLink an opportunity to state its position on the matter,
after which the Township shall determine whether or not the franchise
shall be revoked. CenturyLink may appeal the Township's
determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to
review the decision of the Township de novo. Such appeal must be taken
within 60 days of the issuance of the Township's determination. The
Township may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it
deems appropriate to enforce its rights under this ordinance in lieu of
revocation.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions in this § A401-173,
CenturyLink does not waive any of its rights under applicable law.
§ A401-173 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-177
1:1494
The Township of Franklin:
Ann Marie McCarthy, Township Clerk
Municipal Building
475 DeMott Lane
Somerset, NJ 06873-6704
CenturyLink:
Thomas A. Bailey
Director, Local Government Affairs
CenturyLink
240 N. 3rd Street, Suite 300
Harrisburg, PA 17101
and
Mr. Kiran Seshagiri
Senior Director Tax
CenturyLink
100 CenturyLink Drive, 3TX120
Monroe, LA 71203
§ A401-178. Severability.
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is for any
reason determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by other lawful
authority, including any state or federal regulatory authority having
jurisdiction thereof, or unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid by any court of
common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such determination shall have no effect on the
validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof,
all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise
or any renewal or renewals thereof.
§ A401-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-178
1:1495

ARTICLE X
United Fiber and Data, LLC
[Adopted 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 4031-13]
§ A401-179. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given herein:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
UNITED FIBER AND DATA, LLC — The grantee of rights under this
ordinance and known as United Fiber and Data, LLC, its servants,
employees, agents, officers, directors and contractors.
§ A401-180. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding United Fiber and
Data, LLC's request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way
and feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township
to grant said request.
§ A401-181. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § A401-182 below.
Said period shall begin on September 4, 2013, and shall expire five years
from said date on September 3, 2018. This consent shall permit United
Fiber and Data, LLC to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above
and over the public highways and streets in Franklin Township poles, wires,
cable, and fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation of the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the
provisions of this ordinance. In the event that United Fiber and Data, LLC
violates any provision of this ordinance, the Township will give notice of
such violation and allow United Fiber and Data, LLC 30 days to cure the
violation unless additional time is granted by the Township Council. In the
event that United Fiber and Data, LLC does not cure the violation in the
prescribed time, appropriate action will be taken on behalf of the Township
which may include, but is not limited to, court intervention and the voidance
of this ordinance and the termination of any and all relationships between
the Township and United Fiber and Data, LLC.
§ A401-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-182
1:1497
§ A401-182. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-183. United Fiber and Data, LLC's continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by United Fiber and Data, LLC, and United
Fiber and Data, LLC will notify the Township of the location of any cable or
other fixtures permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance prior to
such installation.
§ A401-184. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled "Schedule A," and attached to this ordinance.212 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at United Fiber and Data, LLC's own cost and expense;
procedures necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every
such question shall be pursued in United Fiber and Data, LLC's own name,
and the Township shall never be under any obligation to perform
investigations or research, conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal
fees or pay the charge of engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others,
or otherwise take any steps to define, delineate, establish or clarify the
boundaries or rights of the Township.
§ A401-185. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other
than wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiber optic
cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
212. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township's offices.
§ A401-182 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-186
1:1498
§ A401-186. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to United Fiber
and Data, LLC.
§ A401-187. Fees.
§ A401-188. Conditions of construction.
A. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to United Fiber
and Data, LLC, United Fiber and Data, LLC agrees to pay the Township
on an annual basis the following fees: $200 per mile of United Fiber and
Data, LLC fiber optic cable located in the public road rights-of-way
within the Township with a minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by United Fiber and Data,
LLC shall be made on or before October 1 of each year in which access
to the Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such United Fiber and Data, LLC by the applicable
authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event United Fiber and Data, LLC shall from time to
time disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, driveways, aboveground or below-ground utilities,
lines, fixtures, equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other
landscaping or surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter
whatsoever, United Fiber and Data, LLC shall, at its sole expense,
reasonably restore and replace such places and things so disturbed to
and in not less than as good condition as existed prior to each
disturbance. In doing so, United Fiber and Data, LLC shall comply with
all applicable ordinances, resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All
restorations shall be completed within 30 working days of the work
requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location or grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, United Fiber and Data, LLC, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, shall, at its own expense, remove,
relay and relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. United Fiber and Data, LLC shall for the
purpose of and upon request of the Township, at United Fiber and Data,
LLC's expense, temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and
associated facilities in order to facilitate the moving of buildings,
equipment, vehicles and machinery and to accommodate other like
circumstances. United Fiber and Data, LLC may suggest alternatives to
the temporary removal of cables where such temporary removal may
§ A401-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-188
1:1499
§ A401-189. Underground lines.
United Fiber and Data, LLC shall respond when requested to mark out
underground lines within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-190. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by United Fiber and Data, LLC of all of
its obligations to the Township, United Fiber and Data, LLC shall deliver to
the Township and maintain in force throughout the duration of the use of the
Township's said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than
$50,000, conditioned on the faithful performance by United Fiber and Data,
LLC of all of its undertakings pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must
be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney. The bonding
company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-191. Liability Insurance.
§ A401-192. Indemnity.
cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with the
expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the right
to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way, United
Fiber and Data, LLC shall deliver to the Township and maintain in force,
at its sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and comprehensive
general liability insurance naming the Township as an additional
insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) "Umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. United
Fiber and Data, LLC shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall
be canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. United Fiber and Data, LLC shall hold and save the Township harmless
from and indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss
and liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or
indirectly, immediately or consequently from:
§ A401-188 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-192
1:1500
§ A401-193. Limitations.
§ A401-194. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against United Fiber and Data,
LLC;
(5) Any act or omission of United Fiber and Data, LLC or any of its
officers, directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers,
materialmen or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) United Fiber and Data, LLC's action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for United Fiber and Data, LLC's nonexclusive use of
the Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services.
When and if United Fiber and Data, LLC increases its scope offering to
any business or resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in
scope passes through the United Fiber and Data, LLC cable lines
located within the Township, the within ordinance shall be null and
void. United Fiber and Data, LLC and the Township must then
renegotiate the terms, conditions and fees of the proposed increase in
scope. If agreement cannot be reached, this ordinance will be deemed
terminated. The Township is not obligated to accept any increase in
scope proposed by United Fiber and Data, LLC.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good-faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to United Fiber and
Data, LLC's use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase in
scope.
§ A401-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-195
1:1501
§ A401-195. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only, and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-196. Law changes.
§ A401-197. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of United
Fiber and Data, LLC's written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such
acceptance is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final
passage of the ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no
further effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, United Fiber and Data, LLC is
deemed to be a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13,
by the appropriate governmental authority, then United Fiber and Data,
LLC shall no longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent
that other public utilities providing telecommunications service are
subject to like requirements.
§ A401-195 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-197
1:1502
ARTICLE XI
Promotion in Motion, Inc.
[Adopted 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 4106-15]
§ A401-198. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
PROMOTION IN MOTION, INC. — The grantee of rights under this
ordinance and is known as Promotion In Motion, Inc., it servants,
employees, agents, officers, directors and contractors.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, and its government, including the Township Council and its
administrative personnel.
§ A401-199. Findings and conclusions.
The Township has reviewed all documentation regarding Promotion In
Motion, Inc.'s request for use of the municipality's public road rights-of-way
and feels that it is in the best interest of the residents of Franklin Township
to grant said request.
§ A401-200. Grant of consent.
The Township Council of the Township of Franklin hereby consents to
the nonexclusive use of its rights-of-way for a period of five years. The
conditions for the parameters of said use are set forth in § 246-61 below.213
Said period shall begin on June 1, 2015, and shall expire five years from
said date on May 31, 2020. This consent shall permit Promotion In Motion,
Inc. to place and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over the public
highways and streets in Franklin Township, poles, wires, cable, and fiber
optic cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of
the proposed use. The consent, however, is subject to the provisions of this
ordinance. In the event that Promotion In Motion, Inc. violates any provision
of this ordinance, the Township will give notice of such violation and allow
Promotion In Motion, Inc. 30 days to cure the violation unless additional
time is granted by the Township Council. In the event that Promotion In
Motion, Inc. does not cure the violation in the prescribed time, appropriate
action will be taken on behalf of the Township which may include, but is
not limited to, court intervention and the voidance of this ordinance and
the termination of any and all relationships between the Township and
Promotion In Motion, Inc.
213. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ A401-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-201
1:1503
§ A401-201. Conditions of grant of public street rights-of-way.
The grant of the above public street rights-of-way shall be for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service.
§ A401-202. Promotion In Motion, Inc.'s continuing obligations.
The needs of the Township and the public to minimize interruption in street
and sidewalk traffic and public and private business, to avoid congestion,
environmental degradation, undue cost, inconvenience, reduction in
property values, private interests and the like, frustration or burdening
of Township planning for future utility installations and operations,
maintenance of current utilities and general planning for development by
the Township, shall be respected by Promotion In Motion, Inc., and
Promotion In Motion, Inc. will notify the Township of the location of any
cable or other fixtures permitted to be installed pursuant to this ordinance
prior to such installation.
§ A401-203. Territory.
The consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to the route set forth
on the map entitled Schedule A and attached to this ordinance.214 All
questions of municipal boundary location, rights and interest in property,
federal, state, county and/or other governmental or quasi-governmental
rights, privileges and/or interests in real estate shall be investigated and
researched at Promotion In Motion, Inc.'s own cost and expense;
procedures necessary to gather relevant information and to resolve every
such question shall be pursued in Promotion In Motion, Inc.'s own name and
the Township shall never be under any obligation to perform investigations
or research, conduct or prosecute proceedings, expend legal fees or pay the
charge of engineers, surveyors, title searchers or others, or otherwise take
any steps to define, delineate, establish or clarify the boundaries or rights
of the Township.
§ A401-204. Compliance with zoning and other ordinances.
The foregoing consent is and at all times shall be subject to full and
complete compliance with the Township Development Ordinance, Chapter
112 of the Code of the Township of Franklin, all other Township ordinances
and regulations, and all rules, regulations and laws of the applicable
jurisdictions as to all aspects of location, operation, and maintenance of
the fiber optic cables and fixtures necessary thereto. Any fixture other
than wires, cable, terminating equipment and electronics and fiber optic
cables shall be subject to the Township's prior written approval before their
installation.
214. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ A401-201 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-205
1:1504
§ A401-205. No interest in Township property.
No easement, title in fee, leasehold or other interest in real estate, nor any
other interest in property of the Township, is hereby granted to Promotion
In Motion, Inc.
§ A401-206. Fee.
In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to Promotion In
Motion, Inc., Promotion In Motion, Inc. agrees to pay the Township on an
annual basis the following fees:
§ A401-207. Conditions of construction.
A. Two hundred dollars per mile of Promotion In Motion, Inc. fiber optic
cable located in the public road rights-of-way within the Township with
a minimum annual fee of $500.
B. All payments due to the Township hereunder by Promotion In Motion,
Inc. shall be made on or before October 1 of each year in which access
to the Township's public road rights-of-way is in effect. Any failure to
accurately make the payment called for on or before October 1 of each
said year will result in the automatic revocation of the nonexclusive
franchise granted to such Promotion In Motion, Inc. by the applicable
authorizing action.
A. Restoration. In the event Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall from time to
time disturb any public or private pavement, street surfaces, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, driveways, above- or belowground utilities, lines,
fixtures, equipment or other facilities or trees, shrubs or other
landscaping or surfaces in the natural topography or any other matter
whatsoever, Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall, at its sole expense,
reasonably restore and replace such places and things so disturbed to
and in not less than as good condition as existed prior to each
disturbance. In doing so, Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall comply with all
applicable ordinances, resolutions, laws, rulings and regulations. All
restorations shall be completed within 30 working days of the work
requiring the same.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any public street or
highway, or alter or change the location of grade of any public water or
sewer facility or other utility facility, Promotion In Motion, Inc., upon
reasonable notice by the Township, shall, at its own expense, remove,
relay and relocate its cables, equipment and other facilities.
C. Temporary removal of cables. Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall for the
purpose of and upon request of the Township, at Promotion In Motion,
Inc.'s expense, temporarily raise, lower or remove its cables and
associated facilities in order to facilitate the moving of buildings,
equipment, vehicles and machinery and to accommodate other like
§ A401-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-207
1:1505
§ A401-208. Underground lines.
Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall respond when requested to mark out
underground lines, within 48 hours of the request.
§ A401-209. Performance bonds.
To secure the faithful performance by Promotion In Motion, Inc. of all of its
obligations to the Township, Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall deliver to the
Township and maintain in force throughout the duration of the use of the
Township's said rights-of-way a surety bond in the penal sum of not less than
$50,000, conditioned on the faithful performance by Promotion In Motion,
Inc. of all of its undertakings pursuant to this ordinance. Said bond must
be acceptable in form and content to the Township Attorney. The bonding
company shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ A401-210. Liability insurance.
§ A401-211. Indemnity.
circumstances. Promotion In Motion, Inc. may suggest alternatives
to the temporary removal of cables where such temporary removal
may cause a disruption of services or otherwise interfere with the
expectations of its customers. However, the Township retains the right
to make the final decision regarding said cable removal.
A. During the term of the use of the Township's said rights-of-way,
Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall deliver to the Township and maintain in
force, at its sole expense, sufficient combined automobile and
comprehensive general liability insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit,
judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For bodily injury or death from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(4) "Umbrella" excess liability coverage for both bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence and in the aggregate:
$5,000,000.
B. The insurance carrier must be acceptable to the Township Attorney and
shall be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Promotion
In Motion, Inc. shall assure that no such policy of insurance shall be
canceled without a minimum of 30 days' notice to the Township or
greater notice if required by regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Insurance.
A. Promotion In Motion, Inc. shall hold and save the Township harmless
from and indemnify and defend the Township against every claim, loss
§ A401-207 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-211
1:1506
§ A401-212. Limitations.
and liability of every kind, arising in any and every way directly or
indirectly, immediately or consequently from:
(1) The grant or use of this municipal consent;
(2) The acquisition of, or negotiation for the acquisition of, any interest
in real estate, rights or privileges within or without the Township;
(3) The making, prosecuting or processing of any application for any
governmental approval, permits or license, including all appeals;
(4) All proceedings of every kind by or against Promotion In Motion,
Inc.;
(5) Any act or omission of Promotion In Motion, Inc. or any of its
officers, directors, employees, agents, contractors, suppliers,
materialmen or affiliated companies;
(6) The exercise or implementation, whether or not proper or lawful, of
any right of privilege expressed or implied hereunder, by law or
otherwise arising out of this municipal consent; or
(7) Promotion In Motion, Inc.'s action, inaction, franchise, operation,
maintenance, construction or installation of the lines, cables and
fixtures described herein.
B. "Loss" shall include all actual legal fees and court costs.
A. This ordinance is for Promotion In Motion, Inc.'s nonexclusive use of the
Township's said rights-of-way for telecommunications services. When
and if Promotion In Motion, Inc. increases its scope offering to any
business or resident in the State of New Jersey and said increase in
scope passes through the Promotion In Motion, Inc. cable lines located
within the Township, the within ordinance shall be null and void.
Promotion In Motion, Inc. and the Township must then renegotiate the
terms, conditions and fees of the proposed increase in scope. If
agreement cannot be reached, this ordinance will be deemed
terminated. The Township is not obligated to accept any increase in
scope proposed by Promotion In Motion, Inc.
B. Any proposed increase of scope of this ordinance must be duly
authorized and accepted by the Township after good faith negotiations
and acceptance of the proposed change by the Township with the
proper ordinance and/or agreement in place prior to Promotion In
Motion, Inc.'s use of the Township's said rights-of-way for the increase
in scope.
§ A401-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-213
1:1507
§ A401-213. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be determined invalid by a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the remaining provisions hereof.
§ A401-214. Captions.
The captions and titles assigned to the sections of this ordinance are for
convenience and reference only and are in no way to be construed as
defining, limiting or modifying the scope or intent of the various provisions
of this ordinance.
§ A401-215. Law changes.
§ A401-216. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon receipt by the Township of Promotion
In Motion, Inc.'s written acceptance of the terms hereof. If such acceptance
is not received by the Township Clerk within 30 days of the final passage
of the Ordinance, the same will automatically expire and be of no further
effect.
A. In the event applicable law shall, during the term hereof, modify any
provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be automatically
modified to incorporate the change.
B. If at any time during the term hereof, Promotion In Motion, Inc. is
deemed to be a public utility, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13,
by the appropriate governmental authority, then Promotion In Motion,
Inc. shall no longer be subject to this ordinance except to the extent
that other public utilities providing telecommunications service are
subject to like requirements.
§ A401-213 FRANKLIN CODE § A401-216
1:1508
Chapter A402
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
New Jersey Bell franchise — See Ch. A400. Telecommunications franchises — See Ch.
A401.
§ A401-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-216
1:1509

ARTICLE I
RCN of New Jersey, Inc.
[Adopted 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 3147, effective until 12-31-2016. 215]
§ A402-1. Statement of findings.
A public hearing regarding the company's consent application was held on
September 26, 1999, after proper public notice, according to the terms and
conditions of the state Act. The hearing was fully open to the public and the
Township received at the hearing all comments regarding the qualifications
of the company to receive Municipal Consent and the community's present
and future cable related needs and interests. Pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth herein, the company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial and other qualifications to support municipal
consent, and the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ A402-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the Federal
Communications Commission, FCC rules and regulations, 47 CFR Section
76.1 et seq. and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 USC, § 521 et
seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and
shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with federal or
state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
OCTV — The Board of Public Utilities, Office of Cable Television.
RCN or THE COMPANY216 — The grantee of rights under this ordinance
which is RCN of New Jersey, Incorporated, formerly known as C-TEC Cable
Systems.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of New
Jersey.
§ A402-3. Consent to renewal.
The Township hereby grants a nonexclusive consent of renewal, franchise,
right and privilege for RCN to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or
dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the Township,
215. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 996 granted a nonexclusive franchise to Franklin
Cablevision, Inc. which became C-Tec Cable Systems. That franchise expired in 1992 and
was replaced by Ord. No. 1731, adopted 9-15-1992 which was effective until 12-31-1999.
That ordinance was replaced by Ord. No. 3147 which appears in this article.
216. Editor's Note: The current cable provider for the Township is Comcast.
§ A402-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-3
1:1511
such poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Township of a cable television and cable communications system for the
purpose of distributing television and radio signals and other impulses in
order to furnish television and radio programs and data as well as video
communication services to the public. The rights of grant includes the right
to use and occupy said highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and
public places and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth
and as provided by the federal and state acts.
§ A402-4. Franchise term.
The consent herein granted shall be nonexclusive and shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval as issued
by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. The Township's consent is
subject to and expressly contingent upon the company commitments, which
shall be expressed by means of an amendment to the application and the
company's acceptance of this ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 49:5A-24.
§ A402-5. Franchise fee.
The company shall, during each year of operation under the consent
granted herein, pay to the Township as a franchise fee the greater of 2% of
the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription
fees paid by subscribers to its cable television reception service in the
Township or the maximum amount permitted under applicable federal or
New Jersey law.
§ A402-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the company shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A402-7. Primary service area.
The primary service area shall consist of all public residential streets within
the Township existing as of the date of this ordinance as set forth in a map
supplied by RCN to the Township with its Application. RCN's line extension
policy shall apply to new residential public streets and to unserved
commercial areas along public streets and rights-of-way.
§ A402-8. Extension of service.
RCN shall be required to provide service to any persons' residence or
business located in the Township, in accordance with RCN's stated
installation charges and line extension policy as set forth in its application
and tariff or as the same may hereafter be amended. As new streets and
roads are constructed within the Township, RCN will extend its system onto
such roads in a timely fashion in accordance with its line extension policy.
§ A402-9. Signal quality.
§ A402-3 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-9
1:1512
§ A402-10. Maintenance of system.
The company shall maintain its system in good and reasonable operating
condition at all times during the term of the franchise.
§ A402-11. State-of-the-art technology.
A. In transmitting its television signals to subscribers in the Township,
RCN shall provide, at a minimum, a good quality signal, in accordance
with federal and state technical standards and prevailing industry
standards. RCN shall adhere to technical specifications recommended
by the National Cable Television Association rating to technical
standards for the transmission of television signals, signal quality, and
facilities and equipment, to the extent such standards remain
consistent with RCN's technical operations during the course of this
franchise. The Township reserves all rights and authority, regarding
technical standards provided it by federal and state law and regulations
at any time during the franchise.
B. All channels shall enjoy the same level of quality of audio and video
signals.
A. As soon as reasonable within RCN's sound business and technical
judgment after any source of television programming or signals carried
by RCN commences regular transmission of an on channel BTS stereo
signal, an HDTV signal, or any other high-resolution signal, RCN will
consider any reasonably necessary action to effect retransmission of
such programming source with a stereo HDTV or other high resolution
signal, taking into account RCN's business and technical parameters.
B. RCN will be committed to keeping pace with the technology of the cable
industry in New Jersey and will maintain a high degree of product
availability, signal integrity and system reliability as compared with
New Jersey Cable Systems of comparable size, measured by the number
of subscribers on the system and the total number of system plant
mileage.
C. In meeting the standard of product availability referenced in
Subsection B of this section, RCN will use its reasonable business
judgment to fully program the alphanumeric and video channel capacity
of the Franklin system and make programming selections based on
those services available on other systems within New Jersey and the
New York metropolitan area with sensitivity to the needs of the
community based on market surveys and popular demand.
D. The company agrees that it will evaluate technology to determine
whether to maintain its system state-of-the-art using its reasonable
business and technical judgment, and to maintain a high degree of
product availability, it will, to the extent that it will not unduly interfere
with the company's need to protect its signals from theft of service or
other factors within RCN'S reasonable business judgment, consider
§ A402-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-11
1:1513
§ A402-12. System rebuild.
making available to its subscribers, as soon as they become
commercially available, any devices or equipment implementing a TV/
VCR interface technology that would work with the scrambling/
descrambling technology used by the company and enable subscribers
to take advantage of some of the advanced TV/VCR features and
combinations on subscriber's equipment, including but not limited to:
(1) Picture-in-picture capability.
(2) Ability to watch and record different channels simultaneously.
(3) Ability to record sequentially on different channels.
(4) Ability to use a remote control device provided by the TV or VCR
manufacturer.
(5) Converter shall have universal remote capability.
E. In fulfillment of its obligation to evaluate state-of-the-art technology,
and to maintain a high degree of product availability, RCN agrees that
when movies-on-demand and/or video-on-demand become
commercially available in New Jersey and there is sufficient demand in
the Township to make provision of movies-on-demand and/or video-ondemand
economically feasible in Franklin Township, RCN shall
consider making the necessary modifications and enhancements to its
system, including installation of the necessary electronics and
hardware, to enable the company to make movies-on-demand and/or
video-on-demand available to its subscribers. Such modifications and
enhancements may include, but not be limited to, relocation of optic
receivers and other electronic equipment, and increasing the number of
node sites in the system, within RCN's sound business and technical
judgment.
A. The company shall rebuild the cable system as specified in the
application. The distribution system shall be rebuilt with both fiber
optic and coaxial cable using and is anticipated to employ what is
customarily known in the cable industry as "fiber to the service area"
architecture. The fiber to the service area architecture consists of fiber
optic cable from the system head end to a node in the service area.
Upon completion of the rebuild, the planned capacity shall be no less
than 750 MHZ of band width. Each strand of active fiber in the forward
direction shall be designed to carry the entire 750 MHZ of band width.
B. The rebuilt system shall be capable of providing two-way interactive
services to residential and commercial subscribers. Such services may
include video-on-demand and high-speed data transfer. Upon
completion of the upgrade, the system may include all necessary
distribution electronic equipment required to make two-way operations
available to the home. At the time that interactive services are offered
§ A402-11 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-12
1:1514
§ A402-13. Construction schedule.
§ A402-14. Access channels. [Amended 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 3476]
by RCN, converters will be made available to subscribers at a
reasonable cost to enable them to use such two-way technology.
C. The company shall specify the list of equipment that will be utilized for
the system rebuild as indicated in its application. The company agrees
to design the cable television system in Franklin Township so that it will
meet the design specifications contained in the application.
D. The rebuilt system shall have status monitoring on the fiber trunk from
the head end up to the various nodes. Status monitoring will be
activated in phases.
A. The company shall complete and fully activate the system rebuild as
described in the application in this ordinance within 36 months of the
effective date of the certificate of approval issued by the Board of Public
Utilities.
B. Upon its application to the Board for a renewal certificate of approval,
the company shall provide a construction plan and construction
timetable, target dates for completion of each phase of construction.
C. The company shall provide the Township with written reports on the
progress of the rebuild construction on at least a quarterly basis.
A. The company shall make available two access channels for use by the
municipality, as set forth hereinafter.
B. The first access channel will continue to be the existing educational
access channel and will have two-way capability. Channel allocation
may change but it will be on the lowest tier.
C. The second access channel will be a new channel for the municipality
known as the governmental access channel, which will also have twoway
capability. Channel allocation may change but it will also be on the
lowest tier.
D. Patriot will make available capacity on its access channels to provide
for the airing of 10 hours per week of original access programming.
E. The company will fund the provision of equipment to be utilized by the
Township for remote and studio productions, editing and transmission.
(1) In providing such equipment, Patriot is obligated to expend no
more than $53,000.
(2) Patriot shall provide such equipment within 60 days of receipt of
the Township's written request for same. Said written request may
be issued no sooner than date on which the certificate of approval
is issued by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
§ A402-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-15
1:1515
§ A402-15. Access training.
§ A402-16. Local origination programming.
RCN, at its own expense, will provide reasonable coverage of important
Franklin events and produce programs on same, to be aired on RCN's
A. RCN will encourage access channel usage by providing and publicizing
reasonable production training courses free of charge to access users in
Franklin Township including:
(1) Government officials, representative and employees.
(2) Educational system officials, representative and employees.
(3) Community leaders and interest groups.
(4) Students.
(5) Individuals.
B. Upon reasonable request, RCN shall conduct a training course once per
quarter for access channel users at times scheduled and advertised in
advance. The access training programs will be geared to a variety of
skill levels. RCN will provide the instructors for these courses.
Equipment for public access courses will be provided by RCN.
C. As a means of improving its public outreach and training endeavors,
RCN will utilize various media to conduct an ongoing public awareness
campaign to promote the public access training, equipment and
programming available in Franklin Township.
D. RCN shall provide sufficient personnel whose responsibilities will
include the provision of adequate assistance and services to public
access users, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Provide technical assistance and training to access users.
(2) Check out equipment to be used by access users.
(3) Supervise studio productions if requested.
(4) Assist users in editing programs.
(5) Assist access users in program planning.
(6) Cable casting programs.
(7) Maintaining equipment.
E. If requested by Franklin's Superintendent of Schools, RCN will
semiannually conduct special production training programs for high
school students and teachers at RCN's expense. The program will be in
the nature of an internship program. Students will be trained to
produce community-based programs.
§ A402-15 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-16
1:1516
local origination programming channel. RCN agrees to produce a maximum
of 12 programs per year. The Township agrees to use its best efforts to
assist RCN in selecting appropriate events for coverage. Such events will
be scheduled upon reasonable advance notice to RCN and considering
program availability. Such programs will be aired in morning, afternoon and
evening time slots. RCN agrees to use its reasonable efforts to replay its
coverage of all such events within one week of the event's original air date.
§ A402-17. Interactive services.
§ A402-18. Customer service.
A. To the extent RCN offers advanced information or interactive services,
including Internet access, such services shall be available to all
Franklin customers. In the event RCN offers new services in the future
that are appropriate for offers new services in the future that are
appropriate for educational use, RCN will offer a "basic" or base level of
such services to each school and the municipal complex at no charge.
B. A fiber backboned broad-band fiber optic connection capable of
supporting a wide area network (WAN) to support video, data and
multimedia applications for education and municipal administration
shall be provided which may be connected to equipment provided and
maintained by the Township, or its designee. This WAN shall be
completed upon completion of the system rebuild discussed in
§ A402-12 above. This requirement is intended to include locations
designated in advance by the Township and may be for the Franklin
school system, the municipal complex, public works, police, fire
companies and rescue squad.
A. The company shall comply with all federal and state regulations
pertaining to customer service, including but not limited to those
pertaining to office hours and telephone availability, installations,
outages, service interruptions, service calls, billing, billing disputes,
service related complaints, notices of changes in rates, programming
and channel positions.
B. RCN agrees to adhere to standards that are consistent in all material
respects with voluntary customer service standards promulgated by the
New Jersey Cable Television Association and published by the
Association on or about August 26, 1993. RCN's commitment to these
standards shall include the following:
(1) Answer any customer telephone calls promptly and courteously 24
hours a day.
(2) Provide four-hour time periods for scheduling service and
installation appointments.
(3) Rebate $20 for any service or installation appointment that was
missed.
§ A402-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-18
1:1517
(4) Track subscribers service experiences and make that information
publicly available.
C. As a supplement to and clarification of and not a limitation of
Subsections A and B above, RCN agrees to the following:
(1) During the term of its franchise and any renewal thereof, RCN shall
maintain a local business office, which will allow its residents to
drop off or pick up boxes, switches and like items of equipment,
along with payment and questioning of their bills. Such office shall
be open from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, from
9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday. If warranted by reasonable
customer demand, RCN shall consider expanding its office hours to
include one evening per week. Additionally, its customer service
center shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday. The business office
shall be able to provide, if needed by a Township resident, a
telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) or shall be
compatible with the state-wide telecommunications relay service.
The local business office shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone
number and will also be equipped to receive all complaints
regarding the quality of service, billing, equipment malfunctions,
installations and similar matters. RCN shall maintain adequate
staff and telephone equipment to keep telephone call response time
(time customer is on hold) to an absolute minimum.
(2) During the course of the franchise, RCN agrees to periodically mail
to Township subscribers a cable television related survey matters
of mutual concern to the Township and RCN. The survey shall be
reasonably developed so it may be mailed by RCN to subscribers
with RCN's monthly bills and to accommodate RCN's billing system
and other reasonable requirements. At RCN's request, the
Township agrees to provide RCN with copies of all responses. RCN
agrees to mail the survey as reasonably required by the Township,
but in no event shall RCN be required to mail the survey more than
once every three years. The survey may only be used for purposes
reasonably related to matters within the Township's jurisdiction
over RCN and shall not be used for political purposes or for the
private gain of any person, party or organization.
(3) The OCTV is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All complaints shall be
received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
(4) RCN shall make every effort to repair service outages within 24
hours of their being reported and, if such repair is not made, RCN
shall credit subscribers for service outages in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey OCTV as established in the New
Jersey Administrative Code N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.5.
§ A402-18 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-18
1:1518
(5) RCN shall provide notice to subscribers and Township officials of
change in rates as provided by 47 CFR, Section 76.964 and N.J.A.C.
14:18-3.6 and as those regulations may be amended.
(6) RCN shall make every effort to exceed the minimum service
agreement requirements provided by state law and fee regulations
and nothing herein contained shall be construed as condoning any
services which fall below such minimum standards.
(7) RCN shall give due consideration to programming preferences
expressed by customers.
(8) RCN will endeavor at all times to keep rates reasonably
comparable to other area systems on a cost per channel basis.
(9) RCN shall provide within its cable guide each month in which it
causes any such guide to be published, by means of its television
bulletin boards (or on another channel that uses them for
announcement) any commercials at reasonable intervals, press
releases at reasonable intervals for delivery to local newspapers
distributed in the Township, or by other means which are
reasonable in quantity and quality, information informing
subscribers and potential subscribers of the procedures and
telephone numbers for deletion of services, addressing billing
problems and for reporting comments or complaints and for also
advising subscribers of their legal rights with respect to service
outages.
(10)With respect to service related complaints, when such complaints
are made in writing, RCN shall maintain such records concerning
its plant and operations as required by N.J.A.C. 14:18-6.2, or as said
rules may be amended.
(11) The company shall provide written notice to its subscribers on a
quarterly basis of the procedure by which a subscriber may obtain
credits for outages and interruptions of service, as required by
N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.18(b), or as said rules may be amended.
(12)RCN will perform repair service, installations, disconnections and
relocations not only on weekdays, but as well on evenings and
weekends as may be reasonably provided as well with a 24 hours
response time. The company will use its reasonable efforts to
provide customers with "appointment window alternatives" for all
service calls, including repair, installation, disconnection and
relocation activities, which appointment windows will be, at
maximum, a four-hour time block. If RCN fails to keep a scheduled
appointment, the company will offer the customer priority in
rescheduling the appointment.
(13) The company shall be available to work on outages and service
interruptions 24 hours a day.
§ A402-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-19
1:1519
§ A402-19. Senior citizen discount.
RCN has agreed to implement a senior citizen discount on the monthly
basic service rate to any person 62 years of age. Such discounts shall be
subject to the eligibility requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2. The
company has agreed to apply the same discount rate to the disabled who
meet the eligibility requirements of the pharmaceutical assistance to aged
and disabled (PAAD) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21.
§ A402-20. Service to certain institutions.
§ A402-21. Drop-line policy.
A. The company agrees to provide standard installation, a converter box
and its entry level cable service, standard cable service and an a-lacarte
package free of charge for the following number of outlets at each
of the following institutions:
(1) Each public and private elementary, secondary and post-secondary
schools within the Township: one outlet, which may be capable of
supporting data and Internet access if such services are offered by
the company, at all points of installation.
(2) The main branch and any other branches which may develop to the
Franklin Township Library: one outlet which may be capable of
supporting data and Internet access if such services are offered by
the company.
(3) The Township municipal complex and any other municipal building
or governmental building designated by the Township: one outlet
which may be capable of supporting data and Internet access if
such services are offered by the company.
(4) Each fire station, police station and substation within the Township:
one outlet which may be capable of supporting data if such services
are offered by the company.
(5) Each rescue squad location within the Township: one outlet which
may be capable of supporting data if such services are offered by
the company.
B. The company agrees to install additional outlets and provide
addressable converter boxes at each of these building upon request for
a fee based only upon the actual cost of materials plus labor and the
company agrees to provide its entry level service, standard cable
service and a-la-carte service free of charge to these additional outlets.
A. RCN's nonstandard installation, or drop-line, policy shall be as set forth
in RCN's tariff and in accordance with the requirements of the OCTV.
B. RCN shall set out the cost per linear foot to the consumer depending
upon whether the drop-line will be installed below ground or
§ A402-19 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-21
1:1520
§ A402-22. Rates.
The Township acknowledges that New Jersey municipalities do not have
the authority to regulate the rates the company charges subscribers for
its service. However, in the event the federal Act and other applicable law
hereafter is amended to permit the exercise of regulatory power over rates
by municipalities, the Township reserves the right to exercise the maximum
power permitted by law.
§ A402-23. Construction requirements, relocation of poles, tree
trimming and restoration.
§ A402-24. Programming.
aboveground. The policy will also set forth each and every type of
equipment that is necessary for the drop-line and what the cost is for
same, as well as the cost for labor.
C. With respect to Subsection B, RCN shall develop, in its drop-line policy,
a menu of methods by which cable service can be provided and a
breakdown of the cost thereof so that the consumer shall have the
option to choose which of such methods best suit his needs and
economies. However, in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:5A-39(a), such rates shall be uniform (one rate for overhead and
one rate for underground) so that the rates are not preferential,
arbitrary or discriminatory.
A. In the event RCN or its agents shall disturb any pavement, street,
surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in the natural
topography, RCN shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such
places or things so disturbed in as good condition as existed prior to
commencement of said work.
B. In the event that, at any time during the term of this ordinance, the
Township shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street,
alley or other public way, RCN, upon reasonable notice by the Township,
shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at RCN's own expense.
C. RCN shall have the authority to trim trees and overhanging branches
upon streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks and public places within the
Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with the wires and cables of the company.
A. Although nothing herein shall require the company to carry or transmit
any particular programming source, the company shall provide
subscribers in the Township with the same mix and, at a minimum, the
same level of video programming as is now provided to Franklin
subscribers and which appears in the company's application. The
company shall provide Franklin subscribers with at least the same
§ A402-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-24
1:1521
§ A402-25. Emergency uses.
RCN shall be required to have the capability to override at the head end
the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of
emergency messages by municipal officials, the Police Department or the
designee of the governing body, as required by the FCC and consistent with
the system established by the State of New Jersey.
§ A402-26. Performance bond.
§ A402-27. Liability insurance and indemnification.
RCN shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy with a single-limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability for any
death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising out of its
construction and operation of the cable television system and an excess
liability (umbrella) policy in the amount of $3,000,000. The Township shall
be named an additional insured under said policy.
§ A402-28. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application and
any amendment thereto, except as modified herein, are binding upon the
company as terms and conditions of this consent. The application and other
relevant writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and
broad categories of programming, in approximately the same quantity
as are now provided and appear in the company's application.
B. The company will comply with federal and state law before deleting
entirely any broad category of video programming or making any
change in the broad categories of programming or mix, level, or quality
of programming services required by the franchise.
C. The company will advise the Township as required by the rules of the
OCTV before deleting entirely any broad category of video
programming. It will make a reasonable attempt to satisfy the
Township's preferences with regard to such issue.
A. During the period of the system rebuild as outlined in this Municipal
Consent Ordinance, the company shall give a surety bond to the
Township which shall be in the amount of $100,000. Such bond shall be
to insure completion of the system rebuild as delineated in this
ordinance. The performance bond shall be reduced to $25,000 upon
completion of the rebuild, subject to certification by the Township and
with the final approval of the OCTV.
B. The bond required herein shall require 30 days' written notice to the
Township prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or alteration of the
bond.
§ A402-24 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-28
1:1522
made a part hereof by reference provided same do not conflict with state or
federal law.
§ A402-29. Compliance with law.
Notwithstanding any specific mention of applicable federal or state statutes
or regulations above, the company shall with all of the requirements of the
federal act, the federal regulations, the state act and state regulations (to
the extent not preempted) and any other valid statute, regulations, rule or
promulgation, specifically including, but without limitation, those relating
to equal employment opportunity.
§ A402-30. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional by
any court of federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed as separate, distinct and independent provision and such
holding shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A402-31. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect as of the date upon final passage in
accordance with law.
§ A402-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-31
1:1523

ARTICLE II
Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC
[Adopted 9-29-2015 by Ord. No. 4118-15]
§ A402-32. Purpose.
The Township hereby grants to Comcast of Central New Jersey II, LLC
renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, construct, erect,
operate, modify and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and
public places of the Township, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus, and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Township of a cable television and cable
communications system for the purposes authorized by the Act.
§ A402-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1
et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.,
as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and the
rules and regulations of the Board, N.J.A.C. 14-18-1.1 et seq., shall in no
way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The Company's March 11, 2014, Application for Renewal
of municipal consent which is incorporated within this Ordinance by
reference.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is Comcast of
Central New Jersey II, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the Township
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
Company's Application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Franklin, County of Somerset, State of New
Jersey.
§ A402-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-34
1:1525
§ A402-34. Statement of findings.
A public hearing was conducted by the Township Council on June 24,
2014, concerning the renewal of municipal consent herein granted to the
Company. The public hearing was held after proper public notice pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the Act and the regulations of the Board
adopted pursuant thereto. The public hearing, having been fully open to
the public, and the Township, having received at said public hearings all
comments regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this
renewal of municipal consent, the Township hereby finds that the Company
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications and that the Company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A402-35. Duration of franchise.
§ A402-36. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Township 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television reception
service in the Township or any higher amount permitted by the Act or
otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A402-37. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this Ordinance for the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Township and any property subsequently
annexed by the Township.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 48:5A-25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the Company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that an occurrence of
noncompliance presents an immediate danger to public health, safety
or welfare of the municipality or its inhabitants, the Company shall take
immediate steps to abate the danger upon notice, while taking steps to
cure an event of noncompliance within 90 days of written notification by
the municipality.
§ A402-34 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-38
1:1526
§ A402-38. Extension of service.
The Company shall be required to provide service to any residence along
any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as set forth in the
Company's Application. Any extension of plant beyond the Primary Service
Area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension Policy, as set forth
in the Company's Application, with the following exception: The minimum
homes per mile (HPM) figure shall be 25 homes per linear mile from the
operator's existing plant.
§ A402-39. Construction requirements.
§ A402-40. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Township upon written request of
the Township Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Township,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
C. Temporary removal of cables: The Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow for the moving of
buildings and machinery, or in other similar circumstances. The
expense shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except
when requested by the Township, in which case the Company shall bear
the cost of the temporary removal.
D. Removal or trimming of trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Township so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
A. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
§ A402-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-40
1:1527
§ A402-41. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be
received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The Township
shall have the right to request copies of records and reports pertaining to
complaints by Township customers from the OCTV.
§ A402-42. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office within reasonable proximity of its
service area in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1 where applications for
service, complaints, service inquiries, bill payments, and so forth will be
received. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during normal business hours and such
other times as the Company deems advisable to meet with customers and
prospective customers.
§ A402-43. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give a bond to the
Township in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the
faithful performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in
its Application which is incorporated herein.
§ A402-44. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law. Nothing within this franchise renewal shall prevent
the Company from offering reduced or discounted rates for senior citizens,
disabled citizens, or other economically disadvantaged citizens in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.1 and 48:5A-11.2, or any other applicable
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
C. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association ("NCTA").
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Township
to express any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the
complaint officer, or impair the right of the complaint officer to take any
action that is permitted under law.
§ A402-40 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-44
1:1528
federal or state law. Any reduced or discounted rates offered by the
Company shall be in compliance with the regulations of the Board.
§ A402-45. Commitments by Company.
§ A402-46. Educational and governmental access.
A. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service to one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and
future school in the Township, including public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary schools, provided the school building is
within 200 feet aerially or 125 feet underground of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials-plus-labor basis by the school requesting service.
B. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost to one outlet to each qualified existing and
future public building including the municipal building, police, fire,
rescue squad, emergency management facility, public library and
library branch, and any other municipal or governmental building
designated by the Township, provided the facility is located within 200
feet aerially or 125 feet underground of active cable distribution plant.
Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materialsplus-
labor basis by the Township.
C. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval by
the BPU, the Company shall provide to the Township a one-time
technology grant in the amount of $125,000 to meet the technology
and/or cable-related needs of the community.
D. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: 1) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; 2) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the cable franchise to support public, education, and/or governmental
access channels or the use of such channels; and 3) any grants or other
fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by
any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. The Company reserves its external cost, passthrough
rights to the full extent permitted by law.
E. Company representative shall appear at least once annually, upon
written request of the Township Council.
F. The Company shall provide additional services as outlined in a separate
letter of agreement, attached to and hereby incorporated into this
Ordinance.217
217. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ A402-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-46
1:1529
§ A402-47. Emergency uses.
§ A402-48. Liability insurance.
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
A. The Company will continue to provide two channels, one for educational
and one for governmental ("EG") access for the use by Township on the
most basic tier of service offered by the Company in accordance with
the Cable Act, Section 611 (47 U.S.C. 531) and as further set forth
within this § A402-15.
B. The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user -
whether an educational or government user - acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
C. The Company shall not exercise editorial control over the use of any
educational or governmental channel capacity, except Company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
D. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
"home schools," community colleges and/or universities.
E. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the Township for the purpose of showing the public local
government at work.
F. Fallow time. Because blank or underutilized EG channels are not in the
public interest, in the event the Township or other EG access users elect
not to fully program the EG access channel, Company may program
unused time on those channels subject to reclamation by the Township
upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
A. The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the Township is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A402-46 FRANKLIN CODE § A402-49
1:1530
§ A402-49. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided that same do not conflict with applicable state or
federal law.
§ A402-50. Competitive equity.
Should the Township grant a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a
cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity on terms
materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms contained
herein, the Company may substitute such language that is more favorable
or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this Ordinance upon
approval by the Board of the Company's petition to modify this Ordinance
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A402-51. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ A402-52. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such prior agreements or this franchise.
§ A402-53. When effective.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval by the BPU.
§ A402-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-53
1:1531
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3585 2-14-2006 Municipal services
amendment
Ch. 236
3586 2-14-2006 Special events amendment Ch. 325
3587 2-14-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
3588 2-14-2006 Access easement
acceptance
NCM
3589 2-14-2006 Drainage easement
acceptance
NCM
3590 2-14-2006 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 146
3591 2-14-2006 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. IV
3592 2-14-2006 Fees: public records
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. I
3593 2-14-2006 Hand washing Ch. 208
3594 2-14-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
3595 2-14-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
3596 2-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
226
3597 3-14-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3598 3-20-2006 Street vacation NCM
3599 3-20-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3600 3-28-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
3601 3-28-2006 Bond NCM
§ A402-53 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1532
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3602 3-28-2006 Bond NCM
3603 5-23-2006 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3604 4-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3605 5-19-2006 Bond NCM
3606 5-19-2006 Bond NCM
3607 5-23-2006 Stormwater management Ch. 330
3608 7-6-2006 Bond NCM
3609 6-13-2006 Bond amendment NCM
3610 5-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3611 5-23-2006 Street renaming Ch. 112
3612 6-13-2006 Bond NCM
3613 6-13-2006 Bond NCM
3614 6-13-2006 Bond NCM
3615 6-13-2006 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
3616 6-13-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
3617 Bond Tabled
3618 6-29-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3619 6-29-2006 Bond NCM
3620 6-29-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3621 6-29-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3622 8-8-2006 Redevelopment plan Ch. 112, Art. XLII
3623 Lease agreements NCM
3624 Not used
3625 8-8-2006 Dogs and other animals:
animal control amendment
Ch. 115, Art. III
3626 8-8-2006 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
amendment
Ch. 230
3627 Zoning Map amendment Tabled
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1533
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3628 9-12-2006 Parks and recreation: fees
for park programs
amendment; Griggstown
Native Grassland Preserve
Regulations; Negri-Nepote
Native Grassland preserve
Regulations
Ch. 260, Arts. II; VI;
VII
3629 9-26-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3630 Licensing of cats Tabled
3631 9-12-2006 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 330
3632 9-12-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal: illicit connections
to municipal separate
storm sewer systems
Ch. 201, Art. V
3633 9-12-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
banners amendment
Ch. 333, Art. V
3634 9-12-2006 Exceed budget limits NCM
3635 9-12-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
3636 10-24-2006 Wreckers amendment Ch. 390
3637A 3-27-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3638 11-9-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3639 Zoning Map amendment Tabled
3640 11-9-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3641 10-24-2006 Street vacation NCM
3642 10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3643 10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3644 10-24-2006 Graffiti Ch. 207
3645 10-24-2006 General provisions:
general penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
3646 11-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3647 11-9-2006 Affordable housing
amendment
Ch. 81
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1534
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3648 11-28-2006 Access easement
acceptance
NCM
3649 11-28-2006 Accept donation of land NCM
3650 12-12-2006 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3651 1-9-2007 Lease amendment NCM
3652 1-23-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3653A 2-13-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3654 1-23-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3655 2-13-2007 Water amendment Ch. 384
3656 2-13-2007 Boards, commissions and
committees: absenteeism
policy
Ch. 13, Art. XXII
3657 2-27-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3658 3-27-2007 Street vacation NCM
3659 Zoning permit fees Not adopted
3659A 4-10-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3660 3-13-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3661A 3-13-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3662 3-13-2007 Street vacation NCM
3663 6-12-2007 Political contributions:
prohibition of
redevelopment
agreements with certain
contributors
Ch. 54, Art. II
3664 3-13-2007 Boards, commissions and
committees: Human
Relations Commission
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. XII
3665 3-13-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3666 3-13-2007 Bond NCM
3667 3-13-2007 Bond NCM
3668 3-13-2007 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1535
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3669 Stream corridor protection Tabled
3670 3-13-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3671 3-13-2007 Bond NCM
3672 Special improvement
district amendment
Tabled
3673 3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3674 3-27-2007 Deed dedication
acceptance
NCM
3675 3-27-2007 Real property tax
abatement amendment
Ch. 345, Art. I
3676 3-27-2007 Fees: vital statistics
records amendment
Ch. 180, Art. III
3677 4-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3678 4-24-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3679 5-22-2007 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
3680 4-24-2007 Miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. IV
3681 4-24-2007 Trees amendment Ch. 222
3682 4-24-2007 Boards, commissions and
committees: Trails
Advisory Committee
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. XXI
3683 5-8-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3684 4-24-2007 Bond NCM
3685 4-24-2007 Street vacation NCM
3686 4-24-2007 Sale of land NCM
3687 4-14-2007 Drainage and utility
easement acceptance
NCM
3688 5-22-2007 Acquisition of easement NCM
3689 5-22-2007 Grant of easement NCM
3690 4-24-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1536
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3691 4-24-2007 Bond NCM
3692 5-8-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3693 5-8-2007 Bond NCM
3694A 5-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3695 5-8-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3696 5-8-2007 Transfer of land NCM
3697 5-8-2007 Telecommunications
franchises: 4Connections,
LLC
Ch. A401, Art. III
3698 5-8-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3699 5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3700 7-10-2007 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
3701 6-28-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3702 6-28-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
3703 6-28-2007 Bond NCM
3704 6-28-2007 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3705 Tabled
3706 8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3707 8-14-2007 Deed, traffic signal and
temporary construction
easement
NCM
3708 8-14-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3709 Land development
amendment
Not adopted
3710 10-9-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3711 11-8-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
3712 9-18-2007 Advisory Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
3713 9-18-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 192
3714 9-18-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1537
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3715 9-18-2007 Grant of easement NCM
3716 9-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3717 10-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3718 10-23-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3719 10-9-2007 Street openings
amendment
Ch. 333, Art. I
3720 10-23-2007 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3721 10-23-2007 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
3722 10-23-2007 Deed of dedication
acceptance; deed of
conservation easement
acceptance
NCM
3723 11-8-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3724 11-20-2007 Telecommunications
franchises: Abvonet
Communications, Inc.
Ch. A401, Art. IV
3725 11-20-2007 Telecommunications
franchises: AT&T
Ch. A401, Art. V
3726 11-20-2007 Authorization of lease NCM
3727 12-11-2007 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3728 12-11-2007 Land development
amendment; uniform
construction codes
amendment; recycling
amendment
Chs. 112; 146; 284
3729 12-11-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3730 12-11-2007 Acceptance of easement NCM
3731 1-22-2008 Easement NCM
3732 2-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3733 2-12-2008 Deed of drainage
easements
NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1538
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3734 2-12-2008 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3735 2-12-2008 Lease amendment NCM
3736 2-12-2008 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3737 2-12-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3738 2-26-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3739 2-26-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 151
3740 2-26-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3741 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3742 3-11-2008 Water amendment Ch. 384
3743 Tabled
3744 3-11-2008 Water amendment Ch. 384
3745 3-11-2008 Drug-free zones: school
zones amendment
Ch. 166, Art. I
3746 3-11-2008 Telecommunications
franchises: Cablevision
Lightpath-NJ, Inc.
Ch. A401, Art. VI
3747 3-11-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3748 3-25-2008 Food establishments
amendment; sewers and
sewage disposal: sewage
disposal systems
amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 138; 201, Art. III;
384
3749 4-22-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 132
3750 4-8-2008 Municipal consent for
water facilities
NCM
3751 5-13-2008 Business and Industrial
Advisory Board
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. V
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1539
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3752 5-13-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3753 6-10-2008 Bond NCM
3754 6-10-2008 Acquisition of land NCM
3755 6-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3756 6-10-2008 Water line easements deed
acceptance
NCM
3757 6-10-2008 Water line easements and
stormwater easements
acceptance
NCM
3758 7-8-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3759 6-24-2008 Sale of land NCM
3760 6-24-2008 Affordable housing
amendment
Ch. 81
3761 6-24-2008 Dogs and other animals:
animal control amendment
Ch. 115, Art. III
3762 6-24-2008 Bond NCM
3763 6-24-2008 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
3764 6-24-2008 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
3765 6-24-2008 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3766 8-12-2008 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 146
3767 8-12-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3768 8-12-2008 Food establishments
amendment
Ch. 138
3769 8-12-2008 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 340
3770 8-12-2008 Water amendment Ch. 384
3771 10-14-2008 Fees: vital statistics
records amendment
Ch. 180, Art. III
3772 8-12-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1540
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3773 Pending adoption
3774 8-12-2008 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
3775 8-12-2008 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3776 8-12-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 265
3777 8-12-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3778 3-10-2009 Property maintenance Ch. 183
3779 8-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3780 9-9-2008 Retirement programs:
Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 60, Art. I
3781 9-9-2008 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3782 9-9-2008 Acquisition of land NCM
3783 9-9-2008 Telecommunications
franchises: Level 3
Communications, LLC
Ch. A401, Art. VII
3784 9-9-2008 Right-of-way deed
conveyance
NCM
3785 Tabled
3786 10-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3787 10-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3788 Tabled
3789 10-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3790 10-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3791 10-28-2008 Vacation of walkway NCM
3792 11-10-2008 Conveyance of land NCM
3793 11-25-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3794 11-10-2008 Acquisition of land NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1541
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3795 11-10-2008 Bond amendment NCM
3796 Tabled
3797 11-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3798 11-25-2008 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
3799 12-9-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3800 12-9-2008 Telecommunications
franchises: Fiber
Technologies Networks,
LLC
Ch. A401, Art. VIII
3801 12-9-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3802 12-9-2008 Lease amendment NCM
3803A 2-24-2009 General provisions:
general penalty
amendment; parks and
recreation: park rules and
regulations amendment;
Griggstown Native
Grassland Preserve (part
of Ten Mile Run
Greenway) regulations
amendment; Negri-Nepote
Native Grassland Preserve
(part of the Middlebush
Greenway) regulations
amendment)
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch. 260,
Art. II; Ch. 260, Art.
VI; Ch. 260, Art. VII
3804 1-6-2009 Sale of land NCM
3805 1-6-2009 Authorization of auction of
land
NCM
3806 Tabled
3807 1-6-2009 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 121
3808 1-6-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3809 1-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3810 1-27-2009 Bond NCM
3811 1-27-2009 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1542
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3812 2-24-2009 Authorization of lease NCM
3813 2-24-2009 Rent control: Rent
Leveling Board
amendment
Ch. 294, Art. I
3814 2-24-2009 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
3815 2-24-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 271
3816 2-24-2009 Boards, Commissions and
Committees terms
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I; Ch. 13,
Art. II; Ch. 13, Art. III;
Ch. 13, Art. VI; Ch. 13,
Art. VII; Ch. 13, Art. X;
Ch. 13, Art. XIV; Ch.
13, Art. XV; Ch. 13,
Art. XVIII; Ch. 13, Art.
XX
3817 2-24-2009 Drug-Free School Zones
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. I
3818 3-10-2009 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Business and
Industrial Advisory Board
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. V
3819 3-24-2009 Bond NCM
3820 3-24-2009 Bond NCM
3821 3-24-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 284
3822 4-14-2009 Bond NCM
3823 4-28-2009 Bond NCM
3824 4-14-2009 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3825 5-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3826 5-12-2009 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3827 5-12-2009 Telecommunications
franchises: United
Telephone Company
Superseded by Ord.
No. 4225-18
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1543
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3828 5-26-2009 Parks and recreation:
exclusive-use permits for
park facilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
3829 6-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3830 7-14-2009 Emergency Life Support
Delivery Committee
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. VII
3831 6-9-2009 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
3832 6-23-2009 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 109
3833 6-23-2009 Alarms systems
amendment
Ch. 85
3834 7-14-2009 Acceptance of storm sewer
easement
NCM
3835 7-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3836 7-14-2009 Cable Television Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 13, Art. VI
3837 7-14-2009 Exclusive-use permits for
park facilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
3838 7-14-2009 Acquisition of property;
sale of property
NCM
3839 9-8-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3840 8-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3841 8-11-2009 Lease amendment NCM
3842 8-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226, footnote only
3843 9-22-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3844 9-22-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3845 2-23-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3846 2-23-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1544
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3847 10-13-2009 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 88
3848 10-13-2009 Rehabilitation of
abandoned property
Ch. 287
3849 10-13-2009 Rehabilitation of
abandoned property
amendment
Ch. 287, footnote only
3850 10-13-2009 Parks and recreation:
trails
Ch. 260, Art. VIII
3851 10-13-2009 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 146
3852 10-27-2009 Bond NCM
3853 12-8-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3854 11-10-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3855 Easement Tabled
3856 11-10-2009 Water amendment Ch. 384
3857 11-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3858 11-24-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
3859 12-8-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3860 Tabled
Board of
Ethics
2-2-2010 Code of Ethics Repealed by Ord. No.
4047-13
3861 2-23-2010 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 142
3862 2-23-2010 Sewers and sewage
disposal: private storm
drain inlet retrofitting
Ch. 201, Art. VI
3863 Tabled
3864 2-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3865 3-9-2010 Parks and recreation:
trails amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VIII
3866 3-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3867 3-9-2010 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1545
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3868 3-9-2010 Boards, commissions and
committees: Insurance
Commission repealer;
Library Board of Trustees
amendment; absenteeism
policy amendment;
Housing Authority
amendment; rent control:
Rent Leveling Board
amendment
Chs. 13, Arts. XIII
(footnote only), XV and
XXII; 26; 294, Art. I
3869 3-9-2010 Acceptance of easement NCM
3870 3-23-2010 Acceptance of easement
for maintenance of
stormwater drainage
facilities
NCM
3871 4-13-2010 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 142
3872 4-13-2010 Sewers and sewage
disposal: private storm
drain inlet retrofitting
amendment
Ch. 201, Art. VI
3873 Tabled
3874 4-13-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
personal property
Ch. 333, Art. VI
3875 4-27-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3876 4-13-2010 Bond NCM
3877 4-27-2010 Bond NCM
3878 5-11-2010 Bond NCM
3879 5-11-2010 Sale of property NCM
3880 5-25-2010 Municipal services:
Homeowners' Associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3881 6-22-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3882 6-10-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3883 6-10-2010 Miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. V
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1546
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3884 6-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3885 7-13-2010 Acquisition of land NCM
3886 7-13-2010 Bond NCM
3887 7-13-2010 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment; salaries and
compensation amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I; see Ch.
62
3888 7-13-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 132
3889 Tabled
3889A 10-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 180, Arts. I, II, III,
IV, VII, and VIII
3890 8-24-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3891 8-24-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3892 8-24-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3893 8-24-2010 Affordable housing: fair
share housing obligation
amendment
Ch. 81
3894 9-14-2010 Fees: vital statistics
records amendment
Ch. 180, Art. III
3895 9-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3896 9-14-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 265
3897 9-14-2010 Acceptance of deeds and
easements
NCM
3898 9-14-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3899 10-12-2010 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
3900 10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3901 10-12-2010 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 146
Board of
Ethics
10-13-2010 Code of Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
4047-13
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1547
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3902 10-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3903 Tabled
3904 Tabled
3905 10-26-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3906 10-26-2010 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 330
3907 10-26-2010 Acceptance of easements NCM
3908 10-12-2010 Bond NCM
3909 11-9-2010 Special events amendment Ch. 325
3910 11-9-2010 Motorized sport bikes and
related vehicles
amendment
Ch. 378
3911 11-9-2010 Bond NCM
3912 11-9-2010 Appropriation NCM
3913 12-14-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3914 12-14-2010 Food establishments:
inspections; training
requirements and costs
Ch. 138, Art. II
3915 12-14-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 350
3916 12-14-2010 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
3917 12-14-2010 Sale of land NCM
3918 1-4-2011 Bond amendment NCM
3919 1-25-2011 Quitclaim interest in
property
NCM
3920 1-25-2011 Land swap amendment NCM
3921 2-22-2011 Drug-free zones: public
housing, public parks and
public building zones
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. II
3922 2-22-2011 Bond amendment NCM
3923 3-22-2011 Quitclaim interest in
property
NCM
3924 3-22-2011 Parks and recreation:
exclusive-use permits for
park facilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1548
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3925 3-22-2011 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
3926 Not adopted
3927 4-12-2011 Wreckers amendment Ch. 390
3928 4-12-2011 Senior Citizen Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 13, Art. XVIII
3929 4-26-2011 Reversion from state fiscal
year to calendar fiscal
year
NCM
3930 4-26-2011 Bond amendment NCM
3931 5-24-2011 Community resources fees
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. VI
3932 5-24-2011 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 330
3933 5-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3934 5-24-2011 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3935 5-10-2011 Bond NCM
3936 5-24-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
3937 5-24-2011 Acceptance of easement NCM
3938 6-14-2011 Acceptance of easements NCM
3939 7-12-2011 Firewood Ch. 188
3940 Tabled
3941 7-12-2011 Bond NCM
3942 8-9-2011 Sale of land NCM
3943 8-9-2011 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3944 Defeated
3945 Defeated
Board of
Ethics
8-17-2011 Code of Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
4047-13
3946 9-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3947 10-11-2011 Filming Ch. 185
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1549
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3948 9-13-2011 Fees for payments via ACH
or credit card
Ch. 180, Art. IX
3949 Not introduced
3950 10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3951 Not adopted
3952 10-25-2011 Bond NCM
3953 10-25-2011 Waterline easements NCM
3954 Tabled
3955 12-13-2011 Raritan and Millstone
Rivers Flood Control
Commission
Ch. 13, Art. XXIII
3956 12-13-2011 Sanitary sewerage,
drainage and water
easements
NCM
3957 12-13-2011 Affordable housing
amendment
Ch. 81
3958 12-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
3959 2-28-2012 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3960 2-14-2012 Taxation: development and
redevelopment tax
abatement or exemption
Ch. 345, Art. III
3961 2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3962 2-14-2012 Recycling amendment Ch. 284
3963 2-28-2012 Bond NCM
3964 2-28-2012 Bond NCM
3965 3-13-2012 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
3966 3-13-2012 Administration of
government: executive and
legislative amendment;
administrative services
and municipal court
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. II
3967 3-13-2012 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1550
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3968 3-13-2012 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3969 4-10-2012 Water amendment Ch. 384
3970 3-27-2012 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
3971 Rescinded
3972 4-10-2012 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 88
3973 4-24-2012 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
NCM
3974 4-24-2012 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
NCM
3975 5-8-2012 Appropriation NCM
3976 5-8-2012 Appropriation NCM
3977 Water amendment Not adopted
3978 5-22-2012 Noise control amendment Ch. 167
3979 6-12-2012 Food establishments:
standards; training;
licensing amendment;
inspections; training
requirements and costs
amendment
Ch. 138, Arts. I and II
3980 6-12-2012 Street vacation NCM
3981 6-26-2012 Bond NCM
3982 8-14-2012 Bond NCM
3983 8-14-2012 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
3984 Not used
3985 Not used
3986 9-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3987 9-11-2012 Easement amendment NCM
3988 9-11-2012 Bond NCM
3989 9-11-2012 Soil importation
amendment
Ch. 206, Art. II
3990 9-11-2012 Acceptance of easements NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1551
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3991 9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
3992 10-23-2012 Parks and recreation: turf
fields
Ch. 260, Art. IX
3993 11-8-2012 Dogs and cats amendment;
cats repealer
Ch. 115, Arts. II, V
(footnote only)
3994 11-8-2012 Water amendment Ch. 384
3995 Tabled
3996 12-11-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3997 12-11-2012 Redevelopment Agency
amendment
Ch. 58
3998 12-11-2012 Licensing of kennels, pet
shops, shelters and pounds
Ch. 115, Art. V
3999 12-11-2012 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Ch. 350
4000 1-22-2013 Bingo and raffles
amendment
Ch. 106
4001 1-22-2013 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4002 2-12-2013 Bond NCM
4003 2-12-2013 Acceptance of easement
and deed
NCM
4004 2-12-2013 Acceptance of easement NCM
4005 2-26-2013 Water amendment Ch. 384
4006 2-26-2013 Telecommunications
franchises: Zayo Group,
LLC
Ch. A401, Art. IV
4007-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4008-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4009-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4010-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4011-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1552
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4012-13 3-27-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4013-13 3-27-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
4014-13 3-27-2013 Lease of Township
property
NCM
4015-13 4-9-2013 Water amendment Ch. 384
4016-13 4-23-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4017-13 4-23-2013 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
amendment
Ch. 230
4018-13 4-23-2013 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 330
4019-13 4-23-2013 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
4020-13 5-28-2013 Deed acceptance NCM
4021-13 7-16-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4022-13 Number not used
4023-13 Number not used
4024-13 6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4025-13 6-25-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
4026-13 7-16-2013 Bond NCM
4027-13 7-16-2013 Bond NCM
4028-13 7-16-2013 Bond NCM
4029-13 7-16-2013 Bond NCM
4030-13 7-16-2013 Acceptance of easement NCM
4031-13 12-10-2013 Telecommunications
franchises: United Fiber
and Data, LLC
Ch. A401, Art. X
4032-13 8-15-2013 Utility easement NCM
4033-13 9-10-2013 Bond NCM
4034-13 9-10-2013 Sewer easement NCM
4035-13 9-10-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1553
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4036-13 9-10-2013 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
4037-13 9-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4038-13 10-8-2013 Easements NCM
4039-13 10-22-2013 Easements NCM
4040-13 10-22-2013 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
4041-13 11-12-2013 Authorization of lease of
premises for use as Little
League baseball complex
NCM
4042-13 11-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4043-13 11-26-2013 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Ch. 350
4044-13 11-26-2013 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
amendment
Ch. 230
4045A-13 Tabled
4046-13 12-10-2013 Access easement NCM
4047-13 12-10-2013 Boards, commissions and
committees: Municipal
Ethics Board repealer
Ch. 13, Art. XVI
(footnote only)
4048-14 1-28-2014 Drainage easement NCM
4049-14 1-28-2014 Drainage easement NCM
4050-14 5-27-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4051-14 2-11-2014 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236
4052-14 Tabled
4053A-14 2-11-2014 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
4054-14 3-25-2014 Quarrying and blasting
amendment
Ch. 278
4055-14 4-8-2014 Deed acceptance NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1554
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4056-14 4-8-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4057-14 4-22-2014 Deed acceptance NCM
4058-14 4-22-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4059-14 5-13-2014 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
4060-14 5-13-2014 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
4061-14 6-12-2014 Parks and recreation:
exclusive-use permits for
park facilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
4062-14 6-24-2014 Bond NCM
4063-14 6-24-2014 Bond NCM
4064-14 6-24-2014 Bond NCM
4065-14 7-8-2014 Water amendment Ch. 384
4066-14 8-12-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4067-14 9-9-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4068-14 9-9-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
4069-14 9-9-2014 Appropriation NCM
4070-14 9-9-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
4071-14 9-9-2014 Appropriation NCM
4072-14 9-9-2014 Appropriation NCM
4073-14 9-9-2014 Boards, commissions and
committees: Cultural Arts
Council; Raritan and
Millstone Rivers Flood
Control Commission
amendment; Franklin
Youth Initiative
Ch. 13, Art. V; Ch. 13,
Art. XXIII; Ch. 13, Art.
XXIV
4074-14 9-9-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption in public
amendment
Ch. 93, Art. III
4075-14 9-9-2014 Recycling amendment Ch. 284
4076-14 9-9-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 330
4077-14 9-9-2014 Water amendment Ch. 384
4078-14 9-9-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1555
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4079-14 9-9-2014 Bond NCM
4080-14 9-9-2014 Bond NCM
4081-14 9-9-2014 Bond NCM
4082-14 9-9-2014 Bond NCM
4083-14 9-23-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4084-14 9-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4085-14 10-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4086-14 10-14-2014 Conservation easement NCM
4087-14 10-28-2014 Telecommunications
franchises: Level 3
Communications, LLC
amendment
Ch. A401, Art. VII
4088-14 Parks and recreation:
Middlebush Park
Tabled
4089-14 11-10-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4090-14 12-11-2014 Advisory Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
4091-14 12-11-2014 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4092-14 12-11-2014 Noise control amendment Ch. 167, Art. I
4093-14 12-11-2014 Access easement NCM
4094-15 2-3-2015 Agricultural easement NCM
4095-15 Number not used
4096-15 2-24-2015 Sale of land NCM
4097-15 2-24-2015 Bond NCM
4098-15 2-24-2015 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4099-15 3-24-2015 Telecommunications
franchises: 4Connections,
LLC, amendment
Ch. A401, Art. VI
4100-15 2-24-2015 Shade Tree Commission
amendment; trees
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. XX; Ch.
222
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1556
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4101-15 3-24-2015 Recycling amendment Ch. 284
4102-15 3-24-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4103-15 4-28-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4104-15 4-14-2015 Hamilton Street Business
Community Special
Improvement District
amendment
Ch. 23
4105-15 4-14-2015 Deed of conservation
easements amendment
and acceptance
NCM
4106-15 5-12-2015 Telecommunications
franchises:
Ch. A401, Art. XI
4107-15 5-26-2015 Bond NCM
4108-15 5-26-2015 Bond NCM
4109-15 5-26-2015 Bond NCM
4110-15 5-26-2015 Appropriation NCM
4111-15 6-9-2015 Appropriation NCM
4112-15 6-9-2015 Emergency Life Support
Delivery Committee
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. VII
4113-15 6-23-2015 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 62
4114-15 7-14-2015 Water amendment Ch. 384
4115-15 8-11-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4116-15 9-8-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 183
4117-15 9-8-2015 Bond amendment NCM
4118-15 9-29-2015 Cable television franchise:
Comcast of Central New
Jersey II, LLC
Ch. A402, Art. II
4119-15 10-13-2015 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment; special
events amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I; Ch. 226;
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1557
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4120-15 10-13-2015 Parks and recreation:
Griggstown Native
Grassland Preserve (part
of Ten Mile Run
Greenway) amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
4121-15 11-10-2015 Lease of Township
property
NCM
4122-15 11-24-2015 Street vacation NCM
4123-15 11-24-2015 Street vacation NCM
4124-15 11-24-2015 Acceptance of easement NCM
4125-15 11-24-2015 Acceptance of easement NCM
4126-15 12-8-2015 Grant of easement NCM
4127-16 1-26-2016 Sale of Township land NCM
4128-16 2-23-2016 Purchase of land NCM
4129-16 2-23-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
4130-16 2-23-2016 Purchase of land NCM
4131-16 2-23-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
4132-16 2-23-2016 Agricultural Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 13, Art. III
4133-16 3-22-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4134-16 3-22-2016 Smoking on public
property
Ch. 300
4135-16 3-8-2016 Senior and Community
Center rental fees
Ch. 180, Art. X
4136-16 3-8-2016 Charitable clothing bins
amendment
Ch. 109
4137-16 3-8-2016 Special events amendment Ch. 325
4138-16 3-8-2016 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
amendment
Ch. 230
4139-16 3-8-2016 Acceptance of easement NCM
4140-16 4-12-2016 Bond NCM
4141-16 4-12-2016 Bond NCM
4142-16 4-12-2016 Bond NCM
4143-16 4-12-2016 Bond NCM
4144-16 4-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1558
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4145-16 4-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
4146-16 4-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
4147-16 4-12-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4148-16 4-26-2016 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4149-16 4-26-2016 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4150-16 5-10-2016 Street vacation NCM
4151-16 5-10-2016 Swimming Pools
Amendment
Ch. 340
4152-16 5-10-2016 Waterline easement NCM
4153-16 Not adopted
4154-16 5-24-2016 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment; salaries and
compensation amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I; See Ch.
62
4155-16 6-14-2016 Deed of access and utility
easement
NCM
4156-16 6-28-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4157-16 6-28-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4158-16 6-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4159-16 6-28-2016 Recycling amendment Ch. 284
4160-16 8-9-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
4161-16 8-9-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
4162-16 9-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4163-16 9-27-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4164-16 9-27-2016 Water amendment Ch. 384
4165-16 9-27-2016 Release of affordable
housing agreements and
discharge of repayment
mortgages
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1559
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4166-16 9-27-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 333, Art. II
4167-16 10-25-2016 Flood damage prevention Ch. 192
4168-16 11-22-2016 Municipal services
amendment
Ch. 236
4169-17 2-14-2017 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
4170-17 2-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4171-17 2-14-2017 Purchase of land NCM
4172-17 2-14-2017 Appropriation Repealed by Ord. No.
4215-17
4173-17 2-28-2017 Purchase of land NCM
4174-17 2-28-2017 Appropriation NCM
4175-17 2-28-2017 Purchase of land NCM
4176-17 2-28-2017 Appropriation NCM
4177-17 2-28-2017 Acceptance of detention
basin deed
NCM
4178-17 2-28-2017 Acceptance of
conservation easement
NCM
4179-17 2-28-2017 Parks and recreation:
exclusive-use permits for
park facilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
4180-17 2-28-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4181-17 3-28-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4182-17 3-28-2017 Dogs and other animals:
pet shop sales
Ch. 115, Art. VI
4183-17 3-28-2017 Food establishments:
standards; training;
licensing amendment
Ch. 138, Art. I
4184-17 3-28-2017 Noise: noise control
amendment; burglar
alarms, sound
amplification equipment
and fireworks
Ch. 167, Art. I; Ch.
167, Art. II
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1560
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4185-17 3-28-2017 Fees: body art
establishment fees
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. VIII
4186-17 3-28-2017 Street vacation NCM
4187-17 4-11-2017 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4188-17 4-11-2017 Acceptance of
conservation easement
NCM
4189-17 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
4190-17 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
4191-17 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
4192-17 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
4193-17 4-11-2017 Bond NCM
4194-17 4-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
4195-17 4-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
4196-17 4-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
4197-17 4-25-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4198-17 4-25-2017 Lease amendment NCM
4199-17 5-9-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4200-17 Tabled
4201-17 5-9-2017 Waterline easement NCM
4202-17 6-13-2017 Street vacation NCM
4203-17 6-13-2017 Municipal services:
homeowners' associations
amendment
Ch. 236, Art I
4204-17 6-27-2017 Police Department:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
4205-17 6-27-2017 Acceptance of deed of
easement
NCM
4206-17 6-27-2017 Filing of corrective deeds NCM
4207-17 6-27-2017 Acceptance of deed of
easement
NCM
4208-17 8-8-2017 Water amendment Ch 384
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1561
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4209-17 9-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4210-17 9-26-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4211-17 9-26-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 112
4212-17 10-24-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 226
4213-17 11-13-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
4214-17 11-13-2017 Bond NCM
4215-17 11-28-2017 Repeal of Ord. No.
4215-17
NCM
4216-17 11-28-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
4217-17 11-28-2017 Utility easement NCM
4218-17 Tabled
4219-17 12-12-2017 Sale of Land NCM
4220-17 12-12-2017 Acceptance of Deed of
Dedication
NCM
4221-18 2-13-2018 Municipal Services:
Homeowners' Associations
Amendment
Pending Review
4222-18 3-27-2018 Political Contributions:
Prohibition of Awarding
Contracts to Certain
Contributors Repealer
Ch. 54, Art. I, Footnote
Only
4223-18 3-27-2018 Exceed Budget; Establish
Cap Bank
NCM
4224-18 4-10-2018 Purchase of Development
Easement
NCM
4225-18 4-10-2018 Telecommunications
Franchises: CenturyLink
Ch. A401, Art. IX
4226-18 4-10-2018 Sewer Easement NCM
4227-18 4-24-2018 Police Department:
General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
4228-18 4-24-2018 Salaries and
Compensation Amendment
See Ch. 62
4229-18 4-24-2018 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1562
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4230-18 4-24-2018 Appropriation NCM
4231-18 4-24-2018 Appropriation NCM
4232-18 4-24-2018 Bond NCM
4233-18 4-24-2018 Bond NCM
4234-18 4-24-2018 Appropriation NCM
4235-18 4-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226
4236-18 6-13-2018 Appropriation NCM
4237-18 6-26-2018 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 192
4238-18 6-26-2018 Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 85
4239-18 9-13-2018 Dogs and Other Animals:
Dogs and Cats Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. II
4240-18 9-13-2018 Easement NCM
4241-18 Acquisition of Land Tabled
4242-18 Appropriation Tabled
4243-18 10-9-2018 Noise: Noise Control
Amendment
Ch. 167, Art. I
4244-18 10-9-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sump Pumps and
Pipe Drain Discharge
Control
Ch. 201, Art. VII
4245-18 10-9-2018 Exchange Zone for Online
Transactions
Ch. 177
4246-18 10-9-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 81
4247-18 11-8-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112
4248-18 10-9-2018 Conveyance of Land NCM
4249-18 10-23-2018 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 46
4250-18 10-23-2018 Alcoholic Beverages:
Regulatory Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
4251-18 10-23-2018 Establishment of
Amusement Park
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1563
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4252-18 11-27-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112
4253-18 Tabled
4254-18 11-8-2018 Municipal Services:
Homeowners' Associations
Amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
4255-18 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226
4256-18 11-27-2018 Street Vacation NCM
4257-18 11-27-2018 Police Department:
General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
4258-18 12-11-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 81
4259-18 12-11-2018 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 271
4260-18 12-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226
4261-19 2-26-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112
4262-19 2-12-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM
4263-19 2-12-2019 Acquisition of Property NCM
4264-19 2-12-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM
4265-19 2-12-2019 Appropriation NCM
4266-19 2-12-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226
4267-19 3-12-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112
4268-19 2-26-2019 Establishment of Stronger
Together Program
NCM
4269-19 2-26-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 384
4270-19 2-26-2019 Appropriation NCM
4271-19 4-9-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112
4272-19 3-12-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 384
4273-19 3-12-2019 Bond NCM
4274-19 3-26-2019 Street Vacation NCM
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1564
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4275-19 3-26-2019 Cable Television
Franchise: Comcast of
New Jersey II, LLC
Amendment
Ch. A402, Art. II
4276-19 3-26-2019 Dogs and Other Animals:
Dogs and Cats Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. II
4277-19 3-26-2019 Cancelling Balances of
Certain Bond and Capital
Ordinances
NCM
Res. No.
19-133
3-26-2019 Parks and Recreation:
Park Rules and
Regulations Amendment;
John Clyde Memorial
Native Grassland Preserve
(Part of Ten Mile Run
Greenway) Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II; Ch.
260, Art. VI
4278-19 4-9-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
4279-19 5-14-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks: Street
Openings Amendment
Ch. 333, Art.
I
51
4280-19 5-14-2019 Easement NCM 51
4281-19 5-14-2019 Bond NCM 51
4282-19 5-14-2019 Bond NCM 51
4283-19 5-14-2019 Bond NCM 51
4284-19 5-14-2019 Bond NCM 51
4285-19 5-14-2019 Appropriation NCM 51
4286-19 5-14-2019 Appropriation NCM 51
4287-19 5-28-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 384 51
4288-19 6-11-2019 Boards, Commissions
and Committees:
Absenteeism Policy
Amendment
Ch. 13, Art.
XXII
51
4289-19 7-9-2019 Hamilton Street
Business Community
Special Improvement
District Amendment
Ch. 23 51
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1565
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
4290-19 8-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226 51
4291-19 8-13-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment; Police
Department
Amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 50 51
4292-19 9-10-2019 Bond NCM 51
4293-19 9-10-2019 Appropriation NCM 51
4294-19 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Defeated 51
4295-19 9-10-2019 Purchase of Property NCM 51
4296-19 9-10-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM 51
4297-19 9-10-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM 51
4298-19 9-10-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM 51
4299-19 9-24-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112 51
4300-19 9-24-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226 51
4301-19 9-24-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226 51
4302-19 10-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226 51
4303-19 10-22-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 112 52
4304-19 10-22-2019 Conservation
Easement
NCM 52
4305-19 11-12-2019 Easement NCM 52
4306-19 11-26-2019 Canceling Balances of
Certain Open Space
Trust Fund
Ordinances
NCM 52
4307-20 1-28-2020 Municipal Services
Amendment
Ch. 236 52
4308-20 1-25-2020 Salaries Amendment See Ch. 62 52
4309-20 1-28-2020 Easement NCM 52
4310-20 2-11-2020 Recycling Amendment Ch. 284 52
4311-20 2-11-2020 Easement NCM 52
§ DL-1 FRANKLIN CODE § DL-1
DT:1566
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
4312-20 2-11-2020 Street Vacation NCM 52
4313-20 2-11-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 226 52
4314-20 2-11-2020 Purchase of Property NCM 52
4315-20 2-11-2020 Purchase of Property NCM 52
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1567

LAND DEVELOPMENT
161 Attachment 3
Borough of Franklin
Schedule B
Bulk and Yard Requirements
Borough of Franklin, Sussex County, New Jersey
[Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008; 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
Zoning
District
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet or acres)
Minimum Lot
Width
at a Street
(feet) Minimum Lot Depth
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet/stories
)
Minimum
Depth of
Corner Lot
from any
Street
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Covering
(percentage)
R-1 43,560 maximum density; 1
unit per 3 acres 125 150 50 25 60 30/2 ½ 200 10
R-2 43,560 150 200 50 25 60 30/2 ½ 200 10
R-3 15,000 60 125 40 15 45 30/2 ½ 125 20
R-4 6,250 50 100 30 6 35 30/2 ½ 75 30
MF 50 acres See § 161-33H, Multifamily Housing.
ZM 20 acres See § 161-33I, Zinc Mine Zone, for all bulk and yard requirements.
B-1 6,250 50 100 10 5 30 30/2 ½ 75 40
B-2 15,000 60 150 40 15 50 30/2 ½ 125 35
HC-1 5 acres 250 500 100 50 100 35/3 300 20
HC-2A1 See § 161-33O, HC-2 Zone, for all bulk and yard requirements.
HC-2B1 See § 161-33O, HC-2 Zone, for all bulk and yard requirements.
I 5 acres 350 100 50 100 35/3 350 20
MHP 40 acres
OS/GU None
GC 50 acres;
100 acres 18 executive holes
Q See § 161-33F, Quarry Zone, for all bulk and yard requirements.
HMF See § 161-33K, Hospital Multifamily Zone, for all bulk and yard requirements.
NC Single use: 2 acres
Mixed-use: 5 acres
Single use: 175
Mixed-use: 250 250 75 25 100 30/2 ½ 30
NOTES:
1 Note: Consult Schedule A and § 161-33O for when a dimensional deviation requires a “d” variance.
161 Attachment 3:1 04 - 01 - 2017